The Charter
Chapter C
CHARTER
C:1

ARTICLE I
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section 1.1. Corporate continuity.
The municipal corporation now existing and known as the "City of Oneida"
shall continue to be a municipal corporation under the same name and with
the same boundaries.
Section 1.2. Title.
This Charter and all amendments hereto shall constitute the form of
government for the City of Oneida and shall be known and cited as the
"Oneida City Charter."
Section 1.3. Powers of the City.
The City of Oneida shall be a body politic and corporate and shall have
perpetual succession, may use a corporate seal, may sue and be sued,
may acquire property within and without its boundaries for any municipal
purpose in fee simple or any lesser interest or estate by purchase, gift,
devise, lease or condemnation and may sell, lease, hold, manage and control
such property as its interest may require. The City of Oneida shall have
all municipal powers, functions, rights, privileges and immunities of every
name and nature wheresoever conferred on cities by the Constitution of the
State of New York and conferred or imposed on it by general or special law.
Section 1.4. Enumerated powers not exclusive. [Amended
12-19-2000 by L.L. No. 6-2000]
The enumeration of particular powers in this Charter shall not be deemed
to be exclusive, but in addition to the powers enumerated or implied herein
or appropriate to the exercise of such powers, the City of Oneida shall
have and may exercise all powers which under the Constitution of the
State of New York it would be competent for this Charter specifically to
enumerate, and all powers necessarily incident or fairly to be implied, not
inconsistent with the provisions hereof. All powers of the City of Oneida,
whether expressed or implied, shall be exercised in the manner specifically
provided in this Charter, or if not so provided, then in the manner provided
by local law, ordinance or resolution of the Common Council or as otherwise
provided by law.
Section 1.5. Boundaries.
The territory comprised within the following limits shall constitute the City
of Oneida:
All that land situated in the County of Madison and State of New York,
bounded and described as follows:
Section 1.1 CHARTER Section 1.5
C:3
Beginning at a point south eighty-four degrees three minutes east sixhundred-
ninety-four feet from the intersection of the centers of the roads
known as Allen's Four Corners; thence north four degrees fifty minutes
east about five and one-half (5 1/2) miles, and parallel with the west line
of the Town of Lenox in the County of Madison to the Oneida Creek on
the boundary line between the Counties of Oneida and Madison; thence
southeasterly along the center of said creek, as it winds and turns to the
northerly line of the Town of Stockbridge; thence north eighty-five degrees
west along the northerly line of said Town of Stockbridge to the northwest
corner of the Town of Stockbridge; thence northwesterly in a straight line
about three miles to the place of beginning; all as shown on a map now on
file with the County Clerk of Madison County; and also being and intended
to be the same tract or parcel of land described in Section 1 of Chapter 352
of the Laws of 1896 of the State of New York.
Section 1.6. Ward boundaries. [Amended by L.L. No. 3-1979;
9-15-2015 by L.L. No. 2-20151]
Section 1.7. Separability; liberal construction.
If any clause, sentence, paragraph, word, section or part of this Charter
shall be adjudged by any court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such
judgment shall not affect, impair, or invalidate the remainder thereof, but
shall be confined in its operation to the clause, sentence, paragraph, section
or part thereof directly involved in the controversy in which such judgment
shall have been rendered.
The provisions of this Charter shall be liberally construed to effectuate the
objectives and purposes for which this Charter and the articles contained
herein are enacted.
Section 1.8. Municipal year.
The municipal year of the City of Oneida shall begin on the first day
of January. The terms of all officers, departments, boards, bureaus,
commissions and agencies appointed as provided in this Charter for a year
or series of years shall be computed by municipal years. For the purpose
of determining when a term of office shall end, the municipal year in which
an officer, department, board, bureau, commission or agency shall take
office shall be deemed to be the entire year, although such officer, board or
A. Division by wards. The City of Oneida shall be divided into six wards.
B. Official Ward Map. The map of the City of Oneida’s six ward boundaries
adopted by the Common Council pursuant to Local Law No. 2 of 2015
shall be the official map of the six ward boundaries of the City of
Oneida. A copy of the official ward map is filed and available for
inspection in the City Clerk’s office.
1. Editor's Note: This local law was subject to mandatory referendum and approved by the
electors of the City of Oneida 11-3-2015.
Section 1.5 ONEIDA CODE Section 1.8
C:4
commission may not have taken office until after the municipal year shall
have begun, so that the terms of office of all such officers, departments,
boards, bureaus, commissions and agencies shall terminate at the end of
the municipal year. This provision shall not apply to the terms of office of
the Civil Service Commission.
Section 1.9. Definitions. [Amended by L.L. No. 5-1974; L.L. No.
3-1975]
Whenever used in this Charter, unless otherwise expressly stated or unless
the context or subject matter otherwise requires:
1. "Charter" shall mean the "Oneida City Charter."
2. "City" shall mean the "City of Oneida."
3. "Common Council" shall mean the elective governing body of the City of
Oneida.
4. "Corporate tax district" shall be all that portion of the City
compromised within the following limits, namely:
Section 1.8 CHARTER Section 1.9
C:5
Beginning in the center of Oneida Creek in the easterly bounds of
the County of Madison at a point where the said Oneida Creek is
intersected by the northerly line of New York State Route 5, formerly
called the Seneca Turnpike; thence northerly down the center of said
Oneida Creek as it winds and turns to the point opposite the northeast
corner of Lot Number 83 of the "Oneida Creek Tract"; thence westerly
along the northerly line of Lot Number 83 and the northerly line
of Lot Number 82, thence southerly along the westerly line of said
Lot Number 82 to the southerly line of the "Oneida Creek Tract";
thence westerly along the southerly line of said tract to the northwest
corner of Lot Number 3 of the "First Oneida Purchase of 1829"; thence
southerly along the west line of Lot Number 3, continuing on said line
to the intersection point of said line extended with the southerly line
of New York State Route 5, thence westerly along the south line of
New York State Route 5 a distance of 296.60 feet, more or less, to
a point being the northwest corner of Lot Number 3 of the Oneida
Heights Subdivision South Section "A" as shown on a map prepared
by Fredric C. Burton dated February 10, 1967; thence southerly along
the west line of said Lot 3 to a point being the northeast corner of
Lot Number 2 of the said Oneida Heights Subdivision; thence westerly
along the northerly line of said Lot Number 2 to a point being the
northwest corner of said Lot Number 2; thence southerly along the
westerly line of Lot 2 to a point being the southwest corner of said
Lot 2, this point being on the northerly line of Foxwood Terrace, a City
street; thence westerly along the northerly line of Foxwood Terrace to
a point being the southeast corner of lot number one of the Oneida
Heights Subdivision; thence northerly along the east line of said Lot
1 to the northeast corner of said Lot 1; thence westerly along the
northerly line of said Lot Number 1 extended to a point on the easterly
boundary of the Oneida Heights Subdivision South Section "A", said
point being approximately three hundred thirty (330) feet easterly,
measured at right angles from the easterly line of Lot Number 1 of the
Second Oneida Purchase of 1829; thence southerly along the westerly
boundary of the Oneida Heights tract a distance of one-thousand-fourhundred-
fifty-five feet more or less to a point, said point being the
intersection of said westerly line of the Oneida Heights Subdivision
with the southerly line of the Baker Reservoir properly extended;
thence easterly on a line parallel to New York State Route 5 to a
point on the center line of Seneca Street extended; thence northerly
along said center line of Seneca Street to a point one-thousand-ten feet
southerly of the south line of New York State Route 5;
Section 1.9 ONEIDA CODE Section 1.9
C:6
thence easterly on a line parallel to New York State Route 5 to the
point of intersection with the center line of Oneida Creek; thence
northerly along the center line of Oneida Creek as it winds and turns
to the place of beginning, and in addition, all of the real property
included in the so-called "Cooley Subdivision" (as shown in the Final
Plat, Phases I, II and III, dated 9-3-1998); and the "Field of Dreams
Subdivision" (as shown in the Preliminary Major Subdivision Plat,
dated 7-6-1997, as amended 8-20-1997, 2-13-1998 and 9-28-1998; and
as further identified currently by Tax Map parcel number 37.00-2-39);
and the Tax Map parcels numbered 37.00-2-32, 37.00-2-33, 37.00-2-34,
37.00-2-40 and 37.00-2-41; shall all be deemed to be within the
Corporate (inside) Tax District, and no portion of such subdivisions or
Tax Map parcels shall be within the Outside Tax District. [Amended
by L.L. No. 2-2001]
5. "Law" shall mean a state statute, charter, local law, ordinance or
resolution.
6. "Local law" shall mean a law adopted pursuant to the Municipal Home
Rule Law or to other authorization of a state statute or this Charter by
the Common Council, or proposed by a Charter Commission or by
petition, and ratified by a popular vote, as provided in article IV of the
Municipal Home Rule Law, or as provided in a state statute, this
Charter or local law; but shall not mean or include an ordinance,
resolution or other similar act of the Common Council or of any other
board or body of this City.
7. "Ordinance" shall mean a legislative act of the Common Council which
is permanent in nature unless specifically self-limiting, general in its
application and may or may not contain penal provisions for its violation
and must be in written form. It shall be enacted in accordance with the
provisions hereinafter provided.
8. "Outside district" shall mean and refer to that portion of the City
situated outside the corporation tax district.
9. "Resolution" shall mean a legislative act of the Common Council which
is limited in its application or of a temporary nature, or both, or as
otherwise provided by law. Unless specifically provided, it need not be
in writing.
10. "Councilmen." Those members of the Common Council exclusive of the
Mayor.
Section 1.9 CHARTER Section 1.9
C:7

ARTICLE II
OFFICERS AND ELECTIONS
Section 2.1. Elective officers: terms.
Section 2.2. Appointive officers: terms.
Section 2.3. Prohibitions.
No Councilman shall, at the same time, hold any elective office under the
government of the State of New York or any political subdivision thereof,
nor shall be hold any appointive office or position of employment of the City
except as specifically provided in this Charter or other provision of law.
Section 2.4. Certificate of appointment.
Every appointment to a City office must be made by a certificate in writing
signed by the appointing officer, or if it is made by a board, commission,
agency or the Common Council, by the presiding officer thereof, and such
certificate shall be filed in the office of the City Clerk.
A. There shall be elected by the qualified electors of the City a Common
Council consisting of the Mayor and six Councilmen, a City
Chamberlain, a City Judge, a City Justice and four Supervisors. All
elective City officers shall be elected for a two-year term except the
Supervisors, who shall be elected for the same term of office as
Supervisors of the towns of Madison County and the City Judge and City
Justice who shall be elected for six-year terms. One Councilman shall be
elected by the qualified electors of each of the six wards. The qualified
electors of the First, Second and Third Wards shall together elect two
Supervisors. The qualified electors of the Fourth, Fifth and Sixth Wards
shall together elect two Supervisors.
B. No person shall be elected to any City office unless he shall at the time
be a resident elector of the City, nor to the office of Councilman unless
he shall at the time be a resident elector of the ward for which he is
elected, nor to the office of Supervisor, unless he shall be at the time a
resident elector of one of the wards for which he is elected. Whenever
any officer of this City shall cease to be a resident of the City or of the
district or ward for which he was elected or appointed, his office shall
thereby become vacant.
A. The City of Oneida shall have such appointive officers as are provided in
this Charter or as required by law or established or authorized by the
Common Council. The term of office of all full-time appointive officers
shall be for an indefinite term except as otherwise provided in this
Charter or other provision of law. The terms of part-time appointive
officers shall be for two years and shall commence at the same time as
that of elective City officials except as otherwise provided in this
Charter or other provision of law.
Section 2.1 CHARTER Section 2.5
C:9
Section 2.5. Official oath and bonds.
Each officer of the City shall, before entering upon the duties of his office,
take and file with the City Clerk the constitutional oath of office; and where
required by ordinance or resolution of the Common Council, he shall file an
official bond with such sureties and in an amount as the Common Council
shall direct. All bonds shall be filed in the City Clerk's office, and the
premiums for all such bonds shall be paid by the City.
Section 2.6. Vacancies.
Any vacancy in an elective office, other than by the expiration of the term
of office, shall be filled by the Mayor. Any person appointed to an elective
office to fill a vacancy shall have the same qualifications as are required
of a person elected to the office. The term of office of an officer appointed
to fill the vacancy in an elective office shall be until the commencement of
the municipal year next succeeding the first general election at which the
vacancy can be filled after the happening of the vacancy. All vacancies in
appointive offices shall be filled by the appointing authority for the balance
of the unexpired term.
Section 2.7. Removal of officers.
The appointing authority shall have the power to remove any officer or
employee appointed by him at any time except as otherwise provided by
law or this Charter and in accordance with all provisions of law applicable
thereto. In those cases where the appointing authority is the Common
Council, board, agency or commission, the Common Council, board, agency
or commission shall have the power to remove any of its appointive officers
or employees by a majority vote of its full membership and in accordance
with all provisions of law applicable thereto.
Section 2.8. Compensation of officers and employees.
The Common Council shall have the power at any time to fix and change
the salaries or compensation for all officers and employees of the City. Any
fees or compensation for the performance of their duties in the execution
of their City office or employment paid to and received by such officers or
employees from any source shall be the property of the City and shall be
paid or turned over by the officer or employee receiving the same to the
City Chamberlain unless this Charter or the Common Council specifically
authorizes the retention of such fees or compensation.
Section 2.9. Moving expenses.
Payment or reimbursement, in whole or in part, to officers or employees for
their expenses of moving to assume employment with the City of Oneida is
hereby authorized, subject to the approval of the Common Council and to
such conditions and requirements as it may impose thereon.
Section 2.5 ONEIDA CODE Section 3.0
C:10
Section 3.0. [2.10] Procedure in the event of an extraordinary
emergency.
A. If, as a result of an attack, actual or imminent, or series of attacks by an
enemy or a foreign nation upon the United States causing or which may
cause substantial damage or injury to civilian property or persons in the
City of Oneida in any manner by sabotage or the use of bombs, shellfire
or atomic, radiological, chemical, bacteriological or biological means or
other weapons or processes, or if as a result of natural or peacetime
disaster the office of the Mayor becomes vacant or the Mayor, by reason
of disability or absence from the City, shall be prevented from attending
to the duties of the office of the Mayor, and the Deputy Mayor is unable
to discharge the powers and duties of the office of Mayor or be absent
from the City, and there shall not be a majority of the members of the
Common Council able, because of disability or absence from the City, to
select one of their number to act as Mayor, or as for any other reason
they are unable to select one of their number to act as Mayor, then the
Councilor longest in service as such Councilor shall act as Mayor during
such vacancy, disability or absence. Should such Councilor longest in
service be unable to discharge the powers and duties of the office of
Mayor or be absent from the City, the Councilor next longest in service
shall so act as Mayor during such disability or absence, and if he is
unable to discharge such powers and duties or is absent from the City,
the Councilor next longest in service shall so act as Mayor during such
disability or absence, and such progression shall continue so long as
such disability or absence continues and there are Councilors to act as
Mayor. [Amended 7-2-2013 by L.L. No. 3-2013]
B. Such person shall have for such period the same powers and be subject
to the same limitations as are hereinafter specified for the Deputy
Mayor acting as Mayor. [Amended 12-19-2000 by L.L. No. 6-2000]
C. Should two or more Councilors able to so act have the same length of
service as such Councilors, the one to act as Mayor shall be selected by
lot.
D. If a vacancy shall occur in any elective office of the City in the event of
such extraordinary emergency, the Mayor, or person filling that
position, shall appoint a person to fill such vacancy until the
commencement of the political year next succeeding the first annual
election after the happening of the vacancy.
E. If any City officer except the Mayor, Councilor or Supervisor shall, from
sickness, absence, suspension from office by the Common Council or
from any other cause, be unable to discharge the duties of his office, in
the event of or during such extraordinary emergency, the Common
Council or if vacancies have reduced its membership to less than a
majority then a majority of the remaining members of the Common
Council shall appoint some suitable person to discharge such duties
during such disability, and the person so appointed shall have and
exercise all the powers and discharge all the duties and be subject to all
Section 3.0 CHARTER Section 3.0
C:11
the provisions of law applicable to the officer whose place he shall
supply or to the officer or the duties of the office at which he is
appointed and shall receive such salary as shall be fixed by the
members of the Common Council making such appointment.
[Amended 7-2-2013 by L.L. No. 3-2013]
F. If the office of the Mayor and of all the Councilors shall from sickness,
absence, suspension from office or from any other cause be vacated and
there is no one to discharge the duties of the office of Mayor, in the
event of and during such extraordinary emergency, it is hereby
established the continuity of leadership which requires the office of
Mayor to be filled at all times. Next in order of succession to the last
Councilor for the purpose of acting as Mayor shall descend in the
following order upon the following City officials dependent on their
availability and presence in the City in the order named: City
Comptroller, City Judge, City Attorney, City Engineer, Acting City Judge,
City Clerk, Police Chief and Fire Chief. [Amended 12-19-2000 by L.L.
No. 6-2000; 7-2-2013 by L.L. No. 3-2013]
Section 3.0 ONEIDA CODE Section 3.0
C:12
ARTICLE III
COMMON COUNCIL
Section 3.1. Composition.
There shall be a Common Council which shall consist of the Mayor and
six Councilmen elected in the manner provided in Article II. The Common
Council shall be a continuing body, and no measure pending before it
shall abate or be discontinued by reason of expiration of terms of office,
resignation, vacancy or removal of any members thereof.
Section 3.2. Legislative powers.
The Common Council shall be the legislative and governing body of the City
and shall exercise all powers of legislation in relation to enacting, amending
or repealing local laws, ordinances and resolutions.
Section 3.3. Power of organization.
The Common Council may by local law, ordinance or resolution establish
offices, departments, boards, bureaus, commissions and agencies in
addition to those created by this Charter and may prescribe the functions
of such offices, departments, boards, bureaus, commissions and agencies
subject to all applicable provisions of law.
Section 3.4. Legislative acts.
A. All of the legislative acts of the Common Council shall be by local law,
ordinance or resolution. The passage of a local law shall be by an
affirmative vote of at least a majority of the Councilmen then in office.
The passage of resolutions and ordinances shall be by a majority of the
total voting strength of the members of the Common Council present
and voting; provided, however, that the Mayor shall not vote except in a
tie, and provided further that the Mayor shall have no vote upon
resolutions involving the expenditure of money or collection of money
by tax or assessment, except a resolution to adopt the budget.
Amendments to the Zoning Ordinance shall be governed by the
provisions of the General City Law, and the Mayor shall not be deemed
a member of the Common Council for computing the vote upon
amendments thereto.
In acting upon legislative acts, the Common Council shall comply with
the Municipal Home Rule Law and the Local Finance Law, in addition
to the requirements imposed by this section or by any other provisions
of law. No ordinance shall be passed by the Common Council on the
same day it is introduced, except by unanimous consent of all of the
Councilmen present at the meeting and at which at least 2/3 of all
of the Councilmen then in office are present. A resolution may be
passed by the Common Council on the same day it is introduced, unless
otherwise provided by law.
Section 3.1 CHARTER Section 3.4
C:13
Section 3.5. Rules of procedure.
The Common Council shall determine the rules of its own proceedings
subject to the provisions of this Charter and other provisions of law.
Section 3.6. Meetings. [Amended 7-2-2013 by L.L. No. 3-2013]
Section 3.7. Mayor to be presiding officer; Deputy Mayor.
B. No appropriation of money shall be made for any use or purpose except
by resolution specifying the amount thereof and the department or
specific purpose for which the appropriation is made. The annual
budget shall be considered to be such a resolution.
C. Every ordinance enacted by the Common Council shall specify the time
when it shall take effect, which shall not be until after the publication of
the title and a brief description of same once in the official newspapers
of the City. If no time is specified in such ordinance, it shall take effect
immediately after such publication.
A. Regular meetings. The Common Council shall hold its first regular
meeting in each term on the evening of the first Tuesday of January next
following the election of its members, or if that is a holiday, on the next
day, and at that meeting, the Common Council shall organize and elect
a Deputy Mayor. The Common Council shall meet regularly at least
once a month, at times to be determined by it.
B. Special meetings. Special meetings may be held at any time the
Common Council may direct and may be called by the Mayor or any
three members of the Common Council. The notice of any special
meeting shall be served personally upon each member of the Council or
delivered to his residence or place of business not less than 24 hours
before the time fixed for such special meeting and shall contain a
statement of the specific item or items of business to be transacted. No
other business shall be conducted at such meeting except by unanimous
consent of all members of the Common Council present and voting.
C. A majority of the Common Council, including the Mayor as a member
thereof, shall constitute a quorum."
A. The Mayor shall be the presiding officer of the Common Council.
B. Every resolution or ordinance passed by the Common Council, except
rules for its own government and resolutions for the appointment of
City officers, shall, before it shall take effect, be submitted to the Mayor,
who shall within 10 days after its passage approve or disapprove the
same. If he approves it, he shall sign it with the date of his approval, and
it shall take effect from such date, except as herein otherwise provided.
If he does not approve it, he shall file it with the Clerk with his
objections in writing thereto or to any separate item thereof. The Clerk
shall thereupon present such resolution or ordinance, together with the
Section 3.4 ONEIDA CODE Section 3.7
C:14
Section 3.8. Clerk of the Common Council.
The City Clerk shall be the Clerk of the Common Council and shall be
responsible for the preparation of the agenda, shall give notice of special
council meetings, shall attend all meetings and shall discharge such other
duties as may be required by this Charter or other provision of law. He shall
keep a journal for public inspection which shall be the official record of
proceedings. He shall have custody of the City seal and shall affix the same
to such documents as required.
Section 3.9. Power of investigation.
The Common Council shall have the power to investigate the official
conduct of all City officers, employees, departments, boards, bureaus,
commissions and agencies. The Common Council shall have access to all
records and papers kept by every City officer, board, bureau, commission
and agency and shall have the power to compel the attendance of witnesses
and the production of books, papers or other evidence at any meeting of
the Common Council or a special committee thereof and for that purpose or
purposes may issue subpoenas signed by the Mayor or the Chairman of the
committee on its behalf.
Section 3.10. Official newspaper. [Amended by L.L. No. 1-1975]
At the first meeting of the Common Council in each term, the Common
Council shall by resolution designate one newspaper published in the City
to be the official paper of said City.
Section 3.11. Committee of the whole: special committees.
Mayor's objections, to the Common Council at its next meeting, which
shall proceed to reconsider the same, or the items thereof vetoed by
the Mayor, and if such reconsideration or such items shall be repassed
by a 2/3 vote of all the Councilmen then in office, it shall take effect
notwithstanding the Mayor's objections, otherwise it or such items shall
not take effect. Any resolution or ordinance not signed or disapproved
by the Mayor within the ten-day period shall thereafter take effect as of
the date of its passage.
C. The Deputy Mayor shall act as Mayor during the absence or disability of
the Mayor. While serving as Mayor during the absence or disability of
the Mayor, he shall not make any appointments or remove from office
any officer unless such absence or disability shall have continued for at
least 30 days. In case of a vacancy in the office of Mayor, the Deputy
Mayor shall act as Mayor until a Mayor shall have been elected and
qualified.
A. The Common Council shall be constituted as a committee of the whole.
The Common Council shall not be organized with permanent standing
committees. The Mayor may designate and appoint some members of
the Common Council as a committee for any special purpose, which
Section 3.7 CHARTER Section 3.11
C:15
Section 3.12. Authentication of ordinances, filing and posting.
Upon its final passage, every ordinance shall be authenticated by the Mayor
and City Clerk and permanently filed in the ordinance book in the office of
the City Clerk. A true copy of every ordinance certified by the City Clerk
shall be posted in a conspicuous place in the municipal building for a period
of two weeks following final passage.
Section 3.13. Penalties for violation of ordinances.
The Common Council shall have the power to provide for penalties,
including fine and imprisonment for the violation of any of its ordinances.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, and in addition thereto, the Common
Council may also provide for civil penalties and the City may maintain an
action or proceeding in a court of competent jurisdiction for an injunction
or to compel compliance with the requirements of any ordinance of the City
or take such other action as is permitted by law.
Section 3.14. General powers of Common Council.
In addition to any other powers conferred upon cities, the Common Council
may take all measures and do all acts by local law, ordinance or resolution,
not inconsistent with the provisions of the constitution which shall be
deemed expedient or desirable for the good government of the City, its
management and business, the protection of its property, the safety, health,
comfort and general welfare of its inhabitants, the protection of their
property, the preservation of peace and good order, the suppression of vice,
the benefit of trade and the preservation and protection of public works.
committee shall be disbanded upon the completion of its assignment
or at the end of the municipal year in which it is appointed, whichever
comes first. The Mayor may, however, reappoint any of the same
members or appoint new members after the commencement of a new
municipal year to any special committee whose assignment has not
been completed at the end of any municipal year.
B. The Mayor may also designate and appoint, subject to approval by the
Common Council, a special committee or committees consisting of
other City officials and/or residents of the City, including members of
the Common Council if he deems it desirable, to make studies,
investigations, recommendations and reports on any subject or matter
properly before the Common Council. Such committees shall have such
powers and duties as are assigned to them in a resolution passed by the
Common Council approving the same. The term of any committee
appointed pursuant to this subdivision shall expire upon the completion
of its assignment or at the end of the second municipal year following
its appointment, whichever comes first. Any of the same members may
be reappointed or new members may be appointed to such a committee
after the commencement of a new municipal year in the same manner
as hereinabove set forth.
Section 3.11 ONEIDA CODE Section 3.15
C:16
Section 3.15. Special powers of taxation. [Amended 7-15-2014 by
L.L. No. 5-2014]
The Common Council shall have the power to establish an equitable system
or taxation for protection against fire, public safety and capital
improvements in the corporation tax district, outside district and fire
protection districts duly organized in the outside district and to assess a
hydrant tax on any building and lot upon which it stands situated within
600 feet of a hydrant in either the corporation tax district or outside district
to defray the expense of installation, inspection, maintenance, repair and
replacement of hydrants by the Water Department. Between the first and
10th day of October in each year, the Common Council shall make out
a list or roll in which they shall set out the amount assessed for fire
protection, public safety and capital improvements upon any lot, part of a
lot or building, designate the lot or building assessed or in default, in the
same manner as designated in the annual assessment roll; and also on or
before the first day of November of each year, set out the amount of water
rates remaining due and unpaid on the 31st day of October in each year, for
use of water in or upon any lot, part of a lot or building. It shall cause notice
to be published in the official newspaper for at least one week of the time
and place at which hearing shall be given to those who desire to examine
said rolls and to present their grievances. The Common Council shall meet
at the time and place specified in said notice and after hearing objections
shall complete said assessments and certify the same. The Common Council
shall, with the annual City tax, levy such assessments and unpaid water
rates upon the property described in said roll, and the amounts appearing
thereon shall be extended in a separate column upon the assessment rolls
of the City and shall be levied, collected and enforced at the same time and
in the same manner as is provided for the collection of other taxes in the
City. The rates for the use of water shall, like other City taxes, be a lien and
charge upon the building and lot in or upon which said water was used as
herein provided.
Section 3.16. Boundaries of tax districts.
Notwithstanding any inconsistent provision of any general, special or local
law to the contrary, the Common Council of the City of Oneida is hereby
granted the power to adopt or amend local laws modifying the boundaries of
the inside tax district and the outside tax district of said City so as to extend
said inside tax district into contiguous areas of the outside tax district either
in part or in its entirety as in the sound discretion of the Common Council
seems appropriate. Any such local law as adopted or amended shall be
subject to the provisions of § 24 of the Municipal Home Rule Law.
Section 3.17. Sale or lease of City real property at private sale.
[Amended by L.L. No. 2-1978]
City real estate may be sold or leased at private sale; provided, however,
that no sale or lease of said real property shall be made or authorized except
Section 3.15 CHARTER Section 3.17
C:17
by a vote of 3/4 of all of the members of the Common Council and for a sum
at least equal to the market value thereof at the date of the sale or lease.
Section 3.18. Lease of real estate for five years. [Amended by L.L.
No. 5-1979]
The Common Council shall be authorized to lease space in City-owned real
estate for a term or terms of not to exceed five years, without restriction
as to the percent of said building to be covered by said lease or leases,
provided that said space is not currently needed for City use. The rent shall
be in a sum, equal to the reasonable rental value for the term of said lease
and said lease may include provisions for amendment of the rent and for
renewal of said lease or any part thereof for a period not to exceed the term
of the original lease. At least seven days prior to the signing of such lease,
notice thereof shall be published once in the official newspaper containing
a summary of the terms and conditions of the proposed lease, and a brief
description of the area of space proposed to be leased and the location
of the building in which such space is contained and the rent to be paid
therefor.
Section 3.17 ONEIDA CODE Section 3.18
C:18
ARTICLE IV
EXECUTIVE DEPARTMENT: CITY MAYOR
Section 4.1. General powers and duties of the Mayor.
The Mayor shall be the chief executive officer of the City and shall have and
exercise all the powers conferred upon him by this Charter and shall have
all powers and duties conferred upon the chief executive office of a City by
the general laws and any special laws pertaining to this City of the State
of New York, except as otherwise provided in this Charter. It shall be his
duty to see that the laws of this state and the local laws, ordinances and
resolutions passed by the Common Council are faithfully executed within
the City. He shall sign, on behalf of the City, all written contracts made by
it or any board or officer thereof, except contracts made by the purchasing
agent pursuant to authority vested in him and all deeds except tax deeds
and cause the seal of the City to be affixed thereto. He shall establish the
hours and days that City offices shall remain open for the transaction of
business and shall declare and establish official holidays in the City. He
shall submit the annual budget and capital program for consideration of
the Common Council, keep the Common Council advised of the financial
condition and future needs of the City and make such recommendations
from time to time to the Common Council as he may deem it advisable. He
shall have the right to be present at all meetings of any department, agency,
board, bureau or commission of the City. The Mayor may at any time in
his discretion call before him the head of any board, bureau, department
or other agency of the City government and may also call together the
heads of the different boards, bureaus, departments or other agencies for
consultation and advice or for any other purpose in regard to the affairs of
the City; and at such meetings he may call upon such persons for reports
in writing in regard to the transactions of the respective boards, bureaus,
departments or other agencies, and it shall be their duty to attend such
meetings and submit such reports to the Mayor without delay or give such
other information or explanation as he shall request. The City Clerk shall, at
the request of the Mayor, attend such meetings and make and keep a record
of the transactions thereof.
Section 4.2. Appointive powers of the Mayor. [Amended 12-19-2000
by L.L. No. 6-2000; 11-8-2017 by L.L. No. 5-2017]
The Mayor shall appoint the City Engineer, a City Comptroller, the Deputy
City Comptroller, a secretary to the Mayor, the City Clerk, Deputy City
Clerk, Deputy City Chamberlain, the City Attorney, the Assessor, the Acting
City Judge, the Park and Playground Commissioners, the Constable, the
Commissioner of Public Safety and as many patrolmen and special
patrolmen as may be determined by the Commissioner of Public Safety
subject to the approval of the Common Council, the members of the Joint
Zoning Board of Appeals/Planning Commission, the members of the Board
of Water Commissioners, Bingo Inspector and so many Commissioners of
Deeds as the Common Council may authorize, and all other boards,
Section 4.1 CHARTER Section 4.2
C:19
commissions, agencies, officers and employees of the City except as
otherwise provided in this Charter or other provision of law.
Section 4.3. Deputy Mayor.
The Deputy Mayor appointed as provided in Article III of this Charter shall
act as Mayor during the absence or disability of the Mayor. While serving
as Mayor during the disability or absence of the Mayor, he shall not make
any appointments or remove from office any officer unless such disability or
absence shall have continued for at least 30 days. In case of a vacancy in
the office of the Mayor, the Deputy Mayor shall act as Mayor, until a Mayor
shall have been elected and qualified.
Section 4.4. Additional authority of the Mayor.
Section 4.5. Power of investigation.
The Mayor shall have the power to investigate and to conduct hearings into
the official conduct of all the City officers, departments, boards, bureaus,
commissions and agencies. He shall have access to all records and papers
kept by every City officer, department, board, bureau, commission and
agency and shall have the power to compel the attendance of witnesses and
the production of books, papers or other evidence to any such hearings and
for that purpose may issue subpoenas signed by him.
A. The Mayor shall have the power to designate any qualified person to be
the acting head of any department, office, board, bureau, commission
or agency appointed by the Mayor during the period of any vacancy,
absence or disability until a permanent appointment can be made or the
disability of the permanent head is removed.
B. Whenever the interest of the City requires, the Mayor shall have the
power to temporarily assign any officer or employee of any department,
agency, board, bureau, commission or office to perform similar duties in
another department, agency, board, bureau, commission or office.
Section 4.2 ONEIDA CODE Section 4.5
C:20
ARTICLE V
BUDGET AND FINANCIAL ADMINISTRATION
Section 5.1. Fiscal year.
The fiscal year of the City shall be the same as the municipal year.
Section 5.2. Annual tax levy.
The Common Council shall raise annually by tax upon the real and personal
property assessable in the City in each year such moneys as it shall deem
necessary and appropriate for any public or municipal purpose. Unless
otherwise provided in this Charter or other provision of law, all expenses
incurred or authorized shall be borne by the City as a whole. Except as
otherwise provided in this Charter or other provision of law, expenditures
for the Bureau of Fire, streetlighting, repair and maintenance of storm
and sanitary sewers, tree removal and snow removal in the corporation
tax district, and any new or additional services or benefits which shall be
available only to the corporation tax district, shall be raised by tax upon
the real and personal property assessable in the corporation tax district.
The Common Council shall apportion the moneys to be raised by tax among
the several City funds, as established by this Charter or other provision of
law, and the City Comptroller shall state and keep his accounts of the funds
accordingly.
Section 5.3. Submission of budget; message.
On or before the 30th day of October of each year, the Mayor shall submit
to the Common Council a proposed budget and capital program, together
with a message concerning the same for the ensuing fiscal year.
Section 5.4. Budget message.
The budget message shall:
Section 5.5. Form of budget.
1. Describe the important features.
2. Enumerate the specific funds to be charged against the City as a whole,
the specific funds to be charged against the corporation tax district and
the specific funds to be charged against special districts.
3. Outline the proposed work and capital program.
4. Point out any major changes from the current fiscal year in financial
policies, expenditures and revenues, together with the reasons for such
changes.
5. Summarize the City's debt position.
6. Include such other material as the Mayor deems advisable.
Section 5.1 CHARTER Section 5.5
C:21
Section 5.6. Filing of budget and public notice.
A. The proposed budget shall provide a complete financial plan of all City
functions and activities for the ensuing fiscal year. It shall enumerate
those funds which are to be borne by the City as a whole and those
funds which are to be chargeable only against the corporation tax
district or special districts. The budget shall be in such form as the
Mayor deems advisable or as the Common Council may direct, but shall
include the following:
1. Actual revenues and expenditures of the preceding fiscal year and
actual and estimated revenues of the current fiscal year.
2. A capital program which shall include a clear general summary of
its contents; a list of all capital improvements which are proposed
to be undertaken during the ensuing five fiscal years with
supporting information as to necessity, cost estimate, method of
financing, affect of operation and maintenance upon the budget,
and recommended time schedules and the specific capital program
to be instituted or carried out during the ensuing fiscal year, stating
the amount to be paid by direct budgetary appropriation and the
amount to be financed, if any, and the method thereof.
3. All estimated revenues and proposed expenditures for the ensuing
fiscal year, including detailed estimates of revenue from all sources
and the amount proposed to be raised from the tax levy upon real
estate.
B. The proposed expenditures shall be itemized as follows:
1. Each office, department, board, bureau, commission and agency
shall be listed separately, showing the proposed amount for salaries
and wages, supplies and other expenditures and the total thereof.
2. Reserve for uncollected taxes.
3. Debt service.
4. Judgments and settlements outstanding and not covered by
insurance.
5. Special funds and purposes not otherwise contained in the budget.
6. Anticipated deficit, if any, of the current fiscal year.
7. Contingency fund for the City as a whole and contingency fund for
the corporation tax district.
A. Immediately after presentation of the proposed budget to the Common
Council, said budget shall be filed in the City Clerk's office, and
sufficient copies of the same and the budget message shall be made
available for distribution to the public. The proposed budget shall be a
Section 5.5 ONEIDA CODE Section 5.6
C:22
Section 5.7. Public hearing; changes by Common Council.
Section 5.8. Adoption of budget, appropriation and tax levy
resolutions.
Upon the completion of the consideration and review of the proposed
budget, the Common Council shall adopt a resolution approving the budget
in the final form approved by it and shall forthwith adopt an appropriation
resolution. The appropriation resolution shall be passed on the budget as
adopted but need not be itemized further than by each office, board, bureau,
public record and shall be open to inspection by the public during
regular business hours in the City Clerk's office.
B. A public hearing on the proposed budget shall be held before the
Common Council at the date, time and place determined by the
Common Council but not later than four weeks after its submission. The
public notice shall specify:
1. The date, time and place of the public hearing.
2. The total amount of the proposed budget.
3. The amount thereof to be raised by taxes.
4. The anticipated tax rate per thousand of assessed valuation for the
City as a whole and for the corporation tax district.
5. That copies of the proposed budget are available to the public in
the City Clerk's office during regular business hours. The public
notice shall be published in the official newspapers of the City by
the City Clerk not less than five days prior to the date of the public
hearing.
A. The Common Council shall meet and hold the public hearing at the
date, time and place specified in the public notice.
B. After conclusion of the public hearing, the Common Council shall
consider the adoption of the proposed budget and may adjourn from
time to time until it has fully considered and reviewed the proposed
budget.
C. The Common Council may add new programs or amounts and may
increase, decrease or strike out programs or amounts. Expenditures
required by law, for debt service, for estimated deficit or estimate of
revenues may not be changed except to correct omissions or
mathematical errors.
D. The Common Council may, however, decrease the amount of the tax levy
for the ensuing fiscal year as proposed in said budget in proportion to
such decrease in the total expenditures as it may have determined. If
the Common Council shall increase the total expenditures, such
increase shall be included in the amount to be raised by taxes.
Section 5.6 CHARTER Section 5.8
C:23
department, commission, agency, fund and program. As soon as practicable
after the Board of Supervisors of Madison County shall file a resolution with
the City Clerk ascertaining and directing the amount of tax to be levied in
the City for state and county purposes, the Common Council shall pass a
resolution making a levy upon all real and personal property situate in the
City liable to taxation in the ensuing fiscal year for City, state and county
purposes.
Section 5.9. Filing of appropriation and tax levy resolutions.
Upon the adoption of the budget, the appropriation resolution and the tax
levy resolution, the City Clerk shall file a certified copy of each with the City
Chamberlain.
Section 5.10. Administration of budget.
Section 5.11. Amendments after adoption of budget.
A. No payment shall be made and no obligation incurred by any official of
the City against any appropriation unless there is a sufficient
unexpended and unencumbered balance in the appropriation. Every
expenditure or obligation authorized or incurred in violation of these
provisions shall be void and any payment so made shall be deemed
illegal. All officers who shall knowingly authorize or make such
payment shall be jointly and severally liable to the City for the full
amount so paid and such action shall be cause for removal.
B. If, at any time during the fiscal year, the Mayor shall ascertain that the
revenues for the City as a whole or for the corporation tax district,
including any surpluses from the preceding year, will be less than the
total appropriations, he shall order the reduction of expenditures in
those appropriations that he deems advisable. No later than the next
regularly scheduled meeting of the Common Council, he shall report
such action and the Common Council may, by resolution, confirm,
modify or amend the action of the Mayor or take such other appropriate
action as it deems necessary to handle the deficit.
A. Transfer of appropriations. The Common Council, upon request of the
head of a department, office, board, bureau, commission or agency, may
at any time transfer any unencumbered appropriations, balance or
portion thereof within a department, office, board, bureau, commission
or agency. The Common Council may by resolution transfer from the
contingency fund or any unencumbered appropriation, balance or
portion thereof, from one department, office, board, bureau,
commission or agency to another.
B. Supplemental appropriations. Upon recommendation of the Mayor and
certification by the City Comptroller that the funds to be appropriated
are not needed for the purpose of preventing a deficit for the fiscal year,
the Common Council may, by resolution passed by a 2/3 vote of all of the
Councilmen, appropriate any unanticipated revenue received during
Section 5.8 ONEIDA CODE Section 5.11
C:24
Section 5.12. Additional powers of the Common Council over
financial affairs of the City.
Notwithstanding any of the foregoing provisions, the Common Council shall
have the power to borrow money, to make additional appropriations and to
exercise all other powers and control over the financial affairs of the City
pursuant to the provisions of the Local Finance Law or other provisions
of law. Except as otherwise provided by law, the Common Council shall
exercise the powers enumerated in this section by resolution of the
Common Council by a 2/3 vote of all of the Councilmen.
Section 5.13. Mandatory referendum on certain bond resolutions.
[Amended 6-1-1982 by L.L. No. 4-1982; 3-2-1990 by L.L. No. 1-1990;
L.L. No. 2-1993; L.L. No. 1-1994; L.L. No. 4-1996; 12-19-2000 by L.L.
No. 6-2000; 7-16-2013 by L.L. No. 4-2013]
the fiscal year for the use of any department, office, board, bureau,
commission, agency, program, City object or purpose.
C. Capital program. The Common Council may, by resolution passed by a
2/3 vote of all of the Councilmen, add, modify or abandon projects or
may modify the methods of financing. No capital project shall be
authorized or undertaken unless it is included in the capital program as
adopted or amended.
(a) Limitations, qualifications and procedure. Bond resolutions providing
for the issuance of bonds in a principal amount exceeding $1,000,000
shall be subject to mandatory referendum after such resolutions have
been adopted by the Common Council.
1. Qualified voters shall be those who are qualified to vote for the
election of officers of the City.
2. All such resolutions shalt be submitted to the qualified electors at a
special election. Except as expressly provided in this section, such
election shall be held in accordance with the provisions of the
Election Law of the State of New York.
3. Notice of such referendum shall be given by publication once in
each week for three successive weeks in the official newspapers of
the City, the first publication to be at least 21 days prior to such
special election. The Common Council, by resolution, shall
designate the hours of voting and the polling places, and the notice
of special election shall set forth the purpose of the special
election, the date of the election, the location of the polling places,
the hours of voting and qualifications of voters.
4. The election inspectors shall canvass the votes immediately after
closing the polls and make a certificate signed by them stating the
number of votes cast and the number of votes for and against the
proposition and deliver the same to the City Clerk, together with
Section 5.11 CHARTER Section 5.13
C:25
Section 5.14. Lapse of appropriations.
Any portion of an annual appropriation, except an appropriation for a
capital improvement, remaining unexpended and encumbered at the close
of the fiscal year shall lapse. An appropriate appropriation for a capital
improvement shall continue in force until the purpose for which it was
made has been accomplished or abandoned; the purpose of any such
appropriation shall be deemed abandoned if three years pass without any
expenditure from, or encumbrance of, the appropriation.
Section 5.15. Department of Finance.
There shall be a Department of Finance which shall be headed by the
City Comptroller. The Mayor shall appoint the City Comptroller. The City
Comptroller shall be the chief fiscal officer of the City and shall have and
possess all the powers and duties as such as provided in this Charter or
other provisions of law.
Section 5.16. Duties of City Comptroller.
The City Comptroller shall:
the registers and poll books. The City Clerk shall deliver the same
to the Common Council at its next meeting.
5. The Common Council shall meet at the Council chambers on the
day following such referendum and shall examine and tabulate the
statements of the result of the special election. The Common
Council shall canvass the returns contained in such statements and
shall determine the number of votes cast on such propositions and
shall declare the result of the canvass. If the proposition shall
receive a majority of the votes cast, it shall be declared adopted.
(b) Exceptions. The provisions of this section shall not apply to bond
resolutions authorizing the issuance of bonds for the payment of
judgments, or compromised or settled claims against the City pursuant
to a determination by a court, or an officer, body or agency acting in an
administrative or quasi-judicial capacity, or to provide disposal or
treatment facilities required by an order of the State Commissioner of
Health or of the State Commissioner of Environmental Conservation
directing compliance with standards, determinations or orders
promulgated pursuant to the Environmental Conservation Law,
§ 17-0101 et seq., for water pollution and wastewater issues and Article
11, § 1107, of the Public Health Law for water supply issues to prevent
pollution of the waters of the state or the payment of the costs of
sanitary sewer installations where special assessments are to be levied
against the benefited property for such improvements.
1. Have charge of the administration of all the financial affairs of the City
except as otherwise provided in this Charter or other provision of law.
Section 5.13 ONEIDA CODE Section 5.16
C:26
2. Maintain and supervise the general accounting system of the City in
accordance with the uniform system of accounts prescribed by the state
comptroller.
3. Examine and audit the accounts of all officers of the City and all persons
indebted to the City, and certify the condition of such accounts
prescribed and controlled.
4. Be responsible for the issuance of receipts to be used by all offices,
departments, boards, bureaus, commissions and agencies of the City.
5. Have supervision over and be responsible for the disbursement of all
City funds.
6. Submit the annual financial statement of the City to the State
Comptroller and provide such other statements or reports as may be
required from time to time by the Mayor, the Common Council or as
otherwise prescribed by law.
7. Have custody over the investment and management of all City funds
unless otherwise provided in this Charter or other provision of law.
8. Serve as purchasing agent for the City, and he shall contract for and
purchase all supplies, materials, equipment and services required by
any office, department, board, bureau, commission or agency of the
City pursuant to rules and regulations established by the Common
Council and except for professional and technical services and public
works contracts. All purchases made and contracts executed by the City
Comptroller shall be pursuant to an approved request from the head of
the office, department, board, bureau, commission, agency, or their
designee, whose appropriation is to be charged; provided, however,
that in accordance with the rules and regulations established by the
Common Council, the City Comptroller may make purchases in advance
of needs or in bulk amounts where such practices would result in
economy or improved efficiency. [Amended 10-7-2014 by L.L. No.
7-2014]
Under the supervision of the Mayor and Common Council, he shall:
a. Establish specifications for supplies, materials and equipment to be
purchased by the City.
b. Determine financial responsibility of all bidders and such
prerequisites for determining the qualification of bidders.
c. Prescribe the time and period for which purchasing requests are to
be made. [Amended 10-7-2014 by L.L. No. 7-2014]
d. Inspect or cause to be inspected all supplies, materials and
equipment and, if necessary, to cause tests to be made as soon as
practicable after receipt of the same and to determine if they
comply with all requirements and specifications.
Section 5.16 CHARTER Section 5.16
C:27
Section 5.16.1. Powers and duties of Deputy City Comptroller.
[Added 12-19-2000 by L.L. No. 6-2000]
The Deputy City Comptroller shall:
Section 5.17. Powers and duties of City Chamberlain.
The City Chamberlain shall:
e. Supervise, control and maintain any central supply office as may be
provided by the Common Council; when authorized by the Common
Council, to enter into cooperative purchasing agreements with
other governmental agencies.
f. Transfer, with approval of the Common Council, to or between
offices, departments, boards, bureaus, commissions and agencies
any supplies, materials and equipment or to sell the same if
determined to be unneeded, surplus or obsolete.
Any supplies, materials or equipment purchased in advance of
actual need shall remain in the custody of the City Comptroller
for delivery to the office, department, board, bureau, commission
or agency until its use is required. The City Comptroller shall
keep records of all purchases made by him and of the ultimate
destination or use of such material, equipment or supplies. The
City Comptroller shall cause to be kept and inventoried all
municipal property in his custody; and it shall be the duty of each
officer or employee having municipal property in his custody to
keep an inventory of such property and to furnish a copy thereof
to the City Comptroller on request.
9. Assist the Mayor and Common Council in preparing the annual City
budget.
10. Perform such other similar and related duties as may be assigned to
him by the Mayor or the Common Council.
A. Assist the City Comptroller in the performance of her duties.
B. Perform such other duties as directed by the City Comptroller.
1. Receive and have custody of all public funds belonging to or handled by
the City.
2. Collect all taxes, assessments, license fees and other revenues of the
City for whose collection the City is responsible, except those payable
by law to the City Clerk or as otherwise provided in this Charter or
other provision of law.
3. Deposit all funds coming into his hands in such depositories as may be
designated by resolution of the Common Council, subject to the
requirements of law as to depositories and depository's undertakings.
Section 5.16 ONEIDA CODE Section 5.17
C:28
Section 5.18. (Reserved)2
Section 5.19. Petty cash fund.
Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions, the City Comptroller may
establish a petty cash fund and may make payments therefrom, prior to
audit of claims, for purchases and disbursements certified by the head of a
City office, department, board, bureau, commission or agency to be a valid
claim. No payment from such fund shall be in excess of $100, and in the
event that said claim is disallowed after audit, the person certifying the
same shall be required to immediately reimburse the City, and upon failure
to do so, the amount of the claim shall be deducted from the salary of such
person.
Section 5.20. Competitive bidding.
All purchases shall be made in conformity with the provisions of the General
Municipal Law and such further and additional regulations as may be
imposed by ordinance of the Common Council.
Section 5.21. Contracts for public works and capital improvements.
All contracts for public works and capital improvements shall comply with
the provisions of the General Municipal Law and such other and additional
rules and regulations established by the Common Council. All such
contracts shall be approved and awarded by the Common Council. The
Common Council in its discretion may reject any or all bids and order the
readvertising for new bids or direct that the Department of Public Works
execute the work or improvement.
Section 5.22. Audit and payment of claims.
4. Require reports of receipts and disbursements from all offices,
departments, boards, bureaus, commissions and agencies of the City at
such intervals as he may deem it advisable or as otherwise required by
law.
5. Perform all the duties required by this Charter or other provision of law
and such other additional and related duties as the Common Council
may direct.
A. Every claim for the payment of money shall be in writing and itemized.
It shall also contain a statement that the service was actually rendered,
the disbursement actually and necessarily made, the supplies or
equipment actually delivered or other appropriate statement that the
consideration has passed to the City. The City Comptroller may require
claims to be verified. A written contract for the payment of money at
stated amounts and at stated intervals shall be deemed a certified or
2. Editor's Note: Former Section 5.18, Powers and duties of Deputy City Chamberlain, was
repealed 7-2-2013 by L.L. No. 3-2013.
Section 5.17 CHARTER Section 5.22
C:29
Section 5.23. Purchasing requests. [Amended 10-7-2014 by L.L. No.
7-2014]
Section 5.24. Assessor. [Amended 2-20-2018 by L.L. No. 2-2018]
The City of Oneida shall have one Assessor appointed by the Mayor for
an indefinite term, which office of Assessor shall be classified in the
competitive class of the civil service. The Assessor may also be employed in
any other position by the City not incompatible with the office of Assessor.
The Assessor shall meet all of the minimum qualification standards as
required by the Real Property Tax Law. Except as otherwise provided in this
Charter, the Assessor shall possess all the powers and duties of an Assessor
as provided in the Real Property Tax Law.
Section 5.25. Assessment procedure. [Amended by L.L. No. 1-1992]
verified claim, as required by the City. [Amended 7-2-2013 by L.L.
No. 3-2013]
B. Every claim for the payment of money shall be audited by the Common
Council or by such other officer or employee designated by it.
Disbursement shall be made from any funds of the City either by check
signed by the City Comptroller and countersigned by the Mayor or by
means of electronic transmission using a secure account. [Amended
7-16-2013 by L.L. No. 4-2013]
C. Approval of payment of the claim shall also be made in writing by the
respective head of the various department, office, board, bureau,
agency or other administrative unit of the City against whose account
the claim is made.
D. All claims shall be audited by the Common Council prior to payment
unless otherwise provided by this Charter or by resolution of the
Common Council.
A. All purchases made and contracts executed by the City Comptroller
shall be pursuant to an approved request from the head of the
department or their designee, board, bureau, agency, commission,
office, or other administrative unit whose appropriation is to be
charged except as otherwise provided in this Charter.
B. The City Comptroller may, under the direction of the Common Council,
establish rules and regulations pertaining to the time, mode, form and
other related matters for the making of purchasing requests.
A. Except as otherwise provided in this Charter, the assessment procedure
shall be as prescribed by the Real Property Tax Law.
B. The assessment roll shall be prepared so as to show separately the
assessed parcels of real property within and without the corporation tax
district, the name or number of any special district in which special ad
valorem levies are made for district purposes and each special
Section 5.22 ONEIDA CODE Section 5.25
C:30
Section 5.26. Board of Assessment Review. [Amended by L.L. No.
1-1992]
Section 5.27. Filing of completed assessment roll. [Amended
2-19-2013 by L.L. No. 1-2013]
franchise, together with the date of payment and such other items and
details as may be required.
C. The taxable status of real property shall be determined annually as of
the first day of May.
D. On or before the first day of June, the Assessor shall complete the
tentative assessment roll and shall file the same and cause notice
thereof to be published in the manner prescribed by the Real Property
Tax Law.
A. There shall be a Board of Assessment Review appointed by the Common
Council to consist of three members who shall be appointed in
accordance with the Real Property Tax Law and shall have all the
powers and duties prescribed therein. Compensation for each member
of the Board of Assessment Review shall be established by resolution of
the Common Council. [Amended 12-1-2015 by L.L. No. 4-20153]
B. Beginning on the second Tuesday of June and so many days thereafter
as the Board of Assessment Review deems necessary, such Board shall
meet to hear complaints in relation to assessments, in the manner
prescribed by law. [Amended by L.L. No. 1-2001]
A. Consistent with the provisions of the Real Property Tax Law and the
Municipal Home Rule Law, for the purpose of enabling the Assessor to
prepare and perpetuate a more perfect record of the names of owners
and claimants of real property within the City of Oneida, every deed of
conveyance of lands in said City, or other instrument in writing,
whereby the ownership of said lands shall be changed, made and
executed after this local law takes effect, shall, before the same be
received for record by the Clerk of the County of Madison, be presented
at the office of the Assessor, who shall note the transfer of title upon
their records. Such presentation to the Assessor shall be noted upon
such deed or other written instrument. Each and every map or plat of
lands within the City, showing a subdivision of such lands into blocks or
lots, shall, before it shall be filed in the office of the Clerk of the County
of Madison, or in any City office, be presented to the Assessor and copy
thereof filed in the office of the Assessor. Such presentation to the
Assessor shall be noted upon the original map or plat. The fee for
recording the aforementioned deeds, written instruments, and maps or
plat with the Assessor shall be set from time to time by resolution of the
Common Council.
3. Editor's Note: This local law provided an effective date of 1-1-2016.
Section 5.25 CHARTER Section 5.27
C:31
Section 5.28. Equalizing assessment by County Board of
Supervisors.
The Board of Supervisors of Madison County shall in each year equalize the
assessment within the City of Oneida with the assessments in the towns
of said county, in the same manner as the assessments are required to be
equalized between such towns. The Board of Supervisors shall not cause the
state and county tax apportionment to said City to be spread upon any tax
roll of property within the City, but shall, by resolution, ascertain and direct
the amount of tax to be levied in the City for state and county purposes,
and shall, on or before the 15th day of December in each year, certify such
resolution under the hands of the Chairman and the Clerk of the Board of
Supervisors, to the Common Council of the City, and file such resolution
with the City Clerk, and the City Chamberlain shall thereupon extend and
apportion such tax on the assessment roll together with the City taxes levied
as hereinafter provided, and no other extension and apportionment of such
state and county taxes need be made.
Section 5.29. Levy of taxes by Common Council; tax rolls.
The Common Council must annually cause to be levied and raised by
general tax upon all taxable property, according to valuation upon the
assessment roll for the current year, levying and apportioning the several
amounts to be raised, upon the taxable property in the corporation tax
district and in the entire City as authorized by and provided in this Charter
and other provision of law:
B. The Assessor shall file the original and two certified copies of the finally
completed assessment roll in the office of the City Cleric on or before
the first day of August.
On or before the fast day of September, the City Clerk shall deliver one
certified copy to the Chairman or Clerk of the Board of Supervisors of
the County of Madison.
The original assessment roll shall be delivered to the City Chamberlain
as provided in Section 5.30.
1. The amount of taxes certified to the Common Council of the City by the
Board of Supervisors to be assessed upon the entire City.
2. The amount of all interest and any installment of principal falling due
upon the bonds or other obligations of the City, which shall be kept in a
separate fund to be called "bond fund."
3. The amount necessary to defray the expenses for the next fiscal year as
authorized and provided in this Charter and other provision of law.
Section 5.27 ONEIDA CODE Section 5.30
C:32
Section 5.30. Extension of taxes and warrant. [Amended 7-2-2013
by L.L. No. 3-2013]
The City Chamberlain in accordance with the levy of taxes as finally adopted
by the Common Council in each year, as soon as practicable thereafter,
shall extend and apportion the taxes to be raised in the City on the original
assessment roll delivered to the Chamberlain by the Madison County Hoard
Supervisors, command the Chamberlain to extend, apportion, receive and
collect the taxes from the persons or property therein mentioned or
described with such percentage of penalty and interest as hereinafter
provided in the manner provided by this Charter or as otherwise provided
by law.
From the time the assessment roll and warrant are delivered to the City
Chamberlain, all taxes assessed and levied upon any real estate shall be
a lien upon such real estate for the amount thereof with percentage and
interest until the same is fully paid.
Section 5.31. Notice of receiving taxes. [Amended by L.L. No.
4-1974; L.L. No. 4-1983; 7-15-2014 by L.L. No. 4-2014]
Immediately upon completion of the extension and apportionment of the
City tax roll and pursuant to the warrant delivered to him, the City
Chamberlain shall publish a notice in the official newspapers of the City,
weekly for four consecutive weeks, that he will attend at his office with said
roll and warrant after the first publication of said notice, Sundays, legal
holidays and half holidays excepted, during the regular business hours,
to receive the City, county and state taxes, and it shall be his duty to
attend accordingly. All taxes or assessments paid within 30 days after the
first publication of the City Chamberlain's notice shall be payable without
fee, percentage or interest thereon. On all taxes or assessments remaining
unpaid after the expiration of such 30 days, and within 60 days, the City
Chamberlain shall collect 1% additional; on all remaining unpaid after the
expiration of 60 days and within 90 days, he shall collect 5% additional; and
all remaining unpaid after the expiration of 90 days from such publication
shall bear, and there shall be collected thereon in addition to said 5%,
interest at the rate of 1% per month from the expiration of said 90 days up
to a maximum of 10%, which interest shall belong to the City.
In the event that any unpaid charge, including water and sewer charges,
special assessment, lot mowing, sidewalk replacement, sewer lateral repair
or any other miscellaneous charges billed to the property and remaining
unpaid as of October 31 of each year, shall be relevied pursuant to the
provisions of this Charter or any other provision of law, there shall be added,
to the amount then due and owing, a surcharge in the amount of 10%
thereof, which said surcharge shall be collected in the same manner as set
forth in this Charter.4
4. Editor's Note: The third unnumbered paragraph of Section 5.31, dealing specifically with
taxes for fiscal year 1975, which immediately followed this paragraph, was repealed
12-19-2000 by L.L. No. 6-2000.
Section 5.30 CHARTER Section 5.32
C:33
Section 5.32. Tax receipts.
Immediately upon receiving any tax, the City Chamberlain shall enter in a
column prepared for the purpose, and opposite the names of the persons
paying the same, the fact of payment and the date thereof and shall give the
person paying the same a receipt therefor. Any person may pay any one or
more taxes or assessments upon his property, leaving others unpaid, to be
enforced in the manner provided by this Charter or other provision of law.
All receipts issued by the City Chamberlain for taxes paid to him shall be
numbered consecutively, commencing with number "1" on the first receipt
issued for taxes for any one year, and he shall not receipt for more than
one year's taxes on the same property in one tax receipt; but shall use a
separate and distinct series of numbers or receipts, issued for the taxes of
each year for which the same is levied and assessed. All tax receipts shall be
printed and numbered and firmly bound together in book form, in duplicate.
and each duplicate to bear the same number.
Section 5.33. Collection of tax by sale of personal property.
[Amended 7-2-2013 by L.L. No. 3-2013]
The City Chamberlain is hereby authorized and empowered to issue a
warrant to any police officer of the City for the amount of any tax remaining
unpaid for a period of 90 days. The officer to whom such warrant shall be
delivered shall proceed as therein directed. Public notice of the time and
place of sale of the property to be sold shall be given by posting the same
in at least three public places in the City at least six days previous thereto.
The officer conducting such sale shall return the proceeds thereof together
with his warrant to the City Chamberlain within 15 days after the same shall
have been issued to him. He shall be entitled to charge the same fee as the
sheriff is entitled for collecting money by virtue of execution. If the proceeds
of such sale shall be more than the amount of such tax, the fees of collection
and the expenses of the sale, the surplus shall be paid to the person against
whom the tax is assessed, unless his right thereto is disputed by some other
persons, in which case such surplus shall remain in the hands of the City
Chamberlain, without liability on his part or on that of the City for costs,
until the rights of the parties thereto shall be determined by due process of
law.
Section 5.34. Collection of tax by action.
The City Chamberlain is hereby authorized and empowered to recover, by
action in any court of competent jurisdiction, and in the corporate name
of the City, the amount of every tax remaining unpaid after the expiration
of 90 days, with the additions and fees unpaid thereon, and to recover
judgment therefor with 12% interest thereon and the cost and expenses
of such action. The City Judge shall have exclusive jurisdiction to try such
action when the sum claimed does not exceed $500. A transcript of the
judgment obtained in such action may be filed and such judgment docketed
in the office of the Clerk of Madison County, and it shall, however small
the amount, thereupon become a judgment of the County Court of said
Section 5.32 ONEIDA CODE Section 5.34
C:34
county, and a lien to the amount of said judgment upon all real estate
of the judgment debtor situated in said county, and shall have the same
priority over any other lien or encumbrance thereon, or transfer of the
property charged with the tax sought to be recovered in said action. Upon
any judgment recovered for said unpaid taxes and docketed in said County
Clerk's office, execution may be issued and collected as provided by law,
and all the provisions of law in reference to sale and redemption of real
estate on execution or to proceedings supplementary to executions shall
apply to sales, redemptions or such proceedings which may be had under
this Charter.
Section 5.35. Proceedings in case of failure to collect tax on
warrant.
On or before the 15th day of June next after any tax shall have been
imposed upon any real estate in said City, the City Chamberlain shall make
and deliver to the Assessor a transcript of any and all such taxes which
remain unpaid, and it shall be the duty of the Assessor on or before the
15th day of July thereafter to make and deliver to the City Chamberlain a
statement containing a brief general description of the location, boundary
and estimated quantity of each parcel of said lands, and in case any such
lands shall have been erroneously assessed, then it shall be the duty of the
Assessor to make and include in said statement a corrected assessment at
the same valuation as before, and such corrected assessment and amount of
taxes levied upon said lands shall be as valid and effectual for all purposes
as though they had originally been corrected.
Section 5.36. Sale of land for unpaid taxes.
Whenever any such tax, penalty or interest, or any part of either of them,
shall remain unpaid on the first day of September, the City Chamberlain
shall proceed on or before December 1 to advertise and sell the lands
upon which the same was imposed for the payment of such tax, penalty
or interest, or in part remaining unpaid, and the expense of such sale, as
hereinafter prescribed, shall be also a charge upon such lands.
Section 5.37. Notice of sale of land for taxes.
The City Chamberlain shall cause to be published a notice of such sale
containing a description of the lands to be sold and specifying the time and
place for sale, in the official newspapers of the City, once a week for at least
three successive weeks, immediately prior to date of sale, and shall also
post such notice of sale in at least three public places in the City at least
21 days before the day of sale. On the day named, the City Chamberlain
shall commence the sale of such lands and shall continue such sale from
day to day until the whole thereof shall be sold. Before the sale, the owner
of any parcel of land or his representatives may avoid the sale thereof by
paying the tax or taxes to the City Chamberlain with all accrued interest,
fees, additions and expenses.
Section 5.34 CHARTER Section 5.38
C:35
Section 5.38. Manner of conducting sale of land for taxes.
Each parcel shall be sold at public auction to the owner, his representatives
or assigns or be bid in by the City Chamberlain in the name of the City for
the gross amount of the taxes, plus interest, penalties and all other charges
allowed by law with respect thereto. A purchaser on such sale, as permitted
herein, shall make payment to the City Chamberlain immediately after each
parcel is struck off. In default of such payment, the City Chamberlain shall
offer the parcel for sale again to any eligible bidder, and if there is none,
then said City Chamberlain shall bid in said parcel on behalf of the City
as hereinbefore set forth. Any and all parcels so acquired by the City shall
be under its care and control and may be leased or sold and conveyed
by it. As soon as practicable after the sale, the City Chamberlain shall
prepare and execute in duplicate, as to the parcel sold, a certificate of such
sale describing the parcel purchased by a brief general description of the
location, boundary and estimated quantity thereof and stating the fact of
the sale, the name of the purchaser, the sum paid therefor, the amount
due thereon at the time of the sale, the name of the person or persons
against whom such tax was assessed and the name of the reputed owner
thereof. One of said duplicates shall be delivered to the purchaser or, in
the case the parcel was struck off to the City, then it shall be retained
by the City Chamberlain. The City Chamberlain shall deliver the other
duplicate certificate to the Clerk of the County of Madison, who shall file
said certificate in his office and record the same in a book to be kept in said
Clerk's office for that purpose, and shall index the certificate in the name of
the person to whom the parcel was assessed, the name of the reputed owner
thereof and in the name of the purchaser in the same book and manner as
deeds are required by law to be indexed. The County Clerk shall be entitled
to receive a fee of $1 for each certificate so filed and recorded, which fee
shall be paid by the City Chamberlain and shall be a part of the expenses
of the sale of the parcel. If from any cause the City Chamberlain shall be
unable to attend at the time and place of sale, the Deputy City Chamberlain
of said City may conduct the sale with the same force and effect as though
made by the City Chamberlain.
Section 5.39. Disposition and proceeds of sale.
The proceeds of the sale of each parcel, other than those struck off to the
City, shall be applied to the payment of the expenses of the sale as herein
provided and the extinguishment of the tax, penalty or interest for which
it was sold. In case any taxes shall be assessed and levied on real estate
which has been sold for taxes, subsequent to such sale and before the
redemption thereof or conveyance thereof to the purchaser and the same
shall be unpaid, the person redeeming shall pay the same; otherwise, the
purchaser shall pay the same before he shall receive his conveyance of the
same.
Section 5.38 ONEIDA CODE Section 5.40
C:36
Section 5.40. Redemption of lands.
The owner of or any person interested in or having a lien upon any parcel
or lot so sold may redeem the same from such sale at any time within two
years by paying to the City Chamberlain for the use of the purchaser or
his assigns the sum mentioned in the certificate as having been bid for
the premises with interest thereon at the rate of 10% per annum from the
day of the sale, together with any tax or assessment or other amount as
shall have accrued thereon, with interest at the rate of 10% per annum
upon such tax or assessment or other amount from the time of payment.
In case of the redemption of any land sold for taxes, as herein provided,
by the person who was the owner thereof at the time of the sale, the City
Chamberlain shall give such owner a receipt for the amount paid by him
to effect such redemption, and on the production thereof by such owner to
him, the County Clerk shall cancel the certificate of sale by a proper entry
at the foot of the record of such certificate in his office.
Section 5.41. Notice of redemption.
At least three months before the expiration of the time for the final
redemption of any parcels or lots so sold, the City Chamberlain shall
commence the publication of a notice of redemption from such sales, which
shall show the year when the sale took place and the last day for the
redemption of the lands not already redeemed by the owners, without other
or further description, and such notice shall be published at least twice
in each of said three months in the official newspapers of the City. The
publication of such notice shall bar and preclude any and all persons except
the purchaser on such sale or his assigns or the person finally redeeming
from claiming any interest in or lien upon such lands or any part thereof,
in case said lands shall not be redeemed from such sale herein before
provided.
Section 5.42. Conveyance of lands sold for taxes.
If any parcel or lot so sold shall not be redeemed as herein provided, the
City Chamberlain, immediately after the expiration of the said two years,
shall execute and deliver to the City or its assigns a conveyance of the
real estate sold, which conveyance shall vest in the grantee an estate in
fee. All purchases made for the City in any year shall be included in one
conveyance, and no fee shall be charged therefor. Every such conveyance
shall be executed by the City Chamberlain, and the execution thereof shall
be acknowledged before some officer authorized to take and certify
acknowledgments of instruments for record in said county, and such
conveyance shall be conclusive evidence that the sale and subsequent
proceedings were regular and presumptive evidence that all the previous
proceedings were regular and according to law. Any such conveyance may
be recorded in like manner and with like effect as any other conveyance of
real estate. In case of failure to redeem within the time herein specified, the
sale and conveyance thereof shall become absolute and the occupant and
all other persons barred forever. The City or its assigns, as the case may be,
Section 5.40 CHARTER Section 5.42
C:37
shall be entitled to have and to possess the granted lands from and after the
execution of such conveyance and may cause the occupants of such lands to
be removed therefrom and the possession thereof delivered to it in the same
manner and by the same proceedings and by and before the same officers as
in the case of a tenant holding over after the expiration of his term without
permission of his landlord.
Section 5.43. Settlement by City Chamberlain for taxes collected.
It shall be the duty of the City Chamberlain to pay over to the County
Treasurer of Madison County at the end of each month during the period
that the tax roll and warrant is in his hands all moneys received by him for
county and state taxes. He shall take duplicate receipts for each payment,
one of which shall be immediately filed with the City Clerk. Except as
otherwise provided in this Charter, the City Chamberlain shall settle with
the County Treasurer for state and county taxes in the manner required
by law of town collectors. Anything to the contrary notwithstanding, the
existence of any order of a court of competent jurisdiction enjoining the
collection of such taxes by the procedures provided in this Charter or the
existence of a lien or liens against any premises subject to tax, which lien
or liens have priority to the lien of the state and county tax uncollected
by the City Chamberlain, at the expiration of the period for the collection
of such tax shall operate to relieve the City Chamberlain and the City of
Oneida from any liability for the payment to the County Treasurer of the
uncollected tax assessed against such premises. The fact of the existence
of such prior lien or liens shall be certified by the City Chamberlain to
the County Treasurer at the time prescribed for the settlement of the
taxes not so collected. The County Treasurer shall thereupon credit the
City Chamberlain with the amount of such uncollected tax. Upon the final
settlement with the County Treasurer, the City Chamberlain may pay from
the general fund of the City the amount of the uncollected state and county
taxes in his hands for collection and thereupon such taxes shall belong to
the City of Oneida. At the time of the delivering to him of the assessment
roll and tax warrants, the City Chamberlain shall receipt for the same and
shall then be charged with the whole amount which he is thereby authorized
to collect. He shall not be authorized to credit himself with any amount
as unpaid on any warrant until he shall make and file with the City Clerk
an affidavit stating the amount paid and setting forth the reason in each
case why such tax or assessment is or has not been collected. The Common
Council may thereupon order and authorize said City Chamberlain to credit
himself with the whole or any part of said tax or assessment unpaid, and the
City Chamberlain shall be credited only with such amount as the Common
Council shall so order. Upon reporting to the Common Council, the City
Chamberlain must show that he has duly settled with one County Treasurer
for state and county funds.
Section 5.42 ONEIDA CODE Section 5.44
C:38
Section 5.44. Power of Common Council as to void erroneous
assessments.
The Common Council may, at its discretion, release, discharge, remit or
commute any portion of the taxes assessed or levied against any person or
property for any error, irregularity or omission in the levying of said taxes or
in any of the proceedings relating to the same. In case any assessment shall
remain unpaid on account of any assessment authorized by this Charter
or the laws in force when such tax was levied, or in case of error in the
description of lands or in the description of the owner or occupants, the
Common Council may, in its discretion or upon the application of any person
interested, proceed to correct such irregularity, omission or error or cancel,
remit or commute such tax or cause the amount so unpaid to be reassessed
on the property, the assessment against which remains unpaid, or upon the
owner or occupant thereof, and the Common Council is hereby authorized
and empowered to make such reassessment upon giving 10 days' personal
notice thereof to the owner, agent or occupant of the property against
which the amount remains so unpaid. The Common Council may direct the
City Chamberlain to correct any irregularity, omission or error, and such
reassessment or correction shall have the same effect as if the assessment
had been properly made. But the Common Council shall not alter any
valuation made by the Assessor. Any omission to comply with the provisions
of this Charter in making an assessment or levying a tax or creating a
lien shall not render such assessment or the tax levied thereunder or the
assessment made or lien created thereby void, but shall be treated as
an irregularity merely, and it shall be the duty of any and all courts, in
case it shall appear that such irregularity exists, to direct the same to be
corrected or amended or the omission supplied, if possible. In case any tax
or assessment shall be void or have failed for want of jurisdiction or for any
irregularity, mistake or inadvertence in levying or assessing the same, the
Common Council shall have the power, and it shall be its duty, to cause the
same to be reassessed in a proper manner. Any sum paid thereon shall be
credited upon the tax so reassessed, and if the sum paid shall exceed the
amount so reassessed, the excess shall be refunded to the person entitled
thereto.
Section 5.45. Special tax credits and assessments. [Amended by
L.L. No. 3-1974]
The Assessor shall have the power and be charged with the duty to carry
out the purpose and intent of Economic Development Law, § 485 of the Real
Property Tax Law and other applicable laws of the state to grant to business
facility owners or operators exemption from taxes and special ad valorem
levies to the extent provided in the aforesaid mentioned New York State
laws. [Amended 12-19-2000 by L.L. No. 6-2000]
The Assessor shall determine the assessed value of the exemption pursuant
to such state laws and shall grant as an exemption of 100% thereof for the
first six years; 80% thereof for the seventh year; 60% thereof for the eighth
Section 5.44 CHARTER Section 5.45
C:39
year; 40% thereof for the ninth year; and 20% thereof for the 10th year, for
a maximum of 10 years for each eligible business facility.
Section 5.45 ONEIDA CODE Section 5.45
C:40
ARTICLE VI
ASSESSMENTS FOR LOCAL IMPROVEMENTS
Section 6.1. Local improvements. [Amended by L.L. No. 5-1975; L.L.
No. 6-1975; L.L. No. 7-1975; L.L. No. 1-1976; L.L. No. 5-1977; L.L.
No. 1-1983; L.L. No. 2-1983; L.L. No. 1-1986; L.L. No. 2-1986; L.L.
No. 1-1988; 10-15-1991 by L.L. No. 6-1991]
A. Bridges, streets and highways. The Common Council shall have the
power to cause the making or repairing of any bridge or bridges, arch
or arches over any stream or run of water in the City and to cause any
street, highway, lane, alley or other public place or any part thereof to
be graded, regraded, leveled, graveled, macadamized or
remacadamized, paved or repaved and the expense thereof, and the
expense of ordinary repairing and improvement of streets and highways
shall be paid by the City at large.
B. Sidewalks.
1. Assessment for sidewalks.
a. The Common Council may, by a 2/3 vote of all the Council
persons in office, authorize or direct the construction or
reconstruction of public sidewalks anywhere in the City, and
said Common Council shall determine the type of materials to
be used therein and the specifications therefor.
b. In the event the Common Council mandates the construction or
reconstruction of public sidewalks in conjunction with the
construction or reconstruction of a public street or undertakes
a stand-alone City-wide sidewalk replacement or construction
capital improvement program, the cost thereof for said
sidewalks shall be borne 50% by the City as a whole and 50%
by the property benefited or the owner or owners thereof.
[Amended 4-7-1998 by L.L. No. 3-1998]
c. In the event said Common Council mandates the
reconstruction of a public sidewalk that has been uplifted or
damaged by the root structure of a tree located within the City
of Oneida highway or street right-of-way, the cost thereof for
said sidewalks shall be borne 100% by the City as a whole.
[Added 3-16-2010 by L.L. No. 1-20105]
d. In all other cases, the cost of construction or reconstruction of
a public sidewalk shall be borne 100% by the property
benefited or owner or owners thereof.
e. The owner or owners shall be billed for their portion of the said
construction at the completion thereof. In the event they fail to
5. Editor's Note: This local law also redesignated former Subsection B1.c through e as
Subsections B1.d through f, respectively.
Section 6.1 CHARTER Section 6.1
C:41
pay the same within 30 days after billing, the same shall be
certified by the City Engineer to the City Chamberlain who
shall add such charge to the next general City taxes for said
property, together with interest thereon, and collect the same
in like manner unless said Common Council determines that
the cost be paid over a period of years. In that event, the
amount due each year shall be added to the taxes, together
with interest thereon, as hereinafter set forth.
f. That in the event said Common Council shall bond for such
project, the rate of interest to be paid by the said property
owner shall be the same as that upon the bond. If the Common
Council determines that the cost of said improvement be paid
over a period exceeding one year without bonding, then the
rate Of interest to be paid by the owner shall be fixed and
determined by said Common Council.
2. Maintenance for sidewalks.
a. The responsibility and expense of maintaining said sidewalk in
a safe condition shall be the responsibility of the abutting
property owner or owners.
C. Sanitary sewers. In the case of construction of sanitary sewers, and
including also carrying connections to the curb, in the inside and
outside tax district, the Common Council may by a 2/3 vote of all the
Council members in office authorize such a project, whether initiated
by a petition or upon its own motion. One hundred percent of the cost of
the project shall be borne by local assessment on the basis of front
footage abutting on the street or portion thereof benefited by the
improvement or by the property benefited or by the owner or owners
thereof, except that if a sanitary sewer or any part of the sanitary sewer
system is designed or constructed to have a capacity or use in excess of
that needed for the property to be benefited thereby, the Common
Council with the advice of the City Engineer shall determine the
additional expense, and such additional expense shall not be included in
the special assessment to be assessed against the benefiting property
but shall be borne by the City as a whole. The entire expense of
replacing existing sanitary sewers shall be borne by the applicable
sewer district, Kenwood Sanitary Sewer District or City of Oneida
Sanitary Sewer District, except that the expense for replacement of
sewer laterals from the main to the curb shall be borne 50% by the City
as a whole and 50% by the property benefited.
D. Storm sewers and street curbs. In case of construction of storm sewers
or street curbs anywhere in the City, the Common Council may by a 2/3
vote of all the Council members in office authorize such a project. Fifty
percent of the cost of the project shall be borne by the City as a whole
and 50% by the property benefited or the owner or owners thereof,
except that if a storm sewer or any part of the storm sewer system is
designed or constructed to have a capacity or use in excess of that
Section 6.1 ONEIDA CODE Section 6.1
C:42
needed for the property to be benefited thereby, the Common Council,
with the advice of the City Engineer, shall determine the additional
expense, and such additional expense shall not be included in the
special assessment to be assessed against the benefiting property but
shall be borne by the City as a whole. The expense of replacing existing
storm sewers or street curbs shall be borne by the City as a whole.
E. Water mains and services. The Common Council may authorize the
construction or extension of new water mains. Where done in the inside
district, 50% of the total cost of the project shall be borne by the City
from revenues received from the use of water and 50% thereof shall be
borne by the benefiting property in such manner as the Common
Council shall determine at the time of authorization of the project;
where done in the outside district, 25% of the total cost of the project
shall be so borne by the City from water revenues and 75% thereof shall
be so borne by the benefiting property. However, all expenses
associated with installation of new water services, whether in the inside
or outside district, shall be borne by the benefiting property.
Where a main is reconstructed in both the inside and outside districts,
all costs associated with the same and with the replacement of water
services due to the reconstruction shall be borne by the City.
F. Consent in writing of owners to certain improvements. Before any
expenditure is incurred in case of the construction of a sanitary or
storm sewer or curbs, the consent in writing of the owners or more than
1/2 of the total foot frontage abutting on the streets or portion or
portions thereof, in the case of storm sewers and curbs, and 1/2 the
assessed valuation in the case of sanitary sewers, in which such
improvement is to be made shall be filed with the Common Council or,
in the absence of such consent, the Common Council may by a 2/3 vote
of all of the Councilmen authorize such improvement.
G. Exemption from costs of sanitary sewer, storm sewers and curbing.
1. Sanitary sewers.
a. In case of construction of sanitary sewers, the owner of any
corner lot presently connected with the sanitary sewer system
of the City and previously included in a sanitary sewer district
shall be exempt from assessment, and such property shall be
excluded from any assessment or assessment roll with respect
to such sanitary sewer construction. This subdivision, however,
does not apply to lots subdivided off of such corner lots and
where no sanitary sewer has heretofore been constructed, nor
does it prohibit any amendment to an existing sanitary sewer
district to provide for changes in value or additional
construction within said district.
b. In case of construction of sanitary sewers assessed back on a
front-foot basis, the owner of any corner lot in a sanitary sewer
Section 6.1 CHARTER Section 6.1
C:43
Section 6.2. Common Council to undertake local improvements.
Whenever the Common Council shall determine, pursuant to the provision
of this Charter or other law, to undertake a local improvement, work or
benefit, whether to be done by the City with its own employees or by
contract, the cost of which or part thereof is to be borne by the abutting
property or the property benefited or its owner or owners, it shall adopt
a resolution declaring its intention to undertake such local improvement,
work or benefit and shall specify in such resolution the type of the
improvement, a general description of the improvement, including its
estimated cost, the area or property deemed to be benefited, and its
intention to assess all or a portion of the cost against the abutting property
or the property benefited or owner or owners thereof and the date, time
and place of a public hearing to consider such undertaking. The Common
district where the construction of said sewer is constructed
along more than one side thereof shall be assessed only on the
front footage on the shortest side; provided, however, that in
no event shall the assessment be based on less than 50% of
all the front footage of said property on all of the sides in said
district.
2. Storm sewers and curbing. In case of construction of storm sewers
or curbing, the owner of any corner lot shall be exempt from
assessment and such property excluded from any assessment or
assessment roll upon the side having the longest frontage up to a
distance of 80 feet from the corner thereof. The exempt portion of
such construction shall be included upon the assessment roll and
the cost thereof borne by the City as a whole as a part of the City's
share of such improvement, and such corner lot shall be charged
for such improvement and included on said assessment roll only for
the distance and amount on said street in excess of such 80 feet.
3. To the extent that the property of any abutting owner may be
exempt from assessment under this subdivision, the property or
portion thereof so exempted shall be excluded in computing the
consent or consents of property owners required by Article VI,
Section 6.1F hereof.
H. Exemption from costs of sidewalks.
1. Sidewalks. In case of construction of sidewalks, the owner of any
corner lot shall be exempt from assessment and such property
excluded from any assessment or assessment roll upon the side
having the longest frontage up to a distance of 80 feet from the
corner thereof. The exempt portion of such construction shall be
included upon the assessment roll and the cost thereof borne by the
City as a whole as a part of the City's share of such improvement,
and such corner lot shall be charged for such improvement and
included on said assessment roll only for the distance and amount
on said street in excess of such 80 feet.
Section 6.1 ONEIDA CODE Section 6.2
C:44
Council shall also direct the City Clerk to publish a notice of the public
hearing in the official newspaper at least 10 days but not more than 30
days prior thereto or cause to be served personally on all persons who may
be liable to assessment for such improvement with a notice of the public
hearing within the stated period of time as aforesaid. Personal service on
one of the owners of jointly held property shall be deemed to be service on
all such other owner or owners thereof.
Section 6.3. Public hearing on local improvements.
At the date, time and place specified in the notice of public hearing, the
Common Council shall meet and shall hear any persons who wish to be
heard on the proposed improvement. The Common Council may adjourn
from time to time to complete such hearing.
Section 6.4. Authorization of local improvements.
After such hearing, the Common Council shall determine whether or not
to undertake the local improvement. The Common Council may make such
changes, additions or omissions as it deems proper in the proposed local
improvement without the necessity of a further hearing and may by
resolution direct the undertaking of said local improvement either by City
forces or by contract.
The Common Council shall, in its resolution authorizing and directing the
undertaking of said local improvement, state the estimated cost thereof and
establish the manner or method of determining the proportionate share of
all or part of the cost to be borne by the abutting property or the property
benefited or by the owner or owners thereof, and the portion or share
thereof to be borne by the corporation tax district or the City as a whole.
Section 6.5. Assessments for local improvements.
When work of any local improvement has been completed, the Common
Council shall assess the cost and expense reasonably incidental to and
a part of the local improvement, including but not limited to surveying,
advertising, inspection, interest, legal and other professional services and
assessment of such local improvement, upon the abutting property or the
property benefited or the owner or owners thereof. It shall cause a report of
assessment to be made by the City Engineer or other City official in charge
of the local improvement project. The report of assessment shall be certified
by the appropriate City official as to the total cost of such improvement, the
part of the total cost of the improvement to be borne by the corporation
tax district or the City as a whole, the amount to be assessed against the
abutting property or the property benefited or the owner or owners thereof,
with the exception of the property which may already have paid its proper
share of such improvement, together with a brief description of each parcel
to be assessed including its number and name of the last known owner,
in accordance with the resolution of the Common Council authorizing and
directing the undertaking of said local improvement.
Section 6.2 CHARTER Section 6.5
C:45
Upon receipt of the report of assessment, the Common Council shall cause
the same to be filed in the office of the City Clerk and the City Clerk shall be
directed to give notice in the official newspapers of the filing of the report
of assessment and that the same will remain in the City Clerk's office for 30
days from the date of said notice, during which time any person interested
may examine such report. The notice shall also specify the date, time and
place of a public hearing thereon and shall be published at least twice in the
official newspapers of the City. The first notice shall be published at least
30 days prior to the public hearing. The second notice shall be published
at least five days and not more than 10 days prior to the public hearing.
The City Clerk shall, so far as practicable, cause notice to be mailed to each
person or persons appearing on such report as the owner of one of the
parcels at the time of first publication, but failure to mail or receive such
notice shall in no way invalidate or affect the assessment.
Upon such hearing, the Common Council shall hear the objections of the
interested parties and may adjourn from time to time to complete such
hearing. The Common Council may alter and amend the said report in its
discretion. When the Common Council shall deem the report of assessment
to be final and correct, it shall confirm the same by resolution.
Upon the confirmation of the report of assessment, the amount assessed
against each parcel of real property shall become and be a first lien upon
such parcel of real property until fully paid. Every such assessment shall be
collected and enforced by the City Chamberlain in the same manner as City
taxes are collected, and as hereinafter provided, and the amount thereof
shall be expended only for the purpose of paying for such improvement
or repaying money borrowed on account of same. Any surplus, however,
remaining after paying for such improvement or repaying money borrowed
on account of the same shall be paid into the general fund of the City or of
the corporation tax district, depending on whether the City as a whole or
the corporation tax district paid any share of the improvement.
Section 6.6. Financing of improvements for sewers, curbs and
water.
In case the work shall be the construction of a sewer or curbs or the
construction of water laterals or mains, upon the making and delivery
to the City Chamberlain of the report of assessment as provided in this
Charter and giving notice by publication thereof at least once in the official
newspaper that the City Chamberlain will receive said assessments for 30
days from the date of the publication of such notice, the City Chamberlain
shall receive said assessments without fees. Upon the expiration of said
30 days, the City Chamberlain shall certify to the Common Council the
whole amount unpaid upon said assessments, and thereupon, the Common
Council shall determine the number of equal annual installments in which
such assessments be made payable; which for the construction of sewers,
the number of equal annual installments shall not exceed 20, and for
construction of water laterals or mains, the number of annual installments
shall not exceed 40. If bonds are issued to finance all or part of such
Section 6.5 ONEIDA CODE Section 6.6
C:46
improvement, such assessment shall bear the same rate of interest as such
bonds. Otherwise, the Common Council shall fix the rate of interest on
such installments. Interest on such installments shall be computed from
the date of filing the report of assessment with the City Chamberlain;
the first annual installment with interest for the full year to become due
on the first day of December next succeeding the date on which such
assessments were made payable in installments, and like annual payment
with interest to become due on the first day of December of each year
thereafter until all the installments are paid; and such installments shall
be subject to the said penalties and all provisions for the enforcement
and collection of assessments as hereinabove provided. In the event of
any such annual installment not being paid within 10 days after the same
shall become due, the amount thereof shall be placed on the next City
tax roll and shall be added to the amount assessed against such land for
the next general City tax and shall be collected in the same manner as
general City taxes as provided in this Charter. No action or proceeding
to set aside, cancel or annul any assessment made under the provisions
of this Charter shall be maintained by any person, unless such action or
proceeding shall have been commenced within 30 days after the delivery of
the report of assessment to the City Chamberlain or unless within said 30
days an injunction shall have been procured by such person, from a court
of competent jurisdiction, restraining the Common Council from issuing
obligations for such improvement.
Section 6.7. Downtown improvement districts or business area
improvement districts. [Amended by L.L. No. 3-1983]
The Common Council shall have the power to create and establish
downtown improvement districts or business area improvement districts to
construct and build public improvements and/or the renovation of existing
structures; and to provide advice and assistance to the owners of property
within said improvements to acquire funding for improvements to property
within said districts; and to provide promotional and other programs and
assistance to implement the district and its goals.
Either upon the petition of the owners of 50% of the assessed evaluation
within a proposed district or upon its own motion by a vote of 2/3 of the
total voting strength of the Common Council, the Common Council may
create and establish a downtown improvement district or business area
improvement district and construct local improvements, work or benefits
within said district. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this
Charter contained, the Common Council shall determine the improvements,
work or benefit to be constructed within said district and assess the cost
thereof on an ad valorem basis against the property benefited or its owner
or owners in such proportions as shall be determined by it. Adjustments
may be made annually based upon any changes in assessments within said
district.
Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this Charter contained, the
procedure for the creation, construction, assessment and financing of the
Section 6.6 CHARTER Section 6.7
C:47
said improvements within said district shall be as set forth in Sections 6.2,
6.3, 6.4, 6.5 and 6.6 of this Charter, except that the determination of the
manner, proportions and duration of financing of the said improvements
shall be fixed and determined by the Common Council, subject only to
the limitations set forth in the Local Finance Law; and except further
that assessments may be imposed and collected prior to the completion
of the public improvement, work or benefit. In the event of the imposition
and collection of assessments prior to said completion, any necessary
adjustments shall be made upon the hearing and final assessment roll after
the completion of the public improvement, work or benefit.
Section 6.8. Re-establishment of approaches to private lands.
[Amended 7-16-1985 by L.L. No. 2-1985]
In the construction and/or reconstruction of any City street where a
substantial change in the existing grade of the street is made, such change
making necessary the re-establishment of an existing entrance or approach
to private lands, the Common Council may, upon the consent and agreement
of the abutting property owner affected, cause the re-establishment of the
entrance, approach or driveway to be adjusted to the new grade, and the
cost thereof shall be a City charge.
In such adjustment the details of the work shall be determined by the
City Engineer and proposed to the Common Council. Upon consent of the
Common Council, it shall be proposed to the property owner. The City shall
not be liable for the maintenance of such adjusted and re-establishment
approaches or driveways beyond the outside of the curb or road shoulder
nor shall it be liable for damages in connection therewith after the
completion of such adjustment work and shall enter into a written
agreement between the City and the property owner prior to undertaking
the same.
Section 6.7 ONEIDA CODE Section 6.8
C:48
ARTICLE VII
CITY CLERK
Section 7.1. City Clerk. [Amended 9-3-1991 by L.L. No. 4-1991]
The City Clerk shall be appointed by the Mayor and serve as the Clerk of
the Common Council.
Section 7.2. Powers and duties of City Clerk.
The City Clerk shall be the official custodian of all City records, shall keep
the minutes of meetings of the Common Council and shall be the Registrar
of Vital Statistics in and for the City. He shall also perform such other and
related duties as may be prescribed by this Charter, the Common Council or
other provisions of law.
Section 7.3. Deputy City Clerk. [Amended 9-3-1991 by L. L. No.
4-1991]
The Deputy City Clerk shall be appointed by the Mayor.
Section 7.4. Powers and duties of Deputy City Clerk. [Amended
12-21-1999 by L.L. No. 1-2000]
The Deputy City Clerk shall:
Section 7.5. Residency of City Clerk and Deputy City Clerk. [Added
11-19-2019 by L.L. No. 3-2019]
The person(s) holding the position of City Clerk or Deputy City Clerk need
not be a resident or elector of the City of Oneida; provided, however, that
such person(s) shall reside in the County of Madison or in an adjoining
county within the State of New York.
1. Assist the City Clerk in the performance of her duties.
2. Serve as Deputy Registrar of Vital Statistics.
3. In case of absence, disability or vacancy in the office of City Clerk,
perform all of the duties and exercise all of the powers of the City Clerk.
Section 7.1 CHARTER Section 7.5
C:49

ARTICLE VIII
CITY ATTORNEY
Section 8.1. City Attorney. [Amended 7-2-2013 by L.L. No. 3-2013]
The City Attorney shall be appointed by and serve at the pleasure of the
Mayor. The City Attorney shall be an attorney and counselor at law admitted
to practice in the State of New York of at least three years' standing.
Section 8.2. Powers and duties of City Attorney. [Amended 7-2-2013
by L.L. No. 3-2013]
The City Attorney shall be the official legal advisor of all offices,
departments, boards, bureaus, commissions and agencies of the City. The
City Attorney shall appear for and represent the City in all actions, suits
or proceedings, administrative hearings and proceedings unless otherwise
provided by the Common Council.
Section 8.3. Special counsel.
The Common Council may, upon the request of the City Attorney, or its own
motion, employ special counsel and/or experts to assist the City Attorney or
to represent the City in any action, proceeding or other matter that it deems
advisable.
Section 8.4. Written notice required to make claim against City.
No civil action shall be maintained against the City for damages or injuries
to person or property sustained in consequence of any street, highway,
bridge, culvert, sidewalk or crosswalk being out of repair, unsafe,
dangerous or obstructed, or in consequence of the existence of snow or
ice thereon, unless it appears that written notice of the defective, unsafe,
dangerous or obstructed condition, or of the existence of snow or ice, was
actually given to the City Engineer and there was a failure or neglect within
a reasonable time after the giving of such notice to repair or remove the
defect, danger or obstruction complained of, or to cause the snow or ice
to be removed, or the place otherwise made reasonably safe. The City
Engineer shall keep an indexed record, in a separate book, of all written
notices which he shall receive of the existence of such defective, unsafe,
dangerous or obstructed condition, or of such snow or ice, which record
shall state the date of receipt of the notice, the nature and location of the
condition stated to exist and the name and address of the person from whom
the notice is received. The record of notices of defects shall be a public
record. The record of each notice shall be preserved for a period of five
years after the date it is received.
No action or proceeding to recover or enforce any claim, debt or demand
against the City shall be brought until the expiration of 30 days after the
claim, debt or demand shall have been presented to the City for audit.
All actions brought against the City upon any contract liability, express or
Section 8.1 CHARTER Section 8.4
C:51
implied, must be commenced within one year from the time that the cause
of action accrued.
In all cases except on contract or negligence, an action must be commenced
within six months after the refusal of the City to allow the claim or such
shorter period as otherwise prescribed by law.
Section 8.4 ONEIDA CODE Section 8.4
C:52
ARTICLE IX
DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC WORKS
Section 9.1. Department of Public Works.
There is hereby created a Department of Public Works which shall be
headed by the City Engineer and shall be responsible for:
Section 9.2. City Engineer.
The City Engineer shall be appointed by the Mayor and shall be the head
of the Department of Public Works. At the time of his appointment, he shall
be a licensed professional engineer of the State of New York, a graduate of
a fully accredited institution of higher learning with specialization in civil
engineering and shall have five years of experience as a civil engineer.
Section 9.3. Powers and duties of City Engineer.
The City Engineer shall have the following powers and duties:
1. The construction, reconstruction, maintenance, repair, alteration,
cleaning, care, improving and installation of:
(a) Streets, highways, bridges, sidewalks and public places of the City;
(b) Storm sewers, drains, culverts, sanitary sewers, sewage disposal
systems and all usual and necessary appurtenances thereto;
(c) Water supply, reservoirs, treatment plants, mains, distribution
systems and all usual and necessary appurtenances thereto;
(d) Traffic and street signs, markings, traffic signals and equipment;
(e) City buildings and all other structures and works of the City unless
otherwise provided in this Charter. [Amended 7-2-2013 by L.L.
No. 3-2013]
2. The collection and disposal of refuse and garbage when authorized by
the Common Council.
3. Operation of a central garage and fuel supply for the maintenance and
repair of all City vehicles except as otherwise provided by the Common
Council.
4. Setting out, care and removal of trees and shrubs along public streets
and highways.
5. Enforcement of building codes, housing codes, zoning, sanitary sewer,
plumbing and similar regulations or ordinances.
6. Engineering services.
7. Such other similar and related duties as may be assigned by the
Common Council.
Section 9.1 CHARTER Section 9.3
C:53
Section 9.4. Assistants to City Engineer.
Section 9.5. Board of Water Commissioners.
There shall be a Board of Water Commissioners composed of five members
appointed by the Mayor and who shall be residents of the City of Oneida;
1. Have general supervision and control over all operations and
organization of the Department of Public Works.
2. Appoint a first assistant, a second assistant and such other officers and
employees of the Department of Public Works as may be authorized by
the Common Council.
3. Be responsible for all engineering and surveying services of the City;
keep the official maps of the City; and establish the grade of streets.
4. Supervise and grant permits upon such terms and conditions as he
deems appropriate and subject to such regulations as the Common
Council may establish for the location, construction and repair in
streets and public places of gas, telephonic and electrical conduits,
lines, poles and other public utilities or services.
5. Have general supervision and control of all public works contracts
performed by independent contractors except where such contracts are
performed under the supervision of consulting engineers or architects.
6. Assist the City Comptroller in the development of standards and
specifications for materials, supplies and equipment that pertain to
Public Work missions, activities and/or functions. [Amended 7-2-2013
by L.L. No. 3-2013]
7. Prepare plans and specifications for all public works projects of the City
except those to be prepared by consulting engineers or architects.
8. Have such other powers and duties as may be assigned to him by the
Common Council or by law.
A. First Assistant. The First Assistant shall be responsible for the
operation of the water supply, reservoirs, treatment plants, mains,
distribution systems and all usual and necessary appurtenances thereof
under the general direction of the City Engineer. [Amended 7-2-2013
by L.L. No. 3-2013]
B. In case of absence, disability or vacancy in the office of City Engineer,
the First Assistant shall assume all the duties and exercise all the
powers of the City Engineer. [Amended 7-2-2013 by L.L. No.
3-2013]
C. Absence, disability or vacancy in office of City Engineer. In case of the
absence, disability or vacancy in the office of the City Engineer or if the
First Assistant is unable to perform such duties, then the Second
Assistant shall do so.
Section 9.3 ONEIDA CODE Section 9.5
C:54
their terms of office to be five years, one to expire each year on the
first of May. The Board of Water Commissioners shall be responsible for
recommendations and proposals concerning the water supply and
distribution system of the City of Oneida. Said proposals and
recommendations by the Board may be either at the request of the Council
or upon its own motion and shall be submitted to the Council for
consideration by it and for such action as the Council shall deem
appropriate. The Board shall also be responsible for the orderly and
efficient operation and maintenance of said water system, subject to the
authority of the Council.
Section 9.6. Certain highways to be deemed town highways.
[Amended 7-2-2013 by L.L. No. 3-2013]
For the purpose of securing benefits granted to towns for the improvement,
maintenance and repair of roads in the outside district, any general or
special law to the contrary notwithstanding, that part of the City lying
outside the corporation tax district shall be deemed a town.
Section 9.5 CHARTER Section 9.6
C:55

ARTICLE X
DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC SAFETY
Section 10.1. Department of Public Safety.
There shall be a Department of Public Safety which shall be headed by the
Commissioner of Public Safety and shall include the Bureau of Police and
the Bureau of Fire.
Section 10.2. Bureau of Police.
The powers and duties connected with and incident to the control,
government and discipline of the Police Bureau, its members and
employees, except as herein otherwise provided, shall be vested in and
exercised by the Commissioner of Public Safety. The Police Bureau shall
consist of the Commissioner of Public Safety, a Chief of Police and such
other officers and personnel as authorized by the Common Council. The
Bureau shall be organized into such divisions as the Commissioner of Public
Safety shall prescribe. The Bureau shall have jurisdiction, supervision and
control of all functions and duties customarily performed by a Police
Bureau. The Commissioner of Public Safety may, upon an emergency or
for any special purpose, with the approval of the Common Council, appoint
extra and additional patrolmen and policemen, their compensation and term
of service to be fixed by the Commissioner subject to the approval of the
Common Council.
The Commissioner shall be responsible for the control of traffic, traffic and
parking regulations, location of traffic control signs, signals and devices,
the location of parking meters and such other duties and responsibilities as
may be assigned to him by the Common Council.
Section 10.3. Chief of Police.
The Chief of Police shall be appointed by the Commissioner of Public Safety
and shall be directly responsible to him. The position of Chief of Police
shall be in the competitive class of the classified service and appointment
shall be made in accordance with the Civil Service Law. The Chief of Police
shall be the head of the Bureau of Police, subject to the authority of the
Commissioner of Public Safety, and shall be in direct command and shall
assign all members of the Bureau to their respective posts, shifts, details
and duties. He shall make rules and regulations concerning the operation
of the Bureau and the conduct, duties and assignments of all officers and
employees, which rules shall be approved by the Commissioner of Public
Safety. The Police Chief shall have such other powers and perform such
other duties as may be assigned to him by the Commissioner.
Section 10.4. Appointment of members of the Bureau of Police.
The Commissioner of Public Safety shall appoint all officers and employees
of the Police Bureau in accordance with the provisions of the Civil Service
Law.
Section 10.1 CHARTER Section 10.5
C:57
Section 10.5. Bureau of Fire. [Amended 1-25-1990 by L.L. No.
2-1990; 4-1-2014 by L.L. No. 2-20146]
The Bureau of Fire shall consist of the Commissioner of Public Safety, a
Fire Chief and such other officers and employees as may be authorized by
the Common Council. The Bureau shall be organized in such a manner as
the Commissioner of Public Safety shall prescribe. The Bureau shall have
the duty to extinguish fires any place within the corporate tax district and
special fire districts created in the outside district; shall investigate the
cause, circumstances and origin of fires; shall engage in fire-protection
activities and the suppression of arson; shall enforce the City housing
and other codes as prescribed by City ordinance; shall provide Emergency
Medical Services (EMS) any place within the corporate tax district and
special fire districts created in the outside district; and shall have all powers
necessary for the performance of its duties.
Section 10.6. Fire Chief.
The Fire Chief shall be appointed by the Commissioner of Public Safety
and be directly responsible to him. The position of Fire Chief shall be in
the competitive class of the classified service and appointment shall be
made in accordance with the Civil Service Law. The Fire Chief shall be
in direct command of the Bureau of Fire, subject to the authority of the
Commissioner of Public Safety, and shall assign all members of the Bureau
to their respective posts and duties. The Fire Chief shall have control,
management and supervision of the personnel of the Fire Bureau and all
property and equipment of the Bureau, subject nevertheless to the authority
of the Commissioner of Public Safety. He shall make rules and regulations
concerning the operation of the Bureau and the conduct of the officers
and employees, which rules shall be approved by the Commissioner of
Public Safety. He shall be responsible for the efficiency, discipline and good
conduct of the Bureau. The Fire Chief shall have such other powers and
perform such other duties as may be assigned to him by the Commissioner.
Section 10.7. Appointments of members of the Bureau of Fire.
The Commissioner of Public Safety shall appoint all officers and employees
of the Bureau of Fire in accordance with the provisions of the Civil Service
Law.
6. Editor’s Note: This local law provided an effective date of 1-1-2016.
Section 10.5 ONEIDA CODE Section 10.7
C:58
ARTICLE XI
YOUTH AND RECREATION
[Amended 3-21-2000 by L.L. No. 2-2000]
Section 11.1. Parks and Recreation Department. [Amended
7-2-2013 by L.L. No. 3-2013]
There shall be a Parks and Recreation Department which shall be headed
by the Director of Parks and Recreation (hereinafter referred to as the
"Director"). The Department shall be responsible for the control, operation
and management of public playgrounds, swimming pools, skating rinks,
recreation centers and all other municipal lands, equipment and facilities
for recreational purposes. The Department is also responsible for providing
wholesome activities for all individuals, regardless of race, color, sex, age,
handicap, religion or national origin.
Section 11.2. Director of Parks and Recreation. [Amended 7-2-2013
by L.L. No. 3-2013]
The Director of Parks and Recreation shall be appointed by the Mayor on
the basis of training and experience in public recreation. The Director shall
be the head of the Department. The Director shall have the supervision
and management of those facilities used for recreational purposes and
shall be responsible for the development of recreation programs for the
inhabitants of the City. The Director shall cooperate and coordinate with
other governmental agencies and civic groups in carrying out such
programs.
Section 11.3. Powers and duties of the Parks and Recreation
Department. [Amended 7-2-2013 by L.L. No. 3-2013]
The Parks and Recreation Department shall:
1. Coordinate and supplement the activities of public and private agencies
devoted in whole or in part to the welfare and protection of residents in
the City, and to undertake and promote activities and establish,
maintain and operate projects, in whole or in part, providing leisure
time activities for all residents or promoting youth development.
[Amended 7-2-2013 by L.L. No. 3-2013]
2. Receive, review and analyze statistical records and data relating to City
of Oneida youth.
3. Make necessary studies and recommendations for the needs of all
citizens residing in the City of Oneida. [Amended 7-2-2013 by L.L.
No. 3-2013]
4. Establish, maintain and operate programs devoted in whole or in part to
the welfare of the aging; and coordinate and supplement the activities
of public and private agencies devoted to such purposes.
Section 11.1 CHARTER Section 11.3
C:59
Section 11.4. Statement of goals.
Section 11.5. Recreation Commission.
There shall be a Recreation Commission, which shall act in an advisory
capacity to the Recreation and Youth Services Department and shall make
recommendations concerning the recreation and youth programs. The
Commission shall consist of seven members who shall be appointed by the
Mayor and approved by the Common Council for terms of three years.
Terms shall be staggered so that not more than four nor fewer than three
shall expire in any one year. Members of the Commission shall serve without
compensation. There should be at least two student liaisons who at the time
of their appointment shall have attained at least the age of 16 years. At the
last meeting in December of each municipal year, the members shall elect
one of its members as Chairman and one as Vice Chairman, whose terms
will begin in January of the next municipal year.
Section 11.6. Meetings.
5. Maintain, repair, clean and care of all City parks and playgrounds,
municipal swimming pools and all other structures and works under the
jurisdiction of this Department.
6. Submit an annual report to the Mayor and members of the City of
Oneida Common Council.
1. To conduct ongoing research to determine the needs of residents in the
City of Oneida.
2. To inventory services/community resources capable of meeting the
needs of the residents in the City of Oneida.
3. To plan for the development of new services to meet the needs of the
residents or to make modifications to current services.
4. To integrate and coordinate services of local, public and private
agencies working with residents in the City of Oneida.
1. The Recreation Commission shall meet on a bimonthly basis or six times
per year at times and places to be determined by the Recreation
Director. [Amended 7-2-2013 by L.L. No. 3-2013]
2. All regular meetings of the Recreation Commission are open to the
public.
3. A quorum shall consist of four voting members.
4. Motions shall be carried by a majority vote of those voting members
present.
5. Special meetings may be called by the Chairperson or by petition of a
majority of the Commission members.7
Section 11.3 ONEIDA CODE Section 11.7
C:60
Section 11.7. Duties of the Recreation Commission.
1. Each Commission member should try to be present at all meetings. If
they cannot attend, they should call by the Wednesday prior to the
scheduled meeting.
2. Volunteer at as many Recreation Department functions and events as
possible.
3. Make necessary studies and recommendations for the recreational
needs of the residents in the City of Oneida.
4. Receive, review and provide input on statistical records and data
relating to the programs offered by the Recreation Department.8
[Amended 7-2-2013 by L.L. No. 3-2013]
7. Editor's Note: Former Subsection 6, concerning guidance of meetings by Robert's Rules of
Order, which immediately followed this subsection, was repealed 7-2-2013 by L.L. No.
3-2013.
8. Editor's Note: Former Subsection 5, concerning setting up subcommittees to prepare for
the next budget year, which immediately followed this subsection, was repealed 7-2-2013
by L.L. No. 3-2013.
Section 11.7 CHARTER Section 11.7
C:61

ARTICLE XII
(RESERVED)9
9. Editor's Note: Original Article XII, Department of Public Health and City Hospital, was
repealed 12-19-2000 by L.L. No. 6-2000.
CHARTER Section 11.7
C:63

ARTICLE XIII
SPECIAL DISTRICTS10
Section 13.1. Fire protection in outside district.
Section 13.2. Levy and collection of tax for fire protection in
outside district. [Amended by L.L. No. 1-1977]
The Common Council shall annually estimate the cost of furnishing fire
protection to such fire protection district or districts as may be created
hereunder, and the same shall be assessed and levied upon the
1. The Common Council, upon a written petition or upon its own motion,
after a public hearing as hereinafter provided, may provide for the
furnishing of fire protection in the outside district or for any described
portion or portions thereof.
2. Such petition shall be signed, acknowledged or proved in the same
manner as a deed to be recorded by resident taxpayers owning taxable
real property aggregating at least 1/2 of the assessed valuation of all
the real property subject to taxation in such outside district, or
described portion or portions thereof, as such valuations appear upon
the latest completed assessment roll of the City at the time of the filing
of such petition.
3. Whether such proposal for the furnishing of additional fire protection
shall have been initiated by petition or by the Common Council, a public
hearing on the proposal shall be held in the City. Notice of such hearing
shall be published at least once in the official newspapers of the City,
the first publication thereof to be not less than 10 days nor more than
20 days before the day designated therein for the hearing. Such notice
shall contain a statement of the purpose of such hearing, a description
of the portion or portions of the outside district in which it is proposed
that such fire protection be furnished and shall specify the time when
and the place where the Common Council will meet to consider such
proposal and to hear all persons interested in the subject concerning
the same.
4. After such hearing and upon the evidence given thereat, the Common
Council, if such proposal was initiated by petition, shall determine
whether the petition is signed and acknowledged or proved as required
by law. If the Common Council shall determine that the petition is not
signed and acknowledged or proved as required by law, it shall deny the
petition. The Common Council shall also determine whether it is in the
public interest to furnish such additional fire protection. If the Common
Council shall determine such matters in the affirmative, it shall adopt
an ordinance to provide for the furnishing of such additional fire
protection.
10.Note: The Sherill-Kenwood Water District, created by Chapter 512 of the Laws of 1920, as
amended, is applicable to certain portions of the City.
Section 13.1 CHARTER Section 13.2
C:65
improvements to the real property subject to taxation in such fire protection
district and collected in the same manner at the same time and by the same
officers as City taxes are assessed, levied and collected.
Section 13.3. Protection furnished by Bureau of Fire.
The Bureau of Fire of the City of Oneida shall furnish fire protection to such
fire protection districts as may be organized hereunder.11
Section 13.10. Special lighting districts.
The Common Council shall have the power, upon the application, in writing,
of the property owners owning at least 2/3 of the number of feet fronting or
abutting upon the street and along the line of any proposed improvement
for the construction of an improved system of streetlighting, to establish
such special lighting districts for the proposed system of streetlighting and
from time to time may alter or extend the same, with full power to order
such construction and installation and to enter into a contract for lighting
in such district or districts so established or extended as it deems proper or
expedient in the corporation tax district or outside district of the City.
The amount of any such contract that may be entered into for such special
lighting, pursuant to the provisions of this section, shall be assessed, levied
and collected upon and between the taxable property in said City and the
district or districts, respectively, in the same manner and by the same
officers as City taxes, charges or expenses for said City are now assessed,
levied and collected.
The Common Council shall, by resolution, apportion the expenses that shall
be borne by the property fronting or abutting upon the street and along
the line of the proposed system or systems and the City at large, but in no
event shall the property fronting or abutting upon the street or streets along
the line of the proposed system or systems be charged less than 50% for
such charges or expenses, nor more than the per centum specified in the
application and agreed to by the property owner or owners.
11.Note: There are no Sections 13.4 through 13.10.
Section 13.2 ONEIDA CODE Section
13.10
C:66
ARTICLE XIV
(RESERVED)12
12.Editor's Note: Original Article XIV, City Court, was repealed 12-19-2000 by L.L. No.
6-2000. See now the Uniform City Court Act § 101 et seq.
CHARTER Section
13.10
C:67

ARTICLE XV
TRANSITIONAL PROVISIONS
Section 15.1. Effective date of Charter.
This Charter shall, upon approval by referendum at a special election in the
manner provided by law, become effective January 1, 1975.
Section 15.2. Appointive offices abolished; incumbents continued.
Section 15.3. Civil service rights continued.
The civil service status and rights of all City employees and their
beneficiaries, including but not limited to those with respect to retirement
and social security, shall not be affected by this Charter.
Section 15.4. Transfer of officers and employees.
Wherever, by any provision of this Charter, any functions, powers or duties
heretofore exercised by an office, department, board, bureau, commission,
agency or committee are assigned to another office, department, board,
bureau, commission, agency or committee, all the officers and employees
in the classified civil service, who at the time when this Charter shall take
effect are engaged in the performance of such functions, powers or duties,
shall be transferred to the office, department, board, bureau, commission
or agency to which such functions, powers or duties are assigned by this
Charter without examination and without affecting existing compensation,
pension or retirement rights, privileges or obligations of such officers and
employees.
Section 15.5. Transfer of powers.
The powers which are conferred and the duties which are imposed upon
any office, department, board, commission or agency of the City by any laws
of the state or by any local law, resolution, ordinance, rule or regulation
shall, if such office, department, board, bureau, commission or agency is
abolished by this Charter, be thereafter exercised and discharged by the
office, department, board, bureau, commission or agency upon which are
A. The office of Commissioner of Charities is hereby abolished. The office
of City Physician is hereby abolished. The board of health is hereby
abolished. The office of the Executive Director of the Youth Bureau is
hereby abolished and the incumbent thereof shall become the
Executive Director of the Recreation and Youth Services Department.
[Amended 12-19-2000 by L.L. No. 6-2000]
B. All other offices, boards, bureaus, commissions, agencies and positions
of employment of the City shall continue until abolished, modified or
superseded by action of the Common Council, but subject to the
provisions of this Charter.
Section 15.1 CHARTER Section 15.5
C:69
imposed corresponding or like powers, duties and functions pursuant to the
provisions of this Charter.
Section 15.6. Transfer of records and property.
All records, property and equipment whatsoever of any office, department,
board, bureau, commission, agency or division, the powers and duties of
which are assigned to any other office, department, board, bureau,
commission, agency or division by this Charter, shall be transferred and
delivered to the office, department, board, bureau, commission, agency or
division to which such powers and duties are assigned.
Section 15.7. Continuity of authority.
All existing state, local and other laws or enactments having the force of
law shall continue in force until lawfully amended, modified, superseded
or repealed, either by this Charter or an enactment adopted subsequent
to its effective date. Any proceedings or other business undertaken or
commenced prior to the effective date of this Charter may be conducted
and completed by the City officer or administrative unit responsible therefor
under this Charter.
Section 15.8. Pending actions and proceedings.
No action or proceeding, civil or criminal, pending at the time when this
Charter shall take effect, brought by or against the City or any officer,
department, board, bureau, commission or agency, shall be affected or
abated by the adoption of this Charter or by anything herein contained;
but all such actions or proceedings shall be continued notwithstanding that
functions, powers and duties of any officer, department, board, bureau,
commission or party thereto may be assigned or transferred by this Charter
to another officer, department, board, bureau, commission or agency, but
in that event the same may be prosecuted or defended by the head of the
office or department to which such functions, powers and duties have been
assigned or transferred by this Charter.
Section 15.9. Effect of Charter on existing laws.
A. The Charter of the City of Oneida, as enacted by Chapter 648 of the
Laws of 1911, and as amended from time to time, is hereby repealed.
The repeal thereof is not intended, however, to abrogate, diminish
or abolish any rights, authority, privileges or immunities accruing
thereunder to the City of Oneida or any portion thereof or any of its
inhabitants, and any provisions of existing law incorporated into this
new Charter shall not be deemed repealed but shall be construed as
a continuation of such provisions, modified or amended as herein set
forth, and not as new enactments.
B. All laws, ordinances, resolutions, rules and regulations and parts
thereof relating to or affecting the City when this Charter takes effect,
Section 15.5 ONEIDA CODE Section 15.9
C:70
to the extent to which they are inconsistent with the provisions of this
Charter and no further, are hereby repealed and superseded
C. The following local laws enacted by the City of Oneida, having been
superseded by this Charter, are hereby repealed:
1. Local Law Nos. 2 and 4 of the year 1925.
2. Local Law Nos. 1, 2 and 3 of the year 1926.
3. Local Law No. 2 of the year 1927.
4. Local Law Nos. 1, 2 and 3 of the year 1928.
5. Local Law Nos. 1, 3 and 4 of the year 1929.
6. Local Law Nos. 1, 2 and 3 of the year 1935.
7. Local Law No. 2 of the year 1940.
8. Local Law Nos. 1, 3, 4 and 5 of the year 1942.
9. Local Law Nos. 1, 2 and 3 of the year 1943.
10. Local Law No. 2 of the year 1945.
11. Local Law Nos. 1 and 3 of the year 1946.
12. Local Law Nos. 1, 2 and 4 of the year 1947.
13. Local Law Nos. 1 and 3 of the year 1948.
14. Local Law Nos. 3 and 4 of the year 1949.
15. Local Law Nos. 5 of the year 1950.
16. Local Law Nos. 1, 2 and 3 of the year 1951.
17. Local Law Nos. 1, 3, 4 and 5 of the year 1952.
18. Local Law Nos. 1 and 2 of the year 1953.
19. Local Law Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 and 6 of the year 1954.
20. Local Law Nos. 2, 3, 4 and 5 of the year 1955.
21. Local Law Nos. 2 and 3 of the year 1956.
22. Local Law Nos. 1 and 3 of the year 1957.
23. Local Law Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8 and 9 of the year 1958.
24. Local Law Nos. 1, 2, 3, 5, 6 and 8 of the year 1959.
25. Local Law No. 1 of the year 1960.
26. Local Law Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4 and 5 of the year 1961.
Section 15.9 CHARTER Section 15.9
C:71
27. Local Law Nos. 1, 2, 4 and 6 of the year 1962.
28. Local Law Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4 and 5 of the year 1964.
29. Local Law No. 1 of the year 1965.
30. Local Law Nos. 1 and 2 of the year 1966.
31. Local Law Nos. 1, 2 and 3 of the year 1967.
32. Local Law Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 and 6 of the year 1968.
33. Local Law Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6 and 7 of the year 1969.
34. Local Law Nos. 1, 2 and 3 of the year 1970.
35. Local Law Nos. 1 and 2 of the year 1971.
36. Local Law No. 1 of the year 1972.
D. Local Law No. 4 of the year 1970 is modified insofar as it is superseded
by the provisions of Section 9.3(2) of this Charter.
E. The following special acts of the State Legislature, having been
superseded by this Charter insofar as they apply to the City of Oneida
Charter are hereby repealed:
1. Chapter 648 of the Laws of 1911.
2. Chapters 67 and 174 of the Laws of 1913.
3. Chapter 435 of the Laws of 1914.
4. Chapter 63 of the Laws of 1916.
5. Chapter 102 of the Laws of 1917.
6. Chapter 259 of the Laws of 1918.
7. Chapter 58 of the Laws of 1923.
8. Chapter 547 of the Laws of 1925.
9. Chapter 355 of the Laws of 1930.
10. Chapter 154 of the Laws of 1937.
11. Chapter 310 of the Laws of 1938.
12. Chapter 839 of the Laws of 1945.
13. Chapter 617 of the Laws of 1946.
14. Chapter 475 of the Laws of 1948.
15. Chapter 878 of the Laws of 1953.
16. Chapter 873 of the Laws of 1957.
Section 15.9 ONEIDA CODE Section 15.9
C:72
F. The following special acts of the State Legislature are hereby modified
or amended as set forth in this Charter:
1. Chapters 116 and 158 of the Laws of 1956.
2. Chapter 968 of the Laws of 1963.
3. Chapter 425 of the Laws of 1965.
4. Chapter 185 of the Laws of 1971.
G. The following general laws or statutes are changed or superseded by
the provisions of this Charter as follows:
1. General City Law § 25 as added by Chapter 502 of the Laws of 1921
as amended by Chapter 604 of the Laws of 1923 is superseded by
Section 2.8 of this Charter.
2. Real Property Tax Law §§ 900, 904, 920, 924, 926, 928, 936, 938,
940, 942 and 948 as enacted by Chapter 959 of the Laws of 1958,
and as last amended by Chapter 845 of the Laws of 1965, and
Chapter 285 of the Laws of 1966 are superseded and modified to
the extent that they are inconsistent with Sections 5.8, 5.28, 5.29,
5.30, 5.31, 5.33, 5.34, 5.35, 5.36, 5.37, 5.38 5.39, 5.40, 5.41, 5.42,
5.43 and 5.44 of this Charter.
3. Civil Practice Law and Rules §§ 211, 212, 213, 214, 215 and 216 as
enacted by Chapter 308 of the Laws of 1962 and as last amended
by Chapter 267 of the Laws of 1970, Chapter 388 of the Laws of
1964, Chapter 138 of the Laws of 1966, Chapter 532 of the Laws of
1963, Chapter 1141 of the Laws of 1969 and Chapter 532 of the
Laws of 1963, respectively, are superseded and modified to the
extent that they are inconsistent with Section 8.4 of this Charter.
4. The enactment of Section 9.6 of this Charter, being a substantial
reenactment of Section 102 of the Charter of the City of Oneida, as
enacted by Chapter 648 of the Laws of 1911, shall not be deemed to
diminish, abrogate or limit any aid or benefits to which the City of
Oneida or any portion thereof would be entitled to under the
provisions of Highway Law §§ 219 through 229-d, as added by
Chapter 983 of the Laws of 1970; §§ 279 through 284, as enacted
by Chapter 63 of the Laws of 1936 and Chapter 801 of the Laws of
1945, and as last amended by Chapter 120 of the Laws of 1971; all
being subsequent re-enactments, modifications or amendments to
the Good Roads Law (Articles 6 and 7 of the Highway Law at the
time of the enactment of the Charter of the City of Oneida) or under
any other present or subsequent provisions of law heretofore or
hereafter enacted by the State Legislature.
Section 15.9 CHARTER Section 15.9
C:73
The Code
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 1-1. Legislative intent.
In accordance with Subdivision 3 of § 20 of the Municipal Home Rule Law,
the local laws, ordinances and certain resolutions of the City of Oneida, as
codified by General Code Publishers Corp., and consisting of the Charter
and Chapters 1 through 190, together with an Appendix, shall be known
collectively as the "Code of the City of Oneida," hereafter termed the
"Code." Wherever reference is made in any of the local laws, ordinances and
resolutions contained in the "Code of the City of Oneida" to any other local
law, ordinance or resolution appearing in said Code, such reference shall be
changed to the appropriate chapter title, chapter number, article number or
section number where such legislation appears in the Code, as if such local
law, ordinance or resolution had been formally amended to so read.
§ 1-2. Continuation of existing provisions.
The provisions of the Code, insofar as they are substantively the same as
those of local laws, ordinances and resolutions in force immediately prior to
the enactment of the Code by this local law, are intended as a continuation
of such local laws, ordinances and resolutions and not as new enactments,
and the effectiveness of such provisions shall date from the date of adoption
of the prior local law, ordinance or resolution. All such provisions are
hereby continued in full force and effect and are hereby reaffirmed as to
their adoption by the Common Council of the City of Oneida, and it is the
intention of said Council that each such provision contained within the Code
is hereby reaffirmed as it appears in said Code. Only such provisions of
former local laws and ordinances as are omitted from this Code shall be
deemed repealed or abrogated by the provisions of § 1-3 below.
§ 1-3. Repeal of enactments not included in Code.
All local laws and ordinances of a general and permanent nature of the City
of Oneida in force on the date of adoption of the Code Adoption local law
and not contained in such Code or recognized and continued in force by
reference therein are hereby repealed from and after the effective date of
said local law.
§ 1-4. Enactments saved from repeal; matters not affected.
The repeal of local laws and ordinances provided for in § 1-3 of this local law
shall not affect the following classes of local laws, ordinances, rights and
obligations, which are hereby expressly saved from repeal:
Section 15.9 ONEIDA CODE § 1-4
C:74
§ 1-5. Severability.
If any clause, sentence, paragraph, section, article, chapter or part of any
local law, ordinance or resolution included in this Code now or through
supplementation shall be adjudged by any court of competent jurisdiction
to be invalid, such judgment shall not affect, impair or invalidate the
remainder thereof but shall be confined in its operation to the clause,
A. Any right or liability established, accrued or incurred under any
legislative provision of the City of Oneida prior to the effective date of
this local law or any action or proceeding brought for the enforcement
of such right or liability.
B. Any offense or act committed or done before the effective date of this
local law in violation of any legislative provision of the City of Oneida or
any penalty, punishment or forfeiture which may result therefrom.
C. Any prosecution, indictment, action, suit or other proceeding pending
or any judgment rendered prior to the effective date of this local law
brought pursuant to any legislative provision of the City of Oneida.
D. Any agreement entered into or any franchise, license, right, easement
or privilege heretofore granted or conferred by the City of Oneida.
E. Any local law or ordinance of the City of Oneida providing for the laying
out, opening, altering, widening, relocating, straightening, establishing
grade, changing name, improvement, acceptance or vacation of any
right-of-way, easement, street, road, highway, park or other public place
within the City of Oneida or any portion thereof.
F. Any local law or ordinance of the City of Oneida appropriating money or
transferring funds, promising or guaranteeing the payment of money or
authorizing the issuance and delivery of any bond of the City of Oneida
or other instruments or evidence of the city's indebtedness.
G. Local laws or ordinances authorizing the purchase, sale, lease or
transfer of property or any lawful contract, agreement or obligation.
H. The levy or imposition of special assessments or charges.
I. The annexation or dedication of property.
J. Any local law or ordinance relating to salaries and compensation.
K. Any local law or ordinance amending the Zoning Map.
L. Any local law or ordinance relating to or establishing a pension plan or
pension fund for city employees.
M. Any local law or ordinance or portion of a local law or ordinance
establishing a specific fee amount for any license, permit or service
obtained from the city.
N. Any local law adopted subsequent to 6-20-2000.
§ 1-4 CHARTER § 1-5
C:75
sentence, paragraph, section, article, chapter or part thereof directly
involved in the controversy in which such judgment shall have been
rendered.
§ 1-6. Copy of Code on file.
A copy of the Code, in loose-leaf form, has been filed in the office of the City
Clerk of the City of Oneida and shall remain there for use and examination
by the public until final action is taken on the Code Adoption local law; and,
if said local law shall be adopted, such copy shall be certified to by the City
Clerk of the City of Oneida by impressing thereon the Seal of the City of
Oneida, and such certified copy shall remain on file in the office of said City
Clerk to be made available to persons desiring to examine the same during
all times while the said Code is in effect. The enactment and publication of
the Code Adoption local law, coupled with the availability of a copy of the
Code for inspection by the public, shall be deemed, held and considered to
be due and legal publication of all provisions of the Code for all purposes.
§ 1-7. Amendments to Code.
Any and all additions, deletions, amendments or supplements to any of
the local laws, ordinances and resolutions known collectively as the "Code
of the City of Oneida" or any new local laws, ordinances or resolutions,
when enacted or adopted in such form as to indicate the intention of the
Common Council to be a part thereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated
into such Code so that reference to the Code shall be understood and
intended to include such additions, deletions, amendments or supplements.
Whenever such additions, deletions, amendments or supplements to the
Code shall be enacted or adopted, they shall thereafter be printed and, as
provided hereunder, inserted in the loose-leaf book containing said Code as
amendments and supplements thereto. Nothing contained in this local law
shall affect the status of any local law, ordinance or resolution contained
herein, and such local laws, ordinances or resolutions may be amended,
deleted or changed from time to time as the Common Council deems
desirable.
§ 1-8. Code book to be kept up-to-date.
It shall be the duty of the City Clerk to keep up-to-date the certified copy of
the book containing the Code of the City of Oneida required to be filed in the
office of the City Clerk for use by the public. All changes in said Code and
all local laws, ordinances and resolutions adopted by the Common Council
subsequent to the enactment of this local law in such form as to indicate
the intention of said Common Council to be a part of said Code shall, when
finally enacted or adopted, be included therein by temporary attachment
of copies of such changes, local laws, ordinances or resolutions until such
changes, local laws, ordinances or resolutions are printed as supplements to
said Code book, at which time such supplements shall be inserted therein.
§ 1-5 ONEIDA CODE § 1-9
C:76
§ 1-9. Sale of Code book; supplementation.
Copies of the Code, or any chapter or portion of it, may be purchased from
the City Clerk, or an authorized agent of the Clerk, upon the payment of
a fee to be set by resolution of the Common Council. The Clerk may also
arrange for procedures for the periodic supplementation of the Code.
§ 1-10. Penalties for tampering with Code.
Any person who, without authorization from the City Clerk, changes or
amends, by additions or deletions, any part or portion of the Code of the
City of Oneida or who alters or tampers with such Code in any manner
whatsoever which will cause the legislation of the City of Oneida to be
misrepresented thereby or who violates any other provision of this local law
shall be guilty of an offense and shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to
a fine of not more than $250 or imprisonment for a term of not more than
15 days, or both.
§ 1-11. Changes in previously adopted legislation; new provisions.
In compiling and preparing the local laws, ordinances and resolutions for
publication as the Code of the City of Oneida, no changes in the meaning
or intent of such local laws, ordinances and resolutions have been made,
except where indicated by histories or footnotes in the text of the chapters,
said changes to become effective upon the effective date of the Code
Adoption local law. In addition, certain grammatical changes and other
minor nonsubstantive changes were made in one or more of said pieces of
legislation, and certain outdated references and titles of city officials were
updated. It is the intention of the Common Council that all such changes be
adopted as part of the Code as if the local laws, ordinances and resolutions
had been previously formally amended to read as such.
§ 1-12. Definitions.
As used in this Code, unless the context requires otherwise, the following
terms shall have the meanings indicated:
AFFIDAVIT — When an affidavit is authorized or required, it may be sworn
to before any officer authorized by law to take the acknowledgment of deeds
in this state, unless a particular officer is specified before whom it is to be
taken.
ARMED FORCES OF THE UNITED STATES — The Army, Navy, Marine
Corps, Air Force and Coast Guard, including all components thereof, and the
National Guard when in the service of the United States pursuant to call as
provided by law. Pursuant to this definition, no person shall be considered
a member or veteran of the Armed Forces of the United States unless his
or her service therein is or was on a full-time active duty basis, other than
active duty for training.
§ 1-9 CHARTER § 1-12
C:77
BOND AND UNDERTAKING — Any provision authorizing or requiring a
bond to be given shall be deemed to have been complied with by the
execution of an undertaking to the same effect.
CALENDAR DAY — A calendar day includes the time from 12:00 midnight
to 12:00 midnight. Sunday or any day of the week specifically mentioned
means a calendar day.
CHARTER — The Oneida City Charter.
CHATTELS — Includes goods and chattels; and, where the term appears in
any chapter pertaining to an action to recover the same, it also includes all
specific personal property, such as, but not limited to, certificates of stock,
bonds, notes or other securities or obligations.
CITY — The City of Oneida in the State of New York.
CITY LIMITS — The legal boundaries of the city as expressed in Section 1.5
of the Charter.
CODE — The Code of the City of Oneida as established and designated
above.
COMMON COUNCIL — The elective governing body of the city.
COMPUTATION OF DAYS — A number of days specified as a period from
a certain day within which or after or before which an act is authorized or
required to be done means such number of calendar days exclusive of the
calendar day from which the reckoning is made. If such period is a period
of two days, Saturday, Sunday or a public holiday must be excluded from
the reckoning if it is in an intervening day between the day from which the
reckoning is made and the last day of the period. In computing any specified
period of time from a specified event, the day upon which the event happens
is deemed the day from which the reckoning is made. The day from which
any specified period of time is reckoned shall be excluded in making the
reckoning.
COMPUTATION OF MONTHS — A number of months after or before a
certain day shall be computed by counting such number of calendar months
from such day, exclusive of the calendar month in which such day occurs,
and shall include the day of the month in the last month so counted having
the same numerical order in days of the month as the day from which the
computation is made, unless there are not so many days in the last month
so counted, in which case the period computed shall expire with the last day
of the month so counted.
CORPORATION TAX DISTRICT, or INSIDE DISTRICT or INSIDE TAX
DISTRICT — Refers to that territory designated as the Corporate Tax
District by Section 1.9 of the Charter.
COUNTY — Madison County, New York.
EFFECT OF HOLIDAYS — When any period of time, computed from a
certain day, within which or after which or before which an act is authorized
or required to be done, ends on a Saturday, Sunday or a public holiday, such
act may be done on the next succeeding business day, and if the period
§ 1-12 ONEIDA CODE § 1-12
C:78
ends at a specified hour, such act may be done at or before the same hour
of such next succeeding business day. Where time is extended by virtue of
the provisions of this definition, such extended time shall not be included in
the computation of interest, except that when the period is specified as a
number of months, such extended time shall be included in the computation
of interest.
GENDER — Whenever words of the masculine or feminine gender appear in
any chapter, unless the sense of the sentence shall require otherwise, they
shall be deemed to refer to both male or female persons. This construction
shall apply to gender-indicative suffixes or prefixes as well as to genderindicative
words. Whenever the reference is to a corporation, board, body,
group, organization or entity comprising more than one person or to an
assemblage of persons or to an inanimate object, the reference shall be
construed to be neuter in gender.
HERETOFORE and HEREAFTER — Each of the terms, "heretofore" and
"hereafter," in any provision of a chapter, relates to the time such provision
takes effect.
MEN — Includes boys.
MONTH — In any chapter, unless otherwise provided, the term "month"
means a calendar month and not a lunar month.
MUNICIPAL OFFICERS — A reference to several officers of the city holding
the same office, or to a board of such officers, shall be deemed to refer to
the single officer holding such office, when but one person is chosen to fill
such office in pursuance of law.
NEWSPAPERS — The terms "daily newspaper" and "newspaper published
each business day" in any chapter means a newspaper customarily
published on each business day of the year, whether or not such newspaper
is published on any other day. The term "business day," when used herein,
does not include Saturdays, Sundays or legal holidays.
NIGHT TIME — Includes the time from sunset to sunrise.
NOTICE — When a notice is required to be given to a board or body, service
of such notice upon the Clerk or Chairman thereof shall be sufficient.
NOW — The term "now" in any provision of a chapter referring to other
ordinances or laws in force, or to persons in office or to any facts or
circumstances as existing relates to the laws or ordinances in force, or to
the person in office or to the facts or circumstances existing, respectively,
immediately before the taking effect of such provision.
NUMBER — Words in the singular number include the plural and in the
plural number include the singular.
OATH, AFFIDAVIT and SWEAR — The terms "oath" and "affidavit" include
every mode authorized by law of attesting the truth of that which is stated.
The term "swear" includes every mode authorized by law for administering
an oath.
§ 1-12 CHARTER § 1-12
C:79
OUTSIDE DISTRICT or OUTSIDE TAX DISTRICT — That territory
designated as the outside district by Section 1.9 of the Charter.
PERSON — Includes a corporation and a joint-stock association. When used
to designate a party whose property may be the subject of any offense, the
term "person" also includes the state or any other state, government or
country which may lawfully own property in the state.
PERSONAL PROPERTY — Includes chattels, money, things in action, and
all written instruments themselves, as distinguished from the rights or
interests to which they relate, by which any right, interest, lien or
encumbrance in, to or upon property, or any debt or financial obligation
is created, acknowledged, evidenced, transferred, discharged or defeated,
wholly or in part, and everything, except real property, which may be
the subject of ownership. Oil wells and all fixtures connected therewith,
situated on lands leased for oil purposes and oil interests, and rights held
under and by virtue of any lease or contract or other right or license to
operate for or produce petroleum oil, shall be deemed personal property for
all purposes except taxation.
PROPERTY — Includes real and personal property.
PUBLIC HOLIDAYS DESIGNATED — Includes the following days in each
year: the first day of January, known as "New Year's Day"; the third Sunday
on January known as "Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. Day"; the 12th day of
February, known as "Lincoln's Birthday"; the third Monday in February,
known as "Washington's Birthday"; the last Monday in May, known as
"Memorial Day"; the second Sunday in June, known as "Flag Day"; the
fourth day of July, known as "Independence Day"; the first Monday in
September known as "Labor Day"; the second Monday in October, known
as "Columbus Day"; the 11th day of November, known as "Veterans Day";
the fourth Thursday in November, known as "Thanksgiving Day"; and the
25th of December, known as "Christmas Day"; and if any of such days
except Flag Day or Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. Day, is Sunday, the next
day thereafter; each general election day, and each day appointed by the
President of the United States or by the Governor of this state as a day of
general thanksgiving, general fasting and prayer, or other general religious
observances. The term "half-holiday" includes the period from 12:00 noon
to 12:00 midnight of each Saturday which is not a public holiday.
QUORUM AND MAJORITY — Whenever three or more public officers are
given any power or authority, or three or more persons are charged with
any public duty to be performed or exercised by them jointly or as a board
or similar body, a majority of the whole number of such persons or officers,
at a meeting duly held at a time fixed by law, or by any bylaw duly adopted
by such board or body, or at any duly adjourned meeting of such meeting,
or at any meeting duly held upon reasonable notice to all of them, shall
constitute a quorum and not less than a majority of the whole number may
perform and exercise such power, authority or duty. For the purpose of this
provision, the words "whole number" shall be construed to mean the total
number which the board, commission, body or other group of persons or
officers would have were there no vacancies and were none of the persons
§ 1-12 ONEIDA CODE § 1-12
C:80
disqualified from acting. Any meeting referred to above may be adjourned
by a lesser number than a quorum.
REAL PROPERTY — Includes real estate, lands, tenements and
hereditaments, corporeal and incorporeal.
REFERENCES TO OFFICIALS, DEPARTMENTS, ETC. — Whenever a
reference is made to an officer, employee, board, department or
commission, such reference shall be interpreted as if it was followed by the
words "of the city."
SIGNATURE — Includes any memorandum, mark or sign written, printed,
stamped, photographed, engraved or otherwise placed upon any instrument
or writing with intent to execute or authenticate such instrument or writing.
REFERENCES TO REPEALED PROVISIONS — If any provision of a law or
ordinance is repealed and, in substance, reenacted, a reference in any law
or ordinance to such repealed provision shall be deemed a reference to such
reenacted provision.
STATE — The State of New York.
TENSE — Words in the present tense include the future.
WOMEN — Includes girls.
WRITING AND WRITTEN — Includes every legible representation of letters
upon a material substance, except when applied to the signature of an
instrument.
YEAR — Means 365 days, but the added day of a leap year and the day
immediately preceding shall for the purpose of such computation be
counted as one day. The term "year" means 12 months, the term "half year"
six months and the term "a quarter of a year" three months.
§ 1-13. Catchlines of sections.
The catchlines of the several sections of this Code printed in boldface type
are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section and
shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections, or as any part of
the section, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when
any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted.
§ 1-14. General penalty.
Wherever in this Code or in any legislation of the city any act is prohibited
or is made or declared to be unlawful, or an offense or a misdemeanor, or
the doing of any act is required, or the failure to do any act is declared
to be unlawful, an offense or a misdemeanor, where no specific penalty is
provided therefor, the violation of any such provision of this Code or such
legislation is hereby declared to be a misdemeanor and shall be punished
by a fine not exceeding $1,000 or by imprisonment for a term in excess of
15 days, but not exceeding one year, or both such fine and imprisonment.
Every day any violation of this Code or any such legislation shall continue
shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 1-12 CHARTER § 1-14
C:81
Chapter 5
ALARM SYSTEMS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building code administration and
enforcement — See Ch. 33.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 61.
Noise — See Ch. 98.
Police Department — See Ch. 120.
§ 5-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the "City of Oneida Alarm System
Ordinance."
§ 5-2. Purpose.
It is the purpose of this chapter to protect and promote the health, safety
and general welfare of the residents of the City of Oneida by reducing
the number of avoidable alarms to emergency agencies. Avoidable alarms
contribute to ineffective utilization of public safety manpower and
equipment. In addition, avoidable alarms require emergency responses
which may contribute to a high accident rate and delayed responses to
genuine emergencies. This chapter seeks to ensure that police, ambulance
and fire communication facilities will be available to dispatch fire,
ambulance and police personnel for actual emergencies and to alleviate
the nuisance of audible alarms to the community. Another purpose of this
chapter is to provide the city with the names of responsible people to
contact in the case of activation of an alarm. This chapter is enforceable for
the following structures:
§ 5-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
respectively ascribed to them in this section:
A. Assembly.
B. Business.
C. Industrial.
D. Institutional.
E. Mercantile.
F. Residential.
G. Storage.
§ 1-14 ONEIDA CODE § 5-3
C:82
ALARM BUSINESS — Any individual, partnership, corporation or other
entity engaging in the business of selling, leasing, maintaining, servicing,
repairing, altering, replacing, moving or installing any alarm system.
ALARM SYSTEM — A device or assembly of equipment which emits a signal
which is intended to alert persons inside or outside a premises to the
existence of a hazard or emergency or which is intended to alert emergency
agencies by automatically dialing an emergency agency or which is
connected to a private answering point for the purpose of reporting such
alarms to emergency agencies, emergency communications center or other
emergency agency. Excluded from this definition and chapter, however, is
any residential smoke, heat or combustion detector not connected to any
point outside the premises or intended to be heard or detected outside the
premises.[Amended 4-1-2014 by L.L. No. 3-201413]
ALARM USER — Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company or organization of any kind in control of any building, structure
or facility wherein an alarm system is maintained, except when the alarm
system is a proprietary system.
AUTOMATIC DIALING DEVICE — A device which is interconnected to a
telephone line and is programmed to select a predetermined telephone
number and transmit by voice message or code signal an emergency
message indicating a need for emergency response.
AVOIDABLE ALARM — The activation of an alarm system through
mechanical failure, malfunction, improper installation, failure to notify for
testing or maintenance or the negligence of the owner, user, custodian or
lessee of an alarm system or of his employees or agents or through any
other cause, which through direct connection to an emergency agency or
which through notification of emergency agency by a private answering
point or automatic dialing device or which through notification to an
emergency agency by any other second party or means indicates that an
emergency situation exists requiring emergency response within the City of
Oneida, when, in fact, an emergency situation does not exist. An avoidable
alarm does not include alarms activated by violent conditions of nature,
such as hurricanes, tornadoes, earthquakes or any other similar cause
beyond the control of the user of an alarm system. Activation of an alarm
system under any circumstances in which the activator reasonably believes
that an emergency exists is not an avoidable alarm.[Amended 11-20-2012
by Ord. No. 12-12]
CENTRAL STATION — A fire detection system that is under the control and
guidance of an outside agency that specializes in watch services. The alarm,
in addition to alerting building occupants, will register in the central watch
station. The watch service will then notify the local Fire Department.14
13.Editor’s Note: This local law provided an effective date of 1-1-2016.
14.Editor’s Note: The former definition of “control loop,” which immediately followed this
definition, was repealed 4-1-2014 by L.L. No. 3-2014, which local law provided an effective
date of 1-1-2016.
§ 5-3 CHARTER § 5-3
C:83
EMERGENCY AGENCY — Any Fire Department, Police Department or other
law enforcement agency, ambulance company or other agency summoned
to respond to an emergency situation; and the emergency communications
center.
LOCAL ALARM SYSTEM — A signaling system which, when activated,
causes an audible signaling device to be activated inside the premises
within which the system is installed, excluding, however, any residential
smoke, heat or combustion detection not connected to any point outside the
premises or intended to be heard or detected outside the premises.15
PRIMARY TRUNK LINE — A telephone line serving an emergency agency
or the Emergency Communications Center that is designated to receive
emergency calls.
PRIVATE ANSWERING POINT — A business which offers the service of
receiving emergency signals, monitoring said signals and relaying them to
an emergency agency.
PROPRIETARY SYSTEM — An alarm system sounding and/or recording
alarm and supervisory signals at a control center located within the
premises protected by the alarm, which is not intended to alert persons
outside of the premises on which the alarm system is located of a possible
hazard and not intended to alert an emergency agency; the control center
being under the supervision of the proprietor of the protected premises. If
a proprietary system includes a signal line connected directly or by means
of an automatic dialing device to an emergency agency or to a private
answering point or to a local alarm system, it thereby becomes an alarm
system, as defined in this section.
WATER FLOW ALARM — A sounding device activated by water flow
detector or alarm check valve and arranged to sound an alarm which will be
audible in all living areas over background noise levels with all intervening
doors closed.
§ 5-4. Exemptions.
A. The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to proprietary alarm
systems and residential smoke, heat or combustion detectors not
connected to any point outside the premises or intended to be heard or
detected outside the premises. Permits shall be required for alarm
systems located in buildings of federal, state and city governmental
agencies as well as others required by federal, state, county or
municipal statute, regulation, rule or ordinance to install, maintain or
operate an alarm system. No alarm user permit required under this
chapter shall be revoked if such system is required by federal, state or
local law.
15.Editor’s Note: The former definition of "municipal or auxiliary system," which immediately
followed this definition, was repealed 4-1-2014 by L.L. No. 3-2014, which local law
provided an effective date of 1-1-2016.
§ 5-3 ONEIDA CODE § 5-4
C:84
§ 5-5. User permits; fees.
B. However, all other provisions of this chapter shall apply to such
systems, including the payment of authorized fees.
A. Required. No person shall own, use, lease, operate or maintain an
alarm system within the City of Oneida, unless such a person shall have
first obtained from the city and have in effect a permit for such alarm.
B. Application.
(1) In order to obtain an alarm user permit, any person who operates
an alarm system shall submit an application for such permit in the
form designated by the city, which application shall contain the
following:
(a) The name and home address of the person applying for a
permit.
(b) The address of the premises upon which the alarm system is or
will be located.
(c) The type of alarm system for which the permit is sought.
(d) The telephone number of the person applying for the permit.
(e) The name of the alarm business or businesses selling,
installing, monitoring, inspecting, responding to and/or
maintaining the alarm system.
(f) The name and telephone number of at least one other person
who can be reached at any time day or night and who is
authorized by the owner of the premises in which the system is
installed to open the premises.
(g) Any other information that the city may require.
(2) Every application for an alarm user permit shall be accompanied by
the appropriate fee. No alarm user permit shall be granted unless
the fee is submitted at time of application. Fees shall be established
by resolution of the Common Council. Such fees may thereafter be
amended from time to time by like resolutions. [Amended
11-20-2012 by Ord. No. 12-12; 4-1-2014 by L.L. No. 3-201416]
(3) Upon receipt of a properly executed application, an investigation of
the facts on the permit application shall be conducted by the Fire
Department for all fire alarm systems. If the investigation reveals
that the provisions of Subsection B have been met and the
applicant's system would not then be in violation of any of the
provisions of this chapter, the city shall issue an alarm user permit
to the applicant. Alarm user permits shall not be transferable and
16.Editor’s Note: This local law provided an effective date of 1-1-2016.
§ 5-4 CHARTER § 5-5
C:85
shall be maintained on the premises where the alarm system is
located. Such permits shall be made available for inspection by fire
or police officers as appropriate. [Amended 11-20-2012 by Ord.
No. 12-12]
C. Duration of permit. An alarm users permit shall expire on July 1 of the
next year following its issuance. [Amended 11-20-2012 by Ord. No.
12-12]
D. False alarms; permit revocation.
(1) Any alarm system which has four or more false alarms within a
permit year shall be subject to permit revocation as provided
herein.
(2) If an emergency agency records four or more false alarms within a
permit year for any alarm system:
(a) The Fire Chief, if a fire alarm system is involved, shall notify
the alarm user and the alarm business providing service or
inspection to the user by certified mail of such fact and direct
that the user submit a report to the Chief within 10 days of
receipt of the notice describing actions taken or to be taken to
discover and eliminate the cause of false alarms or why any
such alarm should not be classified as an avoidable alarm.
Such notice shall also inform the user that avoidable alarms,
greater than four in number, will be subject to a user fee to be
determined by resolution of the Common Council for each such
avoidable alarm in excess of four. Payment of such fees shall be
paid prior to renewal of said permit. [Amended 11-20-2012
by Ord. No. 12-12]
(b) If the alarm user submits a report as directed, the Chief shall
determine if the actions taken or to be taken will prevent the
occurrence of false alarms; if he determines that the action will
prevent the occurrence of false alarms, he shall notify the
alarm user and the relevant alarm business by certified mail
that the permit will not be revoked at that time and that if one
more false alarm occurs within the permit year, the permit will
be summarily revoked, subject to the procedure described in
the following Subsection D(2)(c). The Chief shall also notify the
user of the number of alarms he has determined to be
avoidable alarms and of the user's right to a hearing on the
classification of the alarms, provided that more than four have
been found. The user shall exercise such right by filing with the
Chief a written request for a hearing within 10 days of the date
of the Chief's notice that he has determined the user to have
incurred in excess of four avoidable alarms.
(c) If no report is submitted or if the Chief determines that the
action taken or to be taken will not prevent the occurrence of
§ 5-5 ONEIDA CODE § 5-5
C:86
false alarms, the Chief shall give notice by certified mail to the
user that the permit will be revoked without further notice on
the 10th day after the date of the notice, provided that the
user does not file, within that period, a written request for a
hearing. The Chief shall also include notice of the number of
alarms he has determined to be avoidable alarms, of the user's
right to a hearing on the classification of alarms, provided that
more than four have been found, and the manner of requesting
the same as above provided.
(d) If a hearing is requested, written notice of the time and place
of the hearing shall be served on the user by the Chief by
certified mail at least 10 days prior to the date set for the
hearing, which date shall not be more than 21 nor less than 10
days after the filing of the request for hearing. [Amended
11-20-2012 by Ord. No. 12-12]
(e) The hearing shall be before the Commissioner of Public Safety
and the Chief and the alarm user shall have the right to present
written and oral evidence, subject to the right of cross
examination. If the Commissioner determines that four or more
false alarms have occurred in a permit year and that the user
has not taken reasonable and appropriate actions to discover
and prevent the occurrence of false alarms, the Commissioner
shall issue written findings to that effect and an order revoking
the user's permit. If the user has presented the issue by filing
of the required written request, the Commissioner shall also
determine the number of avoidable alarms which have
occurred during the permit year and the amount of the
additional avoidable alarm fee then accrued. Judicial review of
the determinations of the Commissioner may be had only
pursuant to Article 78 of the Civil Practice Law and Rules.
(f) An alarm user shall immediately discontinue use of the alarm
system upon being notified by certified mail of the revocation
of a permit pursuant to Subsection D(2)(b), (c) or (e) of this
section.
(g) An alarm user whose permit is revoked may reinstate the same
by submission of proof that modifications have been made to
the alarm system to reduce the number of avoidable alarms
and by payment of an excessive use fee, to be determined by
resolution of the Common Council, together with the fee for
the accrued number of avoidable alarms in excess of four.
Should another avoidable alarm occur during the life of the
permit, the same shall be subject summary revocation. In such
a case, the revocation shall be effective on the third day
following the mailing, by certified mail, of a notice of
revocation by the Chief of fire. [Amended 11-20-2012 by
Ord. No. 12-12]
§ 5-5 CHARTER § 5-5
C:87
§ 5-6. Operation without permit; penalties for offenses. [Amended
12-19-2000 by L.L. No. 6-2000]
Violators of § 5-5A shall be guilty of a violation and subject to a fine of
not more than $250 or 15 days imprisonment, or both such fine and
imprisonment. However, if the alarm user obtains a permit within 25 days,
the charges shall be dismissed.
§ 5-7. Automatic dialing device; certain interconnections
prohibited.
§ 5-8. Instructions. [Amended 11-20-2012 by Ord. No. 12-12]
Every alarm business installing or operating systems within the City of
Oneida shall provide all alarm system purchasers or lessees with written
instructions that provide adequate information to enable the alarm user to
operate the alarm properly. A current copy of all such written instructions
shall be furnished to the City.
E. Renewal of permit. At the end of the permit year, the city shall notify the
alarm system user of the necessity of renewing the permit. Such notice
shall contain an accounting of all avoidable alarms by the user's system
during the previous year.
(1) A renewed permit shall be issued upon payment of a renewal fee to
be determined by resolution of the Common Council, and any
avoidable alarm fees from the previous permit year. [Amended
11-20-2012 by Ord. No. 12-12]
(2) No renewal shall be granted until a new application, with current
information, is submitted with the appropriate fees.
F. If a permit lapses, no new permit shall be granted unless the alarm user
applicant shall pay all outstanding excessive use fees and additional
avoidable alarm fees accrued during the three years previous to the
application for a new permit.
A. It is unlawful for any person to program an automatic dialing device to
select a primary trunk line, including any line assigned to the Oneida
Police or Fire Departments; and it is unlawful for an alarm user to fail to
disconnect or reprogram an automatic dialing device which is
programmed to select a primary trunk line within 12 hours of receipt of
written notice from the Fire or Police Chief that it is so programmed.
B. Within 60 days after the effective date of this chapter, all existing
automatic dialing devices programmed to select a primary trunk line
shall be reprogrammed or disconnected.
§ 5-5 ONEIDA CODE § 5-9
C:88
§ 5-9. Emergency communications center interface. [Amended
11-20-2012 by Ord. No. 12-12]
Alarm systems which are interconnected or otherwise transmit signals
directly to the Madison County E911 Center, Oneida, New York, shall be
subject to the laws, rules and regulations and penalties adopted by the
County of Madison, relating to such systems.
§ 5-10. (Reserved)17
§ 5-11. Implementation and education. [Amended 11-20-2012 by
Ord. No. 12-12]
The Fire Chief is hereby directed to develop procedures necessary to
implement this chapter and to commence an ongoing public education to
inform users and potential users of alarm systems of the requirements and
purpose of this chapter. Said education program shall also serve to increase
public awareness of the cost and danger of false alarms, tending to reduce
their number.
§ 5-12. Confidentiality; statistics. [Amended 11-20-2012 by Ord. No.
12-12]
All information submitted in compliance with this chapter shall be held in
the strictest confidence and shall be deemed a public record exempt from
disclosure pursuant to state statute; and any violation of confidentiality
shall be deemed a violation of this chapter. The Chief shall be charged
with the sole responsibility for the maintenance of all records of any kind
whatsoever under this chapter. Subject to the requirements of
confidentiality, the Chief shall develop and maintain statistics having the
purpose of assisting alarm system evaluation for use by members of the
public.
§ 5-13. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 12-19-2000 by L.L. No.
6-2000]
Unless otherwise herein specifically stated, a violation of any provision of
this chapter shall constitute a violation, punishable by a fine of not more
than $250 or 15 days imprisonment, or both such fine and imprisonment.
17.Editor’s Note: Former § 5-10, Connecting to municipal fire alarm system; fee, was repealed
4-1-2014 by L.L. 3-2014, which local law provided an effective date of 1-1-2016. Section 4
of L.L. No. 3-2014, which repealed this § 5-10, also stated that maintenance by the City of
Oneida of all alarm wire on a control loop shall be discontinued.
§ 5-9 CHARTER § 5-13
C:89
Chapter 9
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Peace and good order — See Ch. 113.
§ 9-1. Possession or consumption of alcoholic beverages in public.
[Amended 12-19-2000 by L.L. No. 6-2000]
The consumption of any alcoholic beverage by any person within the
boundary of any public street in the city is prohibited. The possession with
intent to consume of any open bottle, can or other receptacle containing an
alcoholic beverage by any person within the boundary of any public street
or in an unauthorized outside public place of the city is prohibited.
§ 9-2. Definitions. [Added 12-19-2000 by L.L. No. 6-2000]
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
INTENT TO CONSUME — Drinking from the container, with alcohol on the
breath of the possessor and/or any circumstances evidencing an intent to
ultimately consume on any public lands.
§ 9-3. Penalties for offenses. [Added 12-16-2014 by L.L. No. 9-2014]
A violation of this chapter shall constitute a violation punishable by a fine of
not more than $250, imprisonment for not more than 15 days, or both such
fine and imprisonment.
Chapter 13
AMUSEMENT DEVICES
§ 13-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AMUSEMENT CENTER — Any indoor place or enclosure in which is
maintained or operated for the amusement, patronage or recreation of the
public any coin-operated amusement device, jukeboxes of any description
and particularly, but not by way of limitation, those commonly known as
bagatelle, baseball, football and pinball amusement games.[Amended
12-19-2000 by L.L. No. 6-2000]
AMUSEMENT MACHINE — An amusement device operated by insertion
of a coin, token or similar object for the purpose of amusement or skill
§ 5-13 ONEIDA CODE § 13-1
C:90
and for the playing of which a fee is charged and particularly, but not by
way of limitation, those commonly known as bagatelle, baseball, football
and pinball amusement games, pool tables or jukeboxes. The term does
not include vending machines in which are not incorporated gaming or
amusement features.[Amended 12-19-2000 by L.L. No. 6-2000]
OWNER or OPERATOR — Any person who sets up for operation by another
or leases and distributes for the purpose of operation by another or himself
any amusement device, whether such setting up for operation, leasing or
distributing is for a fixed charge, rental, on the basis of division of the
income derived from such device or otherwise, in any place in which it is
operated for the amusement, patronage or recreation of the public.
§ 13-2. Filing evidence of ownership with City Clerk.
Any individual who owns an amusement machine shall file with the City
Clerk evidence of such ownership prior to the issuance of a license, and any
individual purchasing an amusement machines shall file with the City Clerk
evidence of ownership thereof before exhibiting or placing said device or
devices for use or play.
§ 13-3. Operation by minors.
No person under 16 years of age shall be allowed to operate any amusement
machine unless said minor shall be accompanied by his parent or guardian.
§ 13-4. Prohibition of cash awards.
No cash awards shall be made in any contest, tournament, league or
individual play of any game maintained or operated in any amusement
center, and no amusement machine shall be permitted to operate if said
device delivers to the player coins or slugs or metal or other tokens on
certain scores, or if said devices may be readily converted to deliver to the
players such coins or slugs or metal or tokens.
§ 13-5. Seizure of equipment.
Any amusement machine operated in violation of the terms of this chapter
may be seized and destroyed in compliance with the terms and provisions
of the statutes of the state.
§ 13-6. License required.
No person shall engage in the business of an owner or operator of
amusement machines without first having obtained the proper license
therefor.
§ 13-7. Application and issuance.
A. Before any amusement machine or game is placed at any location
within the city, an application for a license hereunder shall be filed in
§ 13-1 CHARTER § 13-7
C:91
§ 13-8. Fees. [Amended 9-1-1987 by Ord. No. 87-07]
§ 13-9. Late applications; fees.
In the event of a late application for any license provided for in this chapter
hereof, the license fee shall be increased by $50 in addition to any and
all other penalties and/or remedies. Continued late applications may be
considered upon future applications to the Common Council for permission
to acquire a license.
§ 13-10. Persons ineligible for license.
No licenses shall be issued under this chapter to any person or a member,
partner, officer or stockholder of any firm, corporation, partnership or
association who has been convicted of a crime or of any gambling offense
against the laws of the state or of the city, and in the event of any such
conviction subsequent to the issuance of said license, said license shall be
immediately revoked.
§ 13-11. Location restrictions.
No license shall be granted for any amusement center if located within 200
yards of a public or private school.
writing with the City Clerk, in duplicate, on a form to be provided by
the city and shall specify:
(1) The name and address of the applicant, and if a firm, corporation,
partnership or association, the principal officers, partners and
stockholders thereof, and their addresses.
(2) The address of the premises where the machine is to be operated.
B. The proper license fee shall accompany each application. Application
for license hereunder shall be first referred by the City Clerk to the
Mayor and Common Council who shall make or cause to be made such
investigation as they deem necessary. If the application is approved by
the Mayor and Common Council, the license shall be issued by the
Clerk. If the license is denied, the fee shall be returned to the applicant.
A. The license fee for each owner or operator shall be established by
resolution of the Common Council. Such fees may thereafter be
amended from time to time by like resolutions. [Amended 11-20-2012
by Ord. No. 12-11]
B. The license fee shall be per year for all devices set up for operation,
leased or distributed to a business premises in the city. License fees
shall be payable annually in advance.
§ 13-7 ONEIDA CODE § 13-12
C:92
§ 13-12. Expiration.
A license issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall expire at the
end of the calendar year for which it was issued, unless sooner suspended
or revoked.
§ 13-13. Transfer or assignment.
A license issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be
nontransferable and nonassignable.
§ 13-14. Amusement machine identification.
Upon payment of his annual license fee, a seal shall be affixed by the owner
to each device in a prominent place and shall bear the owner's or operator's
name, address and telephone number.
§ 13-15. Posting.
A license issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be posted in
a conspicuous place in the establishment of the licensee.
§ 13-16. Revocation or suspension.
After a hearing affording due process, the Mayor may suspend or revoke
any license issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter if its holder
has violated any of the provisions of this chapter. A person whose license
has been suspended or revoked may appeal such decision to the Common
Council by requesting a hearing before the Council. Such requests shall be
made to the City Clerk within 10 days after receipt of notice of the action
of the Mayor. The Council shall then hear and decide the matter within a
reasonable time.
Chapter 17
ANIMALS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Appearance tickets — See Ch. 21.
§ 13-12 CHARTER § 13-16
C:93

ARTICLE I
In General
§ 17-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
respectively ascribed to them in this section:
ANIMAL — Any live vertebrate creature, domestic or wild.
ANIMAL SHELTER — Any facility operated by a humane society or by a
municipal agency or its authorized agents for the purpose of impounding or
caring for animals held under the authority of this chapter or state law.
AT LARGE — Any animal shall be deemed at large when it is off the property
of its owner and not under the control or restraint of a competent person.
AUCTION — Any place or facility where animals are regularly bought, sold
or traded, except for those facilities otherwise defined in this chapter. This
definition does not apply to individual sales of animals by owners.
CIRCUS — A commercial variety show featuring animal acts for public
entertainment.
COMMERCIAL ANIMAL ESTABLISHMENT — Any pet shop, grooming shop,
auction, riding school or stable, zoological park, circus, performing animal
exhibition or kennel.
COMMUNITY SERVICE OFFICER — The officer charged with enforcement
of this chapter, who shall have all the powers of a peace officer in the
execution of this chapter or Article 7 of the Agriculture and Markets Law,
including the service of summons or any other order of process.
DANGEROUS ANIMAL — Any animal that constitutes a physical threat to
human beings or other animals.
DOMESTIC ANIMAL — Includes domesticated sheep, horses, cattle, goats,
swine, fowl, ducks, geese, turkeys and game birds raised in confinement
under permit or license from the State Department of Environmental
Conservation.[Amended 10-3-2001]
GROOMING SHOP — A commercial establishment where animals are
bathed, clipped, plucked or otherwise groomed.
KENNEL — Any premises wherein any person engages in the business of
boarding, breeding, buying, letting for hire, training for a fee or selling dogs
or cats.
OWNER — Any person who owns, keeps, harbors or has the care, custody
or control of an animal. Animals owned by minors shall be deemed to be in
custody and control of the minor's parents or other head of the household
where the minor resides.
PET — Includes dogs, cats, cage birds and other animals commonly kept or
harbored in a home as a house pet.
§ 17-1 CHARTER § 17-1
C:95
PET SHOP — Any person, partnership or corporation, whether operated
separately or in connection with another business enterprise, except for a
licensed kennel, that buys, sells or boards any species of animals.
RESTRAINT — An animal is under restraint if it is secured by leash or lead
or under the control of a competent person not less than 12 years of age and
obedient to that person's commands, on or within a vehicle being driven or
parked on the street or within the property limit of its owner or keeper or
upon the premises of another with consent of such other person.
§ 17-2. Impounding of animals and enforcing chapter.
§ 17-3. Restraining or confining dogs or cats.
§ 17-4. Domestic animals at large or grazing in public.
No owner or person having the care of any domestic animals shall permit
or suffer the same or any of them to go at large or to graze on any street,
public ground, park or square of this City.
§ 17-5. Dangerous animals.
No person shall own or harbor any dangerous animal or any animal which
shall attack or attempt to bite any person peaceably passing along the
street, lane, park or walk of the City or any place the person may legally be.
§ 17-6. Keeping of domestic animals.
A. Except as otherwise provided herein, the Community Service Officer
shall be the enforcing officer for carrying out the terms of this chapter.
The Community Service Officer shall investigate any complaint lodged
by any person against any animal or animal owner for allegedly
violating this chapter.
B. It is the duty of the Community Service Officer to seize and impound
animals running at large, in addition to the dogs that are seized for
other violations.
C. Every animal seized by the Community Service Officer shall be
maintained, redeemed, sold or disposed of in accordance with Article 7
of the Agriculture and Markets Law.
A. No owner shall permit or allow any dog to run at large within the City
unless such animal is under restraint.
B. No unspayed female dog or cat in heat shall be permitted to be outside
a building or a fenced enclosure.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to keep, harbor, raise or maintain any
domestic animals within the area of the City bounded by a line
beginning at the point where the Conrail tracks cross Oneida Creek just
south of the New York State Thruway, thence westerly along the Conrail
§ 17-1 ONEIDA CODE § 17-6
C:96
§ 17-7. Animal care and treatment generally.
§ 17-8. Animal prizes.
No person shall give away any live animal, fish, reptile or bird as an
inducement to enter any contest, game or other competition or as an
inducement to enter a place of amusement; or offer such vertebrate as an
tracks to the point where an extension of the west inside/outside
corporation line intersects, thence southerly along the inside/outside
corporation line to Genesee Street (New York State Route 5), thence
easterly along Genesee Street to the point where the same crosses
Oneida Creek, thence northerly along Oneida Creek to its starting
point.
B. Nothing in this section shall be deemed to make unlawful the use of any
property being used as of January 1, 1979, for the keeping, harboring,
raising or maintaining of domestic animals; however, this provision
shall not permit the establishment or maintenance of any nuisance or
other condition or circumstance otherwise prohibited by law, nor does it
permit the increasing or extending of any preexisting use. Such
preexisting use shall be known as a nonconforming use and shall
terminate and become unlawful upon the termination of ownership of
the person or persons owning the same on January 1, 1979.
A. No owner shall fail to provide their animal with sufficient good and
wholesome food, water, proper shelter and protection from the weather,
veterinary care when needed to prevent suffering and with humane
care and treatment.
B. No person shall beat, cruelly ill treat, torment, overload, overwork or
otherwise abuse an animal or cause, instigate or permit any dogfight,
cockfight, bullfight or other combat between animals or between
animals and humans.
C. No owner of an animal shall abandon such animal.
D. No person shall unjustifiably administer any poisonous or noxious drug
or substance to any animal not covered in § 361 of the Agriculture and
Markets Law, nor shall a person unjustifiably expose such animals to
any drug or substance with the intent such drug be taken by such
animal.
E. No person shall willfully or unjustifiably interfere with, injure, destroy
or tamper with or willfully set on foot, instigate, engage in or in any way
further any act by which any animals used for the purposes of breeding,
racing or competitive exhibition of skill, breed or stamina is impaired.
F. No person shall willfully throw, drop or place or cause to be thrown,
dropped or placed any substance which might wound, disable or injure
any animal.
§ 17-6 CHARTER § 17-8
C:97
incentive to enter any business agreement whereby the offer was for the
purpose of attracting trade.
§ 17-9. Duty of operators of vehicles which strike animals.
Any person who, as the operator of a motor vehicle, strikes a pet or
domestic animal shall stop at once and render such assistance as may be
possible and shall immediately report such injury or death to the animal's
owner; in the event the owner cannot be ascertained and located, such
operator shall at once report the accident to the appropriate law
enforcement agency.
§ 17-10. Molesting or enticing animals.
No person shall entice, seize or molest any animal while it is being held
or led by any person or while properly muzzled or wearing a licensed tag,
except where such action is incidental to the enforcement of some law or
regulation.
§ 17-11. Unlawfully transporting animals.
No person shall transport any animal, not lawfully in his possession, for the
purpose of killing or selling such animal.
§ 17-12. Animal wastes. [Amended 6-18-2003 by Ord. No. 03-05]
The owner or person in control of an animal shall be responsible for the
immediate removal of any excreta deposited by his/her animal on public
walks, recreation areas, parks or another's private property.
§ 17-13. Nuisances.
A. An owner of an animal shall not permit such animal, either licensed or
unlicensed, to become a public nuisance. An animal shall be presumed
to be a public nuisance if it shall:
(1) Persistently or consistently bark or howl or whine or snarl or growl.
(2) Cause personal injury.
(3) Cause damage to personal property.
(4) Transport trash or create impairment of lawns, hedges, flower beds
and gardens on property other than of the owner or of anyone
having the animal in custody.
(5) Persistently bark or chase or growl or snarl at pedestrians who are
using the sidewalks while the animal is on the property of the
owner or harborer.
(6) Roam with one or more animals in a pack.
(7) Be in the habit of chasing or barking at automobiles.
§ 17-8 ONEIDA CODE § 17-13
C:98
§ 17-14. Taking possession of animals or implements used in fights
among animals.
Any officer authorized by law to make arrests may lawfully take possession
of any animal or implements or other property used or employed or about
to be used or employed in violation of any provision of law relating to
fights among animals. The disposition of animals or implements used in
such fights shall be carried out in accordance with §§ 375 and 376 of the
Agriculture and Markets Law.
§ 17-15. Penalties for offenses; violations; appearance tickets.
[Amended 2-8-1986 by Ord. No. 86-02; 7-19-1994]
(8) Kill other animals, except mice and rats.
(9) Be in any grocery stores or any store where perishable goods are
sold or any part of any restaurant where food is prepared, except
for Seeing Eye dogs.
B. No person shall keep or harbor such number of dogs as to constitute a
nuisance.
A. Violations.
(1) Any person who violates this chapter or knowingly permits the
violation of this chapter or any of the provisions thereof shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable as provided in § 1-14 of this
Code, but if such provision is inconsistent with the provisions of the
Agriculture and Markets Law or other applicable state provision in
defining the grade of the offense or the punishment therefor, then
as defined and punishable by such law or provision, except that a
violation of any of the following provisions of this chapter shall be a
violation, punishable as hereinafter provided in this section:
(a) Section 17-3 regarding restraining or confining dogs or cats;
(b) Section 17-4 regarding domestic animals at large or grazing in
public;
(c) Section 17-5 regarding dangerous animals;
(d) Section 17-6 regarding keeping of domestic animals;
(e) Section 17-9 regarding duty of operators of vehicles which
strike animals;
(f) Section 17-12 regarding removal of animal wastes;
(g) Section 17-13 regarding animal nuisances.
(h) Section 17-16 regarding license required; fees. [Added
11-21-2007 by Ord. No. 07-05]
§ 17-13 CHARTER § 17-15
C:99
(2) A person convicted of a violation of any of the immediate above
§§ 17-3, 17-4, 17-5, 17-6, 17-9, 17-12, 17-13, 17-16 shall be subject
to a fine of not less than $50 nor more than $100; for a conviction of
a second violation of the same offense, both of which were
committed within a period of five years, a fine of not less than $75
nor more than $150; for conviction of a third or subsequent
violation of the same offense, all of which were committed within a
period of five years, a fine of not less than $100 nor more than $250
or imprisonment for not more than 15 days, or both. [Amended
11-21-2007 by Ord. No. 07-05]
B. Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be issued an
appearance ticket for such violation. The appearance ticket shall be
substantially in the form set forth in Subsection C. An answer to such
appearance ticket may be made within five days of the violation, by
certified mail, return receipt requested, in lieu of a personal
appearance upon the date at the time and court specified in the
appearance ticket, in accordance with the provisions of § 124 of the
Agriculture and Markets Law.
C. The appearance ticket shall read substantially as follows:
APPEARANCE TICKET
City of Oneida
To: (Name) ________________(Address)
(City/State) _________________(Dog)
You are hereby notified to appear personally in the City Court of the
City of Oneida, located at City Hall, 109 North Main Street, City of
Oneida on the________ day of____________ 20____, at___________ o'clock
in the fore/afternoon to answer a charge of
_____________________________________, in violation of
Section_____________, of the Animal Control Ordinance of the City of
Oneida, an offense. Upon your failure to appear as above directed, a
warrant may be issued for your arrest. Issued on this__________________
day of 20_____.
________________________________________
Community Service Officer, City of Oneida
To Plead Guilty:
1. Complete form below.
2. Mail form to City Court, City Hall, 109 N. Main Street, Oneida,
New York, within five days of the alleged violation by certified mail,
return receipt requested, together with the appearance ticket.
3. The court will advise you by mail of the fine.
TO: CITY COURT, CITY OF ONEIDA:
I, _______________________ residing at
§ 17-15 ONEIDA CODE § 17-15
C:100
have been charged with the offense specified on the attached
appearance ticket. I waive arraignment in open court and aid of
counsel. I plead guilty to the offense as charged and elect and request
that this charge be disposed of and fine or penalty fixed by the court. I
make the following statement of explanation (optional)
APPLICANTS UNDER 18 MUST COMPLETE THE FOLLOWING:
Name of parent or guardian
Address of parent of guardian
All statements are made under penalty of perjury:
Date __________ Signed
To Plead Not Guilty:
1. Complete form below.
2. Send your not guilty plea together with the above appearance
ticket and a certified check or money order for $25 as a security
payable to the City Court, City Hall, 109 N. Main Street, Oneida,
New York, within five days of the alleged violation by certified mail,
return receipt requested. DO NOT SEND CASH.
3. The court will thereafter advise you by return mail of the date of
your trial. Your failure to appear will forfeit your $25 security and
a summons or warrant of arrest may be issued pursuant to the
Criminal Procedure Law.
TO: CITY COURT, CITY OF ONEIDA:
I, ________________________ residing at________________________ plead
not guilty to the offense as charged.
APPLICANTS UNDER 18 MUST COMPLETE THE FOLLOWING:
Name of parent or guardian
Address of parent or guardian
All statements are made under penalty of perjury.
Date ____________ Signed
§ 17-15 CHARTER § 17-15
C:101

ARTICLE II
Licensing and Identification of Dogs
[Amended 10-2-1984; 2-6-1988 by Ord. No. 88-10; 2-20-1996 by
Ord. No. 96-01; 10-3-2006 by Ord. No. 06-02; 12-7-2010 by L.L. No.
3-201018]
§ 17-16. Purpose and applicability.
The purpose of this article is to provide for the identification and licensing
of dogs, so as to aid in the control and protection of the dog population and
the protection of persons, property and domestic animals within the City of
Oneida. This article shall apply to all areas of the City of Oneida and, except
to the extent otherwise specifically provided herein, to all dogs kept and/
or harbored within the City of Oneida, and to all dog licenses issued by the
City of Oneida on and after January 1, 2011.
§ 17-17. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ADOPTION — The delivery to any natural person 18 years of age or older,
for the limited purpose of harboring a pet, of any dog, seized or
surrendered.
CLERK — The City Clerk of the City of Oneida.
DETECTION DOG — Any dog that is trained and is actually used for the
purpose of detecting controlled substances, explosives, ignitable liquids,
firearms, cadavers, or school or correctional facility contraband, or any dog
undergoing training for such purposes.
DOG — Any member of the species canis familiaris.
DOG CONTROL OFFICER — Any individual appointed by the Mayor of the
City of Oneida to assist in the enforcement of this article and/or Article
7 of the New York State Agriculture and Markets Law, or any authorized
officer, agent or employee of an incorporated humane society or similar
incorporated dog protective association under contract with the City of
Oneida to assist in the enforcement of this article.
GUIDE DOG — Any dog that is trained to aid a person who is blind and is
actually used for such purpose, or any dog owned by a recognized guide dog
training center located within the state during the period such dog is being
trained or bred for such purpose.
HARBOR — To provide food and/or shelter to any dog.
HEARING DOG — Any dog that is trained to aid a person with a hearing
impairment and is actually used for such purpose, or any dog owned by a
18.Editor’s Note: This local law also provided for the renumbering of former §§ 17-20 through
17-26 as §§ 17-24 through 17-30, respectively, and provided an effective date of 1-1-2011.
§ 17-16 CHARTER § 17-17
C:103
recognized training center located within the state during the period such
dog is being trained or bred for such purpose.
IDENTIFICATION TAG — A tag issued by the City of Oneida which sets forth
an official identification number, together with the words "City of Oneida"
and "State of New York," the telephone number for the City Clerk of the City
of Oneida, and any other information as may be required by the provisions
of this article.
IDENTIFIED DOG — Any dog carrying an identification tag as provided in
this article.
OFFICIAL IDENTIFICATION NUMBER — A series or combination of letters,
numbers and/or symbols approved and furnished by the City of Oneida.
OWNER — Any person who keeps or harbors any dog.
OWNER OF RECORD — The person in whose name any dog was last
licensed pursuant to this article and/or Article 7 of the New York State
Agriculture and Markets Law, except that if any license is issued upon
application of a person under 18 years of age, the owner of record shall be
deemed to be the parent or guardian of such person.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, partnership, association or other
organized group of persons, or other legal entity.
PERSON WITH A DISABILITY — Any person with a disability as that term
is defined in Subdivision 21 of Section 292 of the New York State Executive
Law.
POLICE WORK DOG — Any dog owned or harbored by any state or
municipal police department or any state or federal law enforcement
agency, which has been trained to aid law enforcement officers and is
actually being used for police work.
RECOGNIZED REGISTRY ASSOCIATION — Any registry association that
operates on a nationwide basis, issues numbered registration certificates
and keeps such records as may be required by the Commissioner of
Agriculture and Markets.
SERVICE DOG — Any dog that has been or is being individually trained
to do work or perform tasks for the benefit of a person with a disability,
provided that the dog is or will be owned by such person or that person's
parent, guardian or other legal representative.
THERAPY DOG — Any dog that is trained to aid the emotional and physical
health of patients in hospitals, nursing homes, retirement homes and other
settings and is actually used for such purpose, or any dog owned by a
recognized training center located within the state during the period such
dog is being trained or bred for such purpose.
WAR DOG — Any dog which has been honorably discharged from the United
States armed services.
WORKING SEARCH DOG — Any dog that is trained to aid in the search for
missing persons, is actually used for such purpose and is registered with
§ 17-17 ONEIDA CODE § 17-17
C:104
the Department of Agriculture and Markets; provided, however, that such
services provided by said dog shall be performed without charge or fee.
§ 17-18. Licensing of dogs; rabies vaccination requirement.
A. Licensing of dogs.
(1) Except as otherwise specifically provided in this article or in Article
7 of the New York State Agriculture and Markets Law, all dogs at
large, and all dogs four months of age or older, shall be licensed in
accordance with the provisions of this article.
(2) All applications for a dog license, both original applications and
renewal applications, shall be made to the Oneida City Clerk.
(3) The application shall state the sex, actual or approximate age,
breed, color, and official identification number of the dog, and other
identification marks, if any, and the name, address and telephone
number of the owner.
(4) The application shall be accompanied by the license application
fee, any applicable license surcharges, and any such additional fees
as may be established from time to time by resolution of the Oneida
Common Council. Each license application shall be accompanied by
a current certificate of rabies vaccination or a statement from a
licensed veterinarian in lieu thereof that such vaccination would
endanger the dog's life. In the case of a spayed or neutered dog,
every application shall also be accompanied by a certificate signed
by a licensed veterinarian or an affidavit signed by the owner,
showing that the dog has been spayed or neutered, provided such
certificate or affidavit shall not be required if the same is already on
file with the clerk. In lieu of the spay or neuter certificate, an owner
may present a statement certified by a licensed veterinarian stating
that he has examined the dog and found that, because of old age or
other reason, the life of the dog would be endangered by spaying or
neutering. In such case, the license fee for the dog shall be the
same as for a spayed or neutered dog as set forth in this article.
(5) Upon validation by the City Clerk, the application shall become a
license for the dog described therein. Once an application has been
validated, no refund shall be made of the fees paid therefor, or any
portion thereof.
(6) The City Clerk shall provide an identification tag and a copy of the
license to the owner, and retain the license and all documentation
supporting the issuance of the license in accordance with the
Records Retention and Disposition Schedule MU-1 issued by the
New York State Archives and Records Administration. If the
application for a dog license (or renewal) is made by mail and the
owner requests a validated copy, the owner shall provide a
stamped, self-addressed envelope for that purpose.
§ 17-17 CHARTER § 17-18
C:105
§ 17-19. License fees.
(7) No license shall be transferable. Upon the transfer of ownership of
any dog, the new owner shall immediately make application for a
license for such dog.
(8) Each initial license issued by the City of Oneida pursuant to this
article shall expire on the last day of the month one year from the
date of the original issuance of the license. Each renewal license
shall expire on the last day of the same month in each succeeding
calendar year. (For example, a license originally issued in January
will always expire on January 31 of each succeeding calendar year,
regardless of the actual date the license is renewed with the City
Clerk; renewing early or late does not change the date of expiration
of the license.)
(9) Owners of more than one dog may request a common renewal date
for their dog licenses, which may be granted by the City Clerk as
long as no license is extended beyond the period of validity that
would otherwise apply under the provisions of Subsection A(8) (i.e.,
the license may be issued for less than a year, but not for more than
a year.) No license fees or surcharges shall be prorated upon the
granting of a request for a common renewal date pursuant to the
provisions of this Subsection A(9).
B. Relocation/relicensing.
(1) The owner of any dog currently licensed in another municipality
who relocates his place of residence to the City of Oneida shall
apply for and obtain a City of Oneida dog license for each dog
owned. Owners of dogs licensed in another jurisdiction shall not be
required to obtain a City of Oneida license during periods of
temporary residence within the City.
(2) Any dog adopted from an incorporated humane society or similar
incorporated dog protective association must be licensed in the
City of Oneida prior to being released from said shelter.
A. A fee schedule for all license fees and other fees to be charged and
collected pursuant to this article shall be established by resolution of
the Oneida Common Council. Such fee schedule may thereafter be
amended from time to time by further resolution of the Common
Council. The fees set forth in, or determined in accordance with, such
fee schedule or amended fee schedule shall be charged and collected
prior to the issuance of the license for which the fees are due.
B. All fees established by the Common Council shall be in accordance with
the following limitations:
(1) The application fee for an unspayed or unneutered dog shall be at
least $5 more than the application fee for a spayed or neutered dog.
§ 17-18 ONEIDA CODE § 17-19
C:106
§ 17-20. Disposition of license fees and fines.
Except as otherwise provided in Article 7 of the New York State Agriculture
and Markets Law, and/or under any other provision of this article, all fees,
fines and/or penalties collected upon the application for a license and/or the
prosecution of any violation of this article shall be the property of the City
of Oneida.
§ 17-21. Identification of dogs.
(2) A surcharge fee in an amount not less than $1 for spayed and
neutered dogs, and not less than $3 for unspayed or unneutered
dogs, for the purpose of supporting animal population control
efforts.
(3) A surcharge fee in an amount not less than $5 shall be imposed
upon a dog license for a dog identified as unlicensed during an
enumeration conducted pursuant to Article 7 of the New York State
Agriculture and Markets Law.
C. There shall be no fee for any license issued for any guide dog, hearing
dog, service dog, war dog, working search dog, detection dog, police
work dog or therapy dog. Each license for any such dog shall be
conspicuously marked by the Clerk, "guide dog," "hearing dog,"
"service dog," "working search dog," "war dog," "detection dog," "police
work dog," or "therapy dog," as applicable.
A. Each dog licensed pursuant to this article shall be assigned, at the time
the dog is first licensed, a permanent official identification number. The
official identification number shall constitute the official identification
of the dog to which it is assigned, regardless of changes of ownership,
and the number shall not be reassigned to any other dog during the
lifetime of the dog to which it is assigned. Such identification number
shall be carried by the dog on an identification tag which shall be
affixed to a collar on the dog at all times, provided that a dog
participating in a dog show shall be exempt from this requirement
during such participation.
B. At the time a dog is first licensed, one identification tag shall be
furnished to the owner at no charge. Should an official City of Oneida
dog tag be lost, a new tag will be issued upon payment of the fee
prescribed by resolution of the Common Council.
C. No tag carrying an official identification number shall be affixed to the
collar of any dog other than the one to which that number has been
assigned.
D. The size, shape and form of imprints on identification tags shall be
prescribed by the City Clerk, and any tag bearing an imprint other than
that prescribed shall not constitute valid identification for the purposes
of this article.
§ 17-19 CHARTER § 17-22
C:107
§ 17-22. Change of ownership; lost, stolen or deceased dog.
§ 17-23. Penalties for offenses.
A. In the event of a change in the ownership of any dog which has been
assigned an official City of Oneida identification number or change in
the address of the owner of record of any such dog, the owner of record
shall, within 10 days of such change, file with the City Clerk a written
report of such change. Such owner of record shall be liable for a
violation of this article until such filing is made, or until the dog is
licensed in the name of the new owner.
B. If any dog which has been assigned an official identification number is
lost or stolen, the owner of record shall, within 10 days of the discovery
of such loss or theft, file with the City Clerk a written report of such loss
or theft. In the case of a loss or theft, the owner of record of any such
dog shall not be liable for any violation of this section, and/or of any
violation of Article 7 of the New York State Agriculture and Markets
Law committed after such report is filed.
C. In the case of a dog's death, the owner of record shall so notify the City
Clerk, in writing, either prior to renewal of licensure or upon the time of
such renewal as set forth in this article. Failure to notify the City Clerk
of the death of a dog as so required herein shall constitute a violation,
and the owner of record shall be liable for such violation.
A. It shall be a violation, punishable as provided in § 17-23B of this article,
for:
(1) Any owner to fail to license any dog;
(2) Any owner to fail to have any dog identified as required by this
article;
(3) Any person to knowingly affix to any dog any false or improper
identification tag;
(4) Any owner or custodian of any dog to fail to confine, restrain or
present such dog for any lawful purpose required pursuant to this
article and/or Article 7 of the New York State Agriculture and
Markets Law;
(5) Any person to furnish any false or misleading information on any
form required to be filed with the City of Oneida pursuant to this
article and/or Article 7 of the New York State Agriculture and
Markets Law;
(6) The owner or custodian of any dog to fail to exercise due diligence
in handling his or her dog if the handling results in harm to another
dog that is a guide, hearing or service dog;
(7) The owner of a dog to fail to notify the City Clerk of any change of
ownership or owner's address as required by this article.
§ 17-22 ONEIDA CODE § 17-23
C:108
B. It shall be the duty of the Dog Control Officer of the City of Oneida, with
the assistance of the City Attorney, to prosecute an action or proceeding
against any person who has committed within the City of Oneida any
violation of this article and/or Article 7 of the New York State
Agriculture and Markets Law. The Dog Control Officer may elect either
to prosecute such action as a violation under the penal law or as a civil
action to recover a civil penalty. A violation of this section shall be
punishable, subject to such an election, by a fine or penalty of not less
than $25, and not more than $250, except that
(1) Where the person was found to have violated this section and/or
Article 7 of the New York State Agriculture and Markets Law within
the preceding five years, the fine or penalty may be not less than
$50; and
(2) Where the person was found to have committed two or more such
violations within the preceding five years, the subsequent violation
shall be punishable by a fine or penalty of not less than $100 or
imprisonment for not more than 15 days, or both.
C. A defendant charged with a violation of any provision of this article may
plead guilty to the charge in open court. He may also submit to the
magistrate having jurisdiction, in person, by duly authorized agent, or
by mail, a statement:
(1) That he waives arraignment in open court and the aid of counsel;
(2) That he pleads guilty to the offense charged;
(3) That he elects and requests that the charge be disposed of and the
fine or penalty fixed by the court;
(4) Reciting any explanation that he desires to make concerning the
offense charged; and
(5) That he makes all statements under penalty of perjury. Thereupon
the magistrate may proceed as though the defendant had been
convicted upon a plea of guilty in open court; provided, however,
that any imposition of fine or penalty hereunder shall be deemed
tentative until such fine or penalty shall have been paid and
discharged in full. If, upon receipt of the aforesaid statement, the
magistrate shall deny the same, he shall thereupon notify the
defendant of this fact, and that he is required to appear before the
said magistrate at a stated time and place to answer the charge
which shall thereafter be disposed of pursuant to the applicable
provisions of law.
D. Each day that a person is in violation of any provision of this article
shall constitute a separate offense, with each such offense being subject
to the fines and penalties set forth herein.
§ 17-23 CHARTER § 17-23
C:109

ARTICLE III
Commercial Animal Establishments
§ 17-24. Rules and regulations.
The City Clerk shall promulgate regulations for the issuance of permits
and shall include requirements for humane care of all animals and for
compliance with the provisions of this chapter and other applicable laws.
Such regulations may be amended from time to time as deemed desirable
for public health and welfare and for the protection of animals.
§ 17-25. Permit required.
No person shall operate a commercial animal establishment without first
obtaining a permit in compliance with this article. Every facility regulated
by this article shall be considered a separate enterprise and require an
individual permit.
§ 17-26. Denial; reapplication fee.
If the applicant has withheld or falsified any information on the application
for a permit for a commercial animal establishment, the City Clerk shall
refuse to issue the permit. No person who has been convicted of cruelty
to animals shall be issued a permit to operate a commercial animal
establishment. Any person denied such a permit may not reapply for a
period of 30 days. Each reapplication shall be accompanied by a $10 fee.
§ 17-27. Term; renewal application.
The commercial animal establishment permit period shall begin with the
first of the year and run one year. Renewal applications for permits shall
be made 30 days prior to and up to 60 days after, the first of the year.
Application for permit to establish a new commercial animal establishment
may be made at any time.
§ 17-28. Fees.
A. Annual commercial animal establishment permits shall be issued upon
payment of the applicable fee that shall be established by resolution of
the Common Council. Such fees may thereafter be amended from time
to time by like resolution. [Amended 11-20-2012 by Ord. No. 12-10]
B. No fee shall be required of any veterinary hospital, animal shelter or
government-operated zoological park.
C. Any person who has a change in the category under which a permit was
issued shall be subject to reclassification and appropriate adjustment of
the permit fee shall be made.
§ 17-24 CHARTER § 17-29
C:111
§ 17-29. Transfer of permit; fee.
If there is a change in ownership of a commercial animal establishment,
the new owner may have the current permit transferred to his name upon
payment of a transfer fee of $10.
§ 17-30. Revocation.
A. After a hearing affording due process, the Mayor may revoke any
permit for a commercial animal establishment if the person holding the
permit refuses to comply with this chapter, the regulations promulgated
by the Clerk or any law governing the protection and keeping of
animals.
B. Any person whose permit is revoked shall, within 10 days thereafter,
humanely dispose of all animals owned, kept or harbored by such
person, and no part of the permit fee shall be refunded.
C. A person whose permit has been revoked may appeal such decision to
the Common Council by requesting a hearing before the Council. Such
requests shall be made to the City Clerk within 10 days after receipt of
notice of the action of the Mayor. The Council shall then hear and
decide the matter within a reasonable time.
D. It shall be a condition of the issuance of any permit that the City Clerk
shall be permitted to inspect all animals and the premises where
animals are kept at any time and shall, if permission for such inspection
is refused, revoke the permit of the refusing owner.
§ 17-29 ONEIDA CODE § 17-30
C:112
Chapter 21
APPEARANCE TICKETS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Animals — See Ch. 17.
Building construction — See Ch. 34.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 61.
Health and sanitation — See Ch. 73.
Housing standards — See Ch. 77.
Solid waste — See Ch. 147.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 155.
Zoning — See Ch. 190.
§ 21-1. Appearance tickets to enforce ordinances. [Amended
4-3-2007 by L.L. No. 2-2007]
The officer charged by ordinance or other provision of law with enforcement
of the provisions of the City of Oneida health and sanitation, solid waste
and recycling, subdivision regulations and zoning regulations ordinances
is hereby authorized to issue an appearance ticket for violation of any of
the provisions of such ordinances or any lawful orders or directions issued
pursuant thereto, after providing any required notice and period of time
for correction or compliance. The appearance ticket shall be substantially
in the form set forth at § 17-15C of the Code of Ordinances of the City of
Oneida but shall refer by its terms to violation of the appropriate section of
the Code. The minimum amount of a security required to be submitted upon
a plea of not guilty by mail shall be stated to be $100 therein, as may be
modified by future ordinance.
Chapter 26
BICYCLES AND SKATEBOARDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 180.
§ 26-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following words shall have the following
meanings.
BICYCLE — Every two- or three-wheeled device upon which a person or
persons may ride, propelled by human power through a belt, chain or gears
with such wheels in tandem or tricycle, except that it shall not include
such a device having solid tires and intended for use only on a sidewalk by
preteenage children.
§ 17-30 CHARTER § 26-1
C:113
COMMISSIONER — The Commissioner of Public Safety of the city.
DRIVER — Every person who operates or drives or is in actual physical
control of the bicycle, whether or not such bicycle is actually in motion.
OWNER — The owner shall be the person having title to the
bicycle.[Amended 6-17-2014 by Ord. No. 14-01]
§ 26-2. Applicability of other legislation.
Every person driving a bicycle upon a highway of the city shall be granted
all of the rights and shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to
the driver of a vehicle by the ordinances of the city relating to traffic
or the Vehicle and Traffic Law, except as to special regulations in this
chapter and except as to those provisions which by their nature can have no
application.19
§ 26-3. Driving on sidewalks. [Amended 6-17-2014 by Ord. No.
14-01]
No bicycle shall be driven upon the sidewalks of the city by any person over
the age of 10 years.
§ 26-4. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 6-17-2014 by Ord. No.
14-01]
A. Any person driving a bicycle in violation of this chapter shall be guilty of
a traffic infraction and subject to the penalties provided for in
Subsection B. Any owner who shall knowingly permit or authorize a
bicycle to be driven in violation of this chapter shall be guilty of a traffic
infraction and subject to the penalties provided for in Subsection B. Any
parent of any child and any guardian of any ward under the age of 16
years who shall knowingly suffer or permit or authorize any such child
or ward to violate any provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a
traffic infraction and subject to the penlties provided for in Subsection
B.
B. Every person convicted of a traffic infraction for a violation of any
provisions of this chapter shall be punished as follows:
(1) For a first conviction, by a fine of not more than $10 or by
imprisonment for not more than five days, or by both such fine and
imprisonment.
(2) For a second conviction within 18 months thereafter, by a fine of
not more than $25 or by imprisonment for not more than 10 days,
or by both such fine and imprisonment.
19.Editor’s Note: Former § 26-3, Registration, which immediately followed this section, was
repealed 6-17-2014 by Ord. No. 14-01, which ordinance redesignated former §§ 26-4
through 26-6 as §§ 26-3 through 26-5, respectively.
§ 26-1 ONEIDA CODE § 26-4
C:114
§ 26-5. Skateboarding prohibited; penalties for offenses.
Chapter 30
BINGO AND GAMES OF CHANCE
§ 30-1. Bingo.
(3) For a third or subsequent conviction within 18 months after the
first conviction, by a fine of not more than $50 or by imprisonment
for not more than 15 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment.
A. Except in areas as may be designated by authority of the Common
Council, it shall be unlawful for any person to use, operate or ride upon
a skateboard within the limits of any public street or upon any sidewalk
or other property of the city.
B. Every person convicted of a violation of this section shall be punished
pursuant to the provisions of § 26-4B of this chapter. The offender may
be further required to pay restitution for any loss or damage caused
thereby. [Amended 6-17-2014 by Ord. No. 14-01]
C. Any parent of any child and any guardian of any ward under the age of
16 years who shall knowingly suffer or permit or authorize any such
child or ward to violate any provisions of this section shall be guilty of a
traffic infraction and subject to the penalties, including restitution,
provided for in Subsection B.
A. No person other than a licensee under the provisions of Article 14-H of
the General Municipal Law shall conduct such game or shall lease or
otherwise make available for conducting bingo a hall or other premises
for any consideration whatsoever, direct or indirect.
B. No bingo games shall be held, operated or conducted on or within any
leased premises if rental under such lease is to be paid, wholly or partly,
on the basis of a percentage of the receipts or net profits derived from
the operation of such game. No authorized organization licensed under
the provisions of Article 14-H of the General Municipal Law shall
purchase or receive any supplies or equipment specifically designed or
adapted for use in the conduct of bingo games from other than a
supplier licensed under the Bingo Control Law20 or from another
authorized organization.
C. The entire net proceeds of any game of bingo and of any rental shall be
exclusively devoted to the lawful purposes of the organization
permitted to conduct the same.
20.Editor's Note: See Executive Law § 430 et seq.
§ 26-4 CHARTER § 30-1
C:115
§ 30-2. Sundays.
It shall be lawful to conduct games of bingo on the first day of the week,
commonly known and designated as "Sunday," by persons or corporations
otherwise authorized by law to conduct such games, and provided further
that all such games are conducted pursuant to law.
§ 30-3. Games of chance on Sunday.
It shall be lawful for any authorized organization, upon obtaining a license
therefor pursuant to law, to conduct games of chance within the city, subject
to the provisions of ordinance, the provisions of Article 9-A of the General
Municipal Law and the provisions, rules and regulations of the New York
State Racing and Wagering Board.
Chapter 33
BUILDING CODE ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Abandoned, unsafe and collapsed
buildings — See Ch. 34.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 61.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 64.
Housing standards — See Ch. 77.
Mobile homes and mobile home parks — See
Ch. 92.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 155.
Zoning — See Ch. 190.
D. No prize shall exceed the sum or value of $1,000 in any single game of
bingo. No series of prizes on any one bingo occasion shall aggregate
more than $3,000.21
E. No person except a bona fide member of any such organization shall
participate in the management or operation of such game. No person
shall receive any remuneration for participating in the management or
operation of any game of bingo.
F. The unauthorized conduct of a bingo game and any willful violation of
any provision of this section shall constitute a misdemeanor.
21.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions).
§ 30-1 ONEIDA CODE § 30-3
C:116
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 33-1. Purpose.
This chapter provides for the administration and enforcement of the New
York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code (the Uniform Code)
and the State Energy Conservation Construction Code (the Energy Code) in
this City. This chapter is adopted pursuant to § 10 of the Municipal Home
Rule Law. Except as otherwise provided in the Uniform Code, other state
law, or other section of this chapter, all buildings, structures, and premises,
regardless of use or occupancy, are subject to the provisions of this chapter.
§ 33-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BUILDING CODE — The Building Code of New York State, as currently in
effect and as hereafter amended from time to time.
BUILDING PERMIT — A permit issued pursuant to § 33-4 of this chapter.
The term "building permit" shall also include a building permit which is
renewed, amended or extended pursuant to any provision of this chapter.
CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY — A certificate issued pursuant to § 33-7B
of this chapter.
CITY — The City of Oneida, New York.
CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — The Code Enforcement Officer
appointed pursuant to § 33-3B of this chapter.
CODE ENFORCEMENT PERSONNEL — The Code Enforcement Officer and
all inspectors.
COMPLIANCE ORDER — An order issued by the Code Enforcement Officer
or Fire Marshal pursuant to § 33-16A of this chapter.
ENERGY CODE — The Energy Conservation Construction Code of New York
State, and as currently in effect and as hereafter amended from time to
time.
FIRE CODE — The Fire Code of New York State, as currently in effect and
as hereafter amended from time to time.
FIRE MARSHAL — The Fire Marshal appointed pursuant to § 33-8B of this
chapter.
FIRE MARSHAL'S OFFICE — The Fire Marshal and/or his designee's office.
FUEL GAS CODE — The Fuel Gas Code of New York State, as currently in
effect and as hereafter amended from time to time.
INSPECTOR — An inspector appointed pursuant to § 33-3D of this chapter.
§ 33-1 CHARTER § 33-2
C:117
MECHANICAL CODE — The Mechanical Code of New York State, as
currently in effect and as hereafter amended from time to time.
OPERATING PERMIT — A permit issued pursuant to § 33-11 of this chapter.
The term "operating permit" shall also include an operating permit which is
renewed, amended or extended pursuant to any provision of this chapter.
PERMIT HOLDER — The person to whom a building permit has been issued.
PERSON — An individual, corporation, limited-liability company,
partnership, limited partnership, business trust, estate, trust, association,
or any other legal or commercial entity of any kind or description.
PLUMBING CODE — The Plumbing Code of New York State, as currently in
effect and as hereafter amended from time to time.
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE — The Property Maintenance Code of
New York State, as currently in effect and as hereafter amended from time
to time.
RESIDENTIAL CODE — The Residential Code of New York State, as
currently in effect and as hereafter amended from time to time.
STOP-WORK ORDER — An order issued pursuant to § 33-6 of this chapter.
TEMPORARY CERTIFICATE — A certificate issued pursuant to § 33-7D of
this chapter.
UNIFORM CODE — The New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and
Building Code, as currently in effect and as hereafter amended from time to
time.
§ 33-2 ONEIDA CODE § 33-2
C:118
ARTICLE II
Building Code, Energy Code, Fuel Gas Code, Mechanical Code,
Plumbing Code and Residential Code
§ 33-3. Code Enforcement Officer; inspectors.
A. The office of Code Enforcement Officer is hereby created. The Code
Enforcement Officer shall administer and enforce all the provisions of
the Building Code, Energy Code, Fuel Gas Code, Mechanical Code,
Plumbing Code, Residential Code, and Article II of this chapter. The
Code Enforcement Officer shall have the following powers and duties:
(1) To receive, review, and approve or disapprove applications for
building permits, certificates of occupancy, certificates of
compliance, temporary certificates, and the plans, specifications
and construction documents submitted with such applications;
(2) Upon approval of such applications, to issue building permits,
certificates of occupancy, certificates of compliance and temporary
certificates, and to include in building permits, certificates of
occupancy, certificates of compliance and temporary certificates
such terms and conditions as the Code Enforcement Officer may
determine to be appropriate;
(3) To conduct construction inspections, inspections to be made prior
to the issuance of certificates of occupancy, certificates of
compliance and temporary certificates, inspections incidental to
the investigation of complaints, and all other inspections required
or permitted under Article II of this chapter;
(4) To issue stop-work orders;
(5) To review and investigate complaints;
(6) To issue orders pursuant to § 33-16A, Compliance orders, of this
chapter;
(7) To maintain records;
(8) To collect fees as set by the Common Council of the City;
(9) To pursue administrative enforcement actions and proceedings;
(10) In consultation with the City Attorney, to pursue such legal actions
and proceedings as may be necessary to enforce the Building Code,
Energy Code, Fuel Gas Code, Mechanical Code, Plumbing Code,
Residential Code, and this chapter, or to abate or correct conditions
not in compliance with the Building Code, Energy Code, Fuel Gas
Code, Mechanical Code, Plumbing Code, Residential Code, or this
chapter; and
(11) To exercise all other powers and fulfill all other duties conferred
upon the Code Enforcement Officer by this chapter.
§ 33-3 CHARTER § 33-3
C:119
§ 33-4. Building permits.
B. The Code Enforcement Officer shall be appointed by the Mayor of this
City. The Code Enforcement Officer shall possess background
experience related to building construction and shall, within the time
prescribed by law, obtain such basic training, in-service training,
advanced in-service training and other training as the State of New
York shall require for code enforcement personnel and the regulations
promulgated thereunder.
C. In the event that the Code Enforcement Officer is unable to serve as
such for any reason, an individual shall be appointed by the Mayor of
this City to serve as Acting Code Enforcement Officer. The Acting Code
Enforcement Officer shall, during the term of his or her appointment,
exercise all powers and fulfill all duties conferred upon the Code
Enforcement Officer by this chapter.
D. One or more inspectors may be appointed by the Mayor of this City to
act under the supervision and direction of the Code Enforcement
Officer and to assist the Code Enforcement Officer in the exercise of the
powers and fulfillment of the duties conferred upon the Code
Enforcement Officer by this chapter. Each inspector shall, within the
time prescribed by law, obtain such basic training, in-service training,
advanced in-service training and other training as the State of New
York shall require for code enforcement personnel and the regulations
promulgated thereunder.
E. The compensation for the Code Enforcement Officer and inspectors
shall be fixed from time to time by the Common Council of this City.
A. Building permits required. Except as otherwise provided in Subsection
B of this section, a building permit shall be required for any work which
must conform to the Building Code, Energy Code, Fuel Gas Code,
Mechanical Code, Plumbing Code and Residential Code, including, but
not limited to, the construction, enlargement, alteration, improvement,
removal, relocation or demolition of any building or structure or any
portion thereof, and the installation of a solid-fuel-burning heating
appliance, chimney or flue in all new construction The Fire Marshal's
Office shall be notified to schedule a solid fuel device permit inspection
prior to issuance of certificate of occupancy. No person shall commence
any work for which a building permit is required without first having
obtained a building permit from the Code Enforcement Officer.
B. Exemptions. No building permit shall be required for work in any of the
following categories:
(1) Construction or installation of one-story detached structures
associated with one- or two-family dwellings or multiple singlefamily
dwellings (townhouses) which are used for tool and storage
sheds, playhouses or similar uses, provided the floor area is not
§ 33-3 ONEIDA CODE § 33-4
C:120
greater than 120 square feet (11 square meters); [Amended
2-6-2018 by Ord. No. 18-01]
(2) Installation of swings and other playground equipment associated
with a one- or two-family dwelling or multiple single-family
dwellings (townhouses);
(3) Installation of swimming pools associated with a one- or two-family
dwelling or multiple single-family dwellings (townhouses) where
such pools are designed for a water depth of less than 24 inches
and are installed entirely above ground;
(4) Installation of fences which are not part of an enclosure
surrounding a swimming pool;
(5) Construction of retaining walls, unless such walls support a
surcharge or impound Class I, II or IIIA liquids;
(6) Construction of temporary motion-picture, television and theater
stage sets and scenery;
(7) Installation of window awnings supported by an exterior wall of a
one- or two-family dwelling or multiple single-family dwellings
(townhouses);
(8) Installation of partitions or movable cases less than five feet nine
inches in height;
(9) Painting, wallpapering, tiling, carpeting, or other similar finish
work;
(10) Installation of listed portable electrical, plumbing, heating,
ventilation or cooling equipment or appliances;
(11) Replacement of any equipment, provided the replacement does not
alter the equipment's listing or render it inconsistent with the
equipment's original specifications; or
(12) Repairs, provided that such repairs do not involve:
(a) The removal or cutting away of a load-bearing wall, partition,
or portion thereof, or of any structural beam or load-bearing
component;
(b) The removal or change of any required means of egress; or the
rearrangement of parts of a structure in a manner which
affects egress;
(c) The enlargement, alteration, replacement or relocation of any
building system; or
(d) The removal from service of all or part of a fire protection
system for any period of time.
§ 33-4 CHARTER § 33-4
C:121
C. Exemption not deemed authorization to perform noncompliant work.
The exemption from the requirement to obtain a building permit for
work in any category set forth in Subsection B of this section shall not
be deemed an authorization for work to be performed in violation of the
Building Code, Energy Code, Fuel Gas Code, Mechanical Code,
Plumbing Code or the Residential Code.
D. Applications for building permits. Applications for a building permit
shall be made in writing on a form provided by or otherwise acceptable
to the Code Enforcement Officer. The application shall be signed by the
owner of the property where the work is to be performed or by an
authorized agent of the owner. The application shall include such
information as the Code Enforcement Officer deems sufficient to permit
a determination by the Code Enforcement Officer that the intended
work complies with all applicable requirements of the Building Code,
Energy Code, Fuel Gas Code, Mechanical Code, Plumbing Code and/or
Residential Code. The application shall include or be accompanied by
the following information and documentation:
(1) A description of the proposed work;
(2) The Tax Map number and the street address of the premises where
the work is to be performed;
(3) The occupancy classification of any affected building or structure;
(4) Where applicable, a statement of special inspections prepared in
accordance with the provisions of the Building Code, Energy Code,
Fuel Gas Code, Mechanical Code, Plumbing Code and/or
Residential Code; and
(5) At least two sets of construction documents (drawings and/or
specifications) which:
(a) Define the scope of the proposed work;
(b) Are prepared by a New York State registered architect or
licensed professional engineer where so required by the
Education Law;
(c) Indicate with sufficient clarity and detail the nature and extent
of the work proposed;
(d) Substantiate that the proposed work will comply with the
Building Code, Energy Code, Fuel Gas Code, Mechanical Code,
Plumbing Code and/or Residential Code; and
(e) Where applicable, include a site plan that shows any existing
and proposed buildings and structures on the site, the location
of any existing or proposed well or septic system, the location
of the intended work, and the distances between the buildings
and structures and the lot lines.
§ 33-4 ONEIDA CODE § 33-4
C:122
E. Construction documents. Construction documents will not be accepted
as part of an application for a building permit unless they satisfy the
requirements set forth in Subsection D(5) of this section. Construction
documents which are accepted as part of the application for a building
permit shall be marked as accepted by the Code Enforcement Officer in
writing or by stamp. One set of the accepted construction documents
shall be retained by the Code Enforcement Officer, and one set of the
accepted construction documents shall be returned to the applicant to
be kept at the work site so as to be available for use by the code
enforcement personnel. However, the return of a set of accepted
construction documents to the applicant shall not be construed as
authorization to commence work, nor as an indication that a building
permit will be issued. Work shall not be commenced until and unless a
building permit is issued.
F. Issuance of building permits. An application for a building permit shall
be examined to ascertain whether the proposed work is in compliance
with the applicable requirements of the Building Code, Energy Code,
Fuel Gas Code, Mechanical Code, Plumbing Code and Residential Code.
The Code Enforcement Officer shall issue a building permit if the
proposed work is in compliance with the applicable requirements of the
Building Code, Energy Code, Fuel Gas Code, Mechanical Code,
Plumbing Code and/or Residential Code.
G. Building permits to be displayed. Building permits shall be visibly
displayed at the work site and shall remain visible until the authorized
work has been completed.
H. Work to be performed in accordance with construction documents. All
work shall be performed in accordance with the construction
documents which were submitted with and accepted as part of the
application for the building permit. The building permit shall contain
such a directive. The permit holder shall immediately notify the Code
Enforcement Officer of any change occurring during the course of the
work. The building permit shall contain such a directive. If the Code
Enforcement Officer determines that such change warrants a new or
amended building permit, such change shall not be made until and
unless a new or amended building permit reflecting such change is
issued.
I. Time limits. Building permits shall become invalid unless the authorized
work is commenced within six months following the date of issuance.
Building permits shall expire six months after the date of issuance. A
building permit which has become invalid or which has expired
pursuant to this subsection may be renewed upon application by the
permit holder, payment of the applicable fee, and approval of the
application by the Code Enforcement Officer.
J. Revocation or suspension of building permits. If the Code Enforcement
Officer determines that a building permit was issued in error because of
incorrect, inaccurate or incomplete information, or that the work for
§ 33-4 CHARTER § 33-4
C:123
§ 33-5. Construction inspections.
which a building permit was issued violates the Building Code, Energy
Code, Fuel Gas Code, Mechanical Code, Plumbing Code or Residential
Code, the Code Enforcement Officer shall revoke the building permit
or suspend the building permit until such time as the permit holder
demonstrates that all work then completed is in compliance with all
applicable provisions of the Building Code, Energy Code, Fuel Gas
Code, Mechanical Code, Plumbing Code and/or Residential Code and
all work then proposed to be performed shall be in compliance with
all applicable provisions of the Building Code, Energy Code, Fuel Gas
Code, Mechanical Code, Plumbing Code and/or Residential Code.
K. Fee. The fee specified in or determined in accordance with the
provisions set forth in § 33-17, Fees, of this chapter must be paid at the
time of submission of an application for a building permit, for an
amended building permit, or for renewal of a building permit.
A. Work to remain accessible and exposed. Work shall remain accessible
and exposed until inspected and accepted by the Code Enforcement
Officer or by an inspector authorized by the Code Enforcement Officer.
The permit holder shall notify the Code Enforcement Officer when any
element of work described in Subsection B of this section is ready for
inspection.
B. Elements of work to be inspected. The following elements of the
construction process shall be inspected, where applicable:
(1) Work site prior to the issuance of a building permit;
(2) Footing and foundation;
(3) Preparation for concrete slab;
(4) Framing;
(5) Building systems, including underground and rough-in;
(6) Fire-resistant construction;
(7) Fire-resistant penetrations;
(8) Solid-fuel-burning heating appliances, chimneys, flues or gas vents;
(9) Energy Code compliance; and
(10) A final inspection after all work authorized by the building permit
has been completed.
C. Inspection results. After inspection, the work or a portion thereof shall
be noted as satisfactory as completed, or the permit holder shall be
notified as to where the work fails to comply with the Building Code,
Energy Code, Fuel Gas Code, Mechanical Code, Plumbing Code or
Residential Code. Work not in compliance with any applicable provision
§ 33-4 ONEIDA CODE § 33-5
C:124
§ 33-6. Stop-work orders.
of the Building Code, Energy Code, Fuel Gas Code, Mechanical Code,
Plumbing Code or Residential Code, shall remain exposed until such
work shall have been brought into compliance with all applicable
provisions of the Building Code, Energy Code, Fuel Gas Code,
Mechanical Code, Plumbing Code and/or Residential Code, reinspected,
and found satisfactory as completed.
D. Fee. The fee specified in or determined in accordance with the
provisions set forth in § 33-17, Fees, of this chapter must be paid prior
to or at the time of each inspection performed pursuant to this section.
A. Authority to issue. The Code Enforcement Officer is authorized to issue
stop-work orders pursuant to this section. The Code Enforcement
Officer shall issue a stop-work order to halt:
(1) Any work that is determined by the Code Enforcement Officer to be
contrary to any applicable provision of the Building Code, Energy
Code, Fuel Gas Code, Mechanical Code, Plumbing Code or
Residential Code, without regard to whether such work is or is not
work for which a building permit is required, and without regard to
whether a building permit has or has not been issued for such
work; or
(2) Any work that is being conducted in a dangerous or unsafe manner
in the opinion of the Code Enforcement Officer, without regard to
whether such work is or is not work for which a building permit is
required, and without regard to whether a building permit has or
has not been issued for such work; or
(3) Any work for which a building permit is required which is being
performed without the required building permit, or under a
building permit that has become invalid, has expired, or has been
suspended or revoked.
B. Content of stop-work orders. Stop-work orders shall be in writing, be
dated and signed by the Code Enforcement Officer, state the reason or
reasons for issuance, and, if applicable, state the conditions which must
be satisfied before work will be permitted to resume.
C. Service of stop-work orders. The Code Enforcement Officer shall cause
the stop-work order, or a copy thereof, to be served on the owner of the
affected property (and, if the owner is not the permit holder, on the
permit holder) personally or by certified mail. The Code Enforcement
Officer shall be permitted, but not required, to cause the stop-work
order, or a copy thereof, to be served on any builder, architect, tenant,
contractor, subcontractor, construction superintendent, or their agents,
or any other person taking part or assisting in work affected by the
stop-work order, personally or by certified mail; provided, however, that
§ 33-5 CHARTER § 33-6
C:125
§ 33-7. Certificates of occupancy.
failure to serve any person mentioned in this sentence shall not affect
the efficacy of the stop-work order.
D. Effect of stop-work order. Upon the issuance of a stop-work order, the
owner of the affected property, the permit holder and any other person
performing, taking part in or assisting in the work shall immediately
cease all work which is the subject of the stop-work order.
E. Remedy not exclusive. The issuance of a stop-work order shall not be
the exclusive remedy available to address any event described in
Subsection A of this section, and the authority to issue a stop-work
order shall be in addition to, and not in substitution for or limitation of,
the right and authority to pursue any other remedy or impose any other
penalty under § 33-16, Enforcement; penalties for offenses, of this
chapter or under any other applicable local law or state law. Any such
other remedy or penalty may be pursued at any time, whether prior to,
at the time of, or after the issuance of a stop-work order.
A. Certificates of occupancy required. A certificate of occupancy shall be
required for any work which is the subject of a building permit and for
all structures, buildings, or portions thereof which are converted from
one use or occupancy classification or subclassification to another.
Permission to use or occupy a building or structure, or portion thereof,
for which a building permit was previously issued shall be granted only
by issuance of a certificate of occupancy.
B. Issuance of certificates of occupancy. The Code Enforcement Officer
shall issue a certificate of occupancy if the work which was the subject
of the building permit was completed in accordance with all applicable
provisions of the Building Code, Energy Code, Fuel Gas Code,
Mechanical Code, Plumbing Code and/or Residential Code and, if
applicable, the structure, building or portion thereof that was
converted from one use or occupancy classification or subclassification
to another complies with all applicable provisions of the Building Code,
Energy Code, Fuel Gas Code, Mechanical Code, Plumbing Code and/or
Residential Code. The Code Enforcement Officer or an inspector
authorized by the Code Enforcement Officer shall inspect the building,
structure or work prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy. In
addition, where applicable, the following documents, prepared in
accordance with the provisions of the Building Code, Energy Code, Fuel
Gas Code, Mechanical Code, Plumbing Code and/or Residential Code by
such person or persons as may be designated by or otherwise
acceptable to the Code Enforcement Officer, at the expense of the
applicant for the certificate of occupancy, shall be provided to the Code
Enforcement Officer prior to the issuance of the certificate of
occupancy:
(1) A written statement of structural observations and/or a final report
of special inspections; and
§ 33-6 ONEIDA CODE § 33-7
C:126
(2) Flood hazard certifications.
C. Contents of certificates of occupancy. A certificate of occupancy shall
contain the following information:
(1) The building permit number, if any;
(2) The date of issuance of the building permit, if any;
(3) The name, address and Tax Map number of the property;
(4) If the certificate of occupancy is not applicable to an entire
structure, a description of that portion of the structure for which
the certificate of occupancy is issued;
(5) The use and occupancy classification of the structure;
(6) The type of construction of the structure;
(7) The assembly occupant load of the structure, if any;
(8) If an automatic sprinkler system is provided, a notation as to
whether the sprinkler system is required;
(9) Any special conditions imposed in connection with the issuance of
the building permit; and
(10) The signature of the Code Enforcement Officer issuing the
certificate of occupancy and the date of issuance.
D. Temporary certificate. The Code Enforcement Officer shall be
permitted to issue a temporary certificate allowing the temporary
occupancy of a building or structure, or a portion thereof, prior to
completion of the work which is the subject of a building permit.
However, in no event shall the Code Enforcement Officer issue a
temporary certificate unless the Code Enforcement Officer determines
that the building or structure, or the portion thereof covered by the
temporary certificate, may be occupied safely, that any fire- and smokedetecting
or fire protection equipment which has been installed is
operational, and that all required means of egress from the building or
structure have been provided. The Code Enforcement Officer may
include in a temporary certificate such terms and conditions deemed
necessary or appropriate to ensure safety or to further the purposes
and intent of the Building Code, Energy Code, Fuel Gas Code,
Mechanical Code, Plumbing Code and/or Residential Code. A temporary
certificate shall be effective for a period of time, not to exceed six
months, which shall be determined by the Code Enforcement Officer
and specified in the temporary certificate. During the specified period
of effectiveness of the temporary certificate, the permit holder shall
undertake to bring the building or structure into full compliance with
all applicable provisions of the Building Code, Energy Code, Fuel Gas
Code, Mechanical Code, Plumbing Code and/or Residential Code.
§ 33-7 CHARTER § 33-7
C:127
E. Revocation or suspension of certificates. If the Code Enforcement
Officer determines that a certificate of occupancy or a temporary
certificate was issued in error because of incorrect, inaccurate or
incomplete information, and if the relevant deficiencies are not
corrected to the satisfaction of the Code Enforcement Officer within
such period of time as shall be specified by the Code Enforcement
Officer, the Code Enforcement Officer shall revoke or suspend such
certificate.
F. Fee. The fee specified in or determined in accordance with the
provisions set forth in § 33-17, Fees, of this chapter must be paid at the
time of submission of an application for a certificate of occupancy or a
temporary certificate.
§ 33-7 ONEIDA CODE § 33-7
C:128
ARTICLE III
Operating Permits, Firesafety and Property Maintenance
§ 33-8. Fire Marshal and inspectors.
A. The office of Fire Marshal is hereby created. The Fire Marshal shall
administer and enforce all the provisions of the Fire Code and the
Property Maintenance Code, and Article III of this chapter. The Fire
Marshal shall have the following powers and duties:
(1) To receive, review, and approve or disapprove applications for
certificates of compliance and operating permits, and the plans,
specifications and construction documents submitted with such
applications;
(2) Upon approval of such applications, to issue certificates of
compliance and operating permits, and to include in the certificates
of compliance and operating permits such terms and conditions as
the Fire Marshal may determine to be appropriate;
(3) To conduct inspections to be made prior to the issuance of
certificates of compliance and operating permits, firesafety and
property maintenance inspections, inspections incidental to the
investigation of complaints, and all other inspections required or
permitted under Article III of this chapter;
(4) To issue stop-work orders;
(5) To review and investigate complaints;
(6) To issue orders pursuant to § 33-16A of this chapter;
(7) To maintain records;
(8) To collect fees as set by the Common Council of the City;
(9) To pursue administrative enforcement actions and proceedings;
(10) In consultation with the City Attorney, to pursue such legal actions
and proceedings as may be necessary to enforce the Fire Code, the
Property Maintenance Code and this chapter, or to abate or correct
conditions not in compliance with the Fire Code, the Property
Maintenance Code and this chapter; and
(11) To exercise all other powers and fulfill all other duties conferred
upon the Fire Marshal by this chapter.
B. The Fire Marshal shall be appointed by the Fire Chief and approved by
the Commissioner of Public Safety. The Fire Marshal shall possess
background experience related to fire prevention and shall, within the
time prescribed by law, obtain such basic training, in-service training,
advanced in-service training and other training as the State of New
York shall require for code enforcement personnel, and the Fire
§ 33-8 CHARTER § 33-8
C:129
§ 33-9. Notification regarding fire or explosion.
The chief of any fire department providing fire-fighting services for a
property within this City shall promptly notify the Code Enforcement Officer
and the Fire Marshal of any fire or explosion involving any structural
damage, fuel-burning appliance, chimney or gas vent.
§ 33-10. Unsafe buildings and structures.
Unsafe structures and equipment in this City shall be identified and
addressed in accordance with the procedures established by Chapter 34
and Chapter 61 of the City of Oneida Code of Ordinances, as now in effect
or as hereafter amended from time to time.
§ 33-11. Operating permits.
Marshal shall obtain certification from the State Fire Administrator
pursuant to the Executive Law and the regulations promulgated
thereunder.
C. An Assistant Fire Marshal shall be appointed by the Fire Chief and
approved by the Commissioner of Public Safety. In the event that the
Fire Marshal is unable to serve as such for any reason, the Assistant
Fire Marshal shall serve as Acting Fire Marshal. The Acting Fire
Marshal shall, during the term of his or her appointment, exercise all
powers and fulfill all duties conferred upon the Fire Marshal by this
chapter.
D. One or more inspectors may be appointed by the Fire Chief to act under
the supervision and direction of the Fire Marshal and to assist the Fire
Marshal in the exercise of the powers and fulfillment of the duties
conferred upon the Fire Marshal by this chapter. Each inspector shall,
within the time prescribed by law, obtain such basic training, in-service
training, advanced in-service training and other training as the State of
New York shall require for code enforcement personnel, and each
Inspector shall obtain certification from the State Fire Administrator
pursuant to the Executive Law and the regulations promulgated
thereunder.
E. The compensation for the Fire Marshal and Inspectors shall be fixed
from time to time by the Common Council of this City.
A. Operating permits required.
(1) Operating permits shall be required for conducting the activities or
using the categories of buildings listed below:
(a) Manufacturing, storing or handling hazardous materials in
quantities exceeding those listed in Table 2703.1.1(1),
2703.1.1(2), 2703.1.1(3) or 2703.1.1(4) in the publication
entitled "Fire Code of New York State" and incorporated by
reference in 19 NYCRR 1225.1;
§ 33-8 ONEIDA CODE § 33-11
C:130
(b) Hazardous processes and activities, including but not limited
to commercial and industrial operations which produce
combustible dust as a byproduct, fruit and crop ripening, and
waste handling;
(c) Use of pyrotechnic devices in assembly occupancies;
(d) Buildings containing one or more areas of public assembly with
an occupant load of 100 persons or more; and
(e) Buildings whose use or occupancy classification may pose a
substantial potential hazard to public safety, as determined by
resolution adopted by the Common Council of this City.
(2) Any person who proposes to undertake any activity or to operate
any type of building listed in this Subsection A shall be required to
obtain an operating permit prior to commencing such activity or
operation.
B. Applications for operating permits. An application for an operating
permit shall be in writing on a form provided by or otherwise
acceptable to the Fire Marshal. Such application shall include such
information as the Fire Marshal deems sufficient to permit a
determination by the Fire Marshal that quantities, materials, and
activities conform to the requirements of the Fire Code. If the Fire
Marshal determines that tests or reports are necessary to verify
conformance, such tests or reports shall be performed or provided by
such person or persons as may be designated by or otherwise
acceptable to the Fire Marshal at the expense of the applicant.
C. Inspections. The Fire Marshal or an inspector authorized by the Fire
Marshal shall inspect the subject premises prior to the issuance of an
operating permit.
D. Multiple activities. In any circumstance in which more than one activity
listed in Subsection A of this section is to be conducted at a location, the
Fire Marshal may require a separate operating permit for each such
activity, or the Fire Marshal may, in his or her discretion, issue a single
operating permit to apply to all such activities.
E. Duration of operating permits. Operating permits shall remain in effect
until reissued, renewed, revoked or suspended.
F. Revocation or suspension of operating permits. If the Fire Marshal
determines that any activity or building for which an operating permit
was issued does not comply with any applicable provision of the
Uniform Code, such operating permit shall be revoked or suspended.
G. Fee. The fee specified in or determined in accordance with the
provisions set forth in § 33-17, Fees, of this chapter must be paid at the
time of submission of an application for an operating permit, for an
§ 33-11 CHARTER § 33-11
C:131
§ 33-12. Firesafety and property maintenance inspections.
amended operating permit, or for reissue or renewal of an operating
permit.
A. Inspections required. Firesafety and property maintenance inspections
of buildings and structures shall be performed by the Fire Marshal or
an inspector designated by the Fire Marshal at the following intervals:
(1) Firesafety and property maintenance inspections of buildings or
structures which contain an area of public assembly shall be
performed at least once every 12 months.
(2) Firesafety and property maintenance inspections of buildings or
structures being occupied as dormitories shall be performed at
least once every 12 months.
(3) Firesafety and property maintenance inspections of all multiple
dwellings not included in Subsection A(1) or (2), and all
nonresidential buildings, structures, uses and occupancies not
included in Subsection A(1) or (2) shall be performed at least once
every 36 months.
B. Inspections permitted. In addition to the inspections required by
Subsection A of this section, a firesafety and property maintenance
inspection of any building, structure, use, or occupancy, or of any
dwelling unit, may also be performed by the Fire Marshal or an
inspector designated by the Fire Marshal at any time upon: the request
of the owner of the property to be inspected or an authorized agent of
such owner; receipt by the Fire Marshal of a written statement alleging
that conditions or activities failing to comply with the Fire Code or
Property Maintenance Code exist; or receipt by the Fire Marshal of any
other information, reasonably believed by the Fire Marshal to be
reliable, giving rise to reasonable cause to believe that conditions or
activities failing to comply with the Fire Code or Property Maintenance
Code exist; provided, however, that nothing in this subsection shall be
construed as permitting an inspection under any circumstances under
which a court order or warrant permitting such inspection is required,
unless such court order or warrant shall have been obtained.
C. OFPC inspections. Nothing in this section or in any other provision of
this chapter shall supersede, limit or impair the powers, duties and
responsibilities of the New York State Office of Fire Prevention and
Control ("OFPC") and the New York State Fire Administrator under
Executive Law § 156-e and Education Law § 807-b. Notwithstanding
any other provision of this section to the contrary:
(1) The Fire Marshal shall not perform firesafety and property
maintenance inspections of a building or structure which contains
an area of public assembly if OFPC performs firesafety and
§ 33-11 ONEIDA CODE § 33-12
C:132
property maintenance inspections of such building or structure at
least once every 12 months;
(2) The Fire Marshal shall not perform firesafety and property
maintenance inspections of a building or structure occupied as a
dormitory if OFPC performs firesafety and property maintenance
inspections of such building or structure at least once every 12
months;
(3) The Fire Marshal shall not perform firesafety and property
maintenance inspections of a multiple dwelling not included in
Subsection A(1) or (2) of this section if OFPC performs firesafety
and property maintenance inspections of such multiple dwelling at
intervals not exceeding the interval specified in Subsection A(3) of
this section; and
(4) The Fire Marshal shall not perform firesafety and property
maintenance inspections of a nonresidential building, structure,
use or occupancy not included in Subsection A(1) or (2) of this
section if OFPC performs firesafety and property maintenance
inspections of such nonresidential building, structure, use or
occupancy at intervals not exceeding the interval specified in
Subsection A(3) of this section.
D. Fee. The fee specified in or determined in accordance with the
provisions set forth in § 33-17, Fees, of this chapter must be paid prior
to or at the time each of inspection performed pursuant to this section.
This subsection shall not apply to inspections performed by OFPC.
§ 33-12 CHARTER § 33-12
C:133

ARTICLE IV
Complaints
§ 33-13. Complaints.
A. The Code Enforcement Officer shall review and investigate complaints
which allege or assert the existence of conditions or activities that fail
to comply with the Building Code, Energy Code, Fuel Gas Code,
Mechanical Code, Plumbing Code or Residential Code, this chapter or
any other local law, ordinance or regulation adopted for administration
and enforcement of the Building Code, Energy Code, Fuel Gas Code,
Mechanical Code, Plumbing Code or Residential Code.
B. The Fire Marshal shall review and investigate complaints which allege
or assert the existence of conditions or activities that fail to comply with
the Fire Code or the Property Maintenance Code, this chapter, or any
other local law, ordinance or regulation adopted for administration and
enforcement of the Uniform Code or the Energy Code.
C. The process for responding to a complaint shall include such of the
following steps as the Code Enforcement Officer or Fire Marshal may
deem to be appropriate:
(1) The compliant shall be in writing and signed by the individual(s)
making the compliant;
(2) Performing an inspection of the conditions and/or activities alleged
to be in violation, and documenting the results of such inspection;
(3) If a violation is found to exist, providing the owner of the affected
property and any other person who may be responsible for the
violation with notice of the violation and opportunity to abate,
correct or cure the violation, or otherwise proceeding in the
manner described in § 33-16, Enforcement; penalties for offenses,
of this chapter;
(4) If appropriate, issuing a stop-work order;
(5) If a violation which was found to exist is abated or corrected,
performing an inspection to ensure that the violation has been
abated or corrected, preparing a final written report reflecting
such abatement or correction, and filing such report with the
complaint.
§ 33-13 CHARTER § 33-13
C:135

ARTICLE V
Recordkeeping, Program Review and Reports
§ 33-14. Recordkeeping.
§ 33-15. Program review and reporting.
A. The Code Enforcement Officer and Fire Marshal shall keep permanent
official records of all transactions and activities conducted by their
respective offices, including records of:
(1) All applications received, reviewed and approved or denied;
(2) All plans, specifications and construction documents approved;
(3) All building permits, certificates of occupancy, temporary
certificates, stop-work orders, and operating permits issued;
(4) All inspections and tests performed;
(5) All statements and reports issued;
(6) All complaints received;
(7) All investigations conducted;
(8) All other features and activities specified in or contemplated by
§§ 33-4 through 33-13, inclusive, of this chapter; and
(9) All fees charged and collected.
B. All such records shall be public records open for public inspection
during normal business hours. All plans and records pertaining to
buildings or structures, or appurtenances thereto, shall be retained for
at least the minimum time period so required by state law and
regulation.
A. The Code Enforcement Officer and the Fire Marshal shall annually
submit to the Common Council of this City written reports and
summaries of all business conducted by their respective offices,
including reports and summaries of all transactions and activities
described in § 33-14, Recordkeeping, of this chapter and reports and
summaries of all appeals or litigation pending or concluded.
B. The Code Enforcement Officer and the Fire Marshal shall jointly
prepare and submit annually to the Secretary of State, on behalf of this
City, on a form prescribed by the Secretary of State, a report of the
activities of this City relative to administration and enforcement of the
Uniform Code.
C. The Code Enforcement Officer and/or Fire Marshal shall, upon request
of the New York State Department of State, provide to the New York
State Department of State, from the records and related materials this
City is required to maintain, excerpts, summaries, tabulations, statistics
§ 33-14 CHARTER § 33-15
C:137
and other information and accounts of the activities of this City in
connection with administration and enforcement of the Uniform Code.
§ 33-15 ONEIDA CODE § 33-15
C:138
ARTICLE VI
Violations
§ 33-16. Enforcement; penalties for offenses.
A. Compliance orders. The Code Enforcement Officer or Fire Marshal's
office is authorized to order, in writing, the remedying of any condition
or activity found to exist in, on or about any building, structure, or
premises in violation of the Building Code, Energy Code, Fuel Gas
Code, Mechanical Code, Plumbing Code, Residential Code, Fire Code,
Property Maintenance Code, or this chapter. Upon finding that any such
condition or activity exists in their respective areas of enforcement
responsibility, the Code Enforcement Officer or Fire Marshal's office
shall issue a compliance order. The compliance order shall be in
writing; be dated and signed by the Code Enforcement Officer or Fire
Marshal or the Fire Marshal's designee; specify the condition or activity
that violates the Building Code, Energy Code, Fuel Gas Code,
Mechanical Code, Plumbing Code, Residential Code, Fire Code,
Property Maintenance Code, or this chapter; specify the provision or
provisions of the Building Code, Energy Code, Fuel Gas Code,
Mechanical Code, Plumbing Code, Residential Code, Fire Code,
Property Maintenance Code, or this chapter which is/are violated by the
specified condition or activity; specify the period of time which the
Code Enforcement Officer or Fire Marshal's office deems to be
reasonably necessary for achieving compliance; direct that compliance
be achieved within the specified period of time; and state that an action
or proceeding to compel compliance may be instituted if compliance is
not achieved within the specified period of time. The Code Enforcement
Officer or Fire Marshal's office shall cause the compliance order, or a
copy thereof, to be served on the owner of the affected property
personally or by certified mail. The Code Enforcement Officer or Fire
Marshal's office shall be permitted, but not required, to cause the
compliance order, or a copy thereof, to be served on any builder,
architect, tenant, contractor, subcontractor, construction
superintendent, or their agents, or any other person taking part or
assisting in work being performed at the affected property personally or
by certified mail; provided, however, that failure to serve any person
mentioned in this sentence shall not affect the efficacy of the
compliance order.
B. Appearance tickets. The Code Enforcement Officer or Fire Marshal and
each inspector are authorized to issue appearance tickets for any
violation of the Uniform Code. Appearance tickets shall be substantially
in the form set forth in § 17-15C of this City's Code of Ordinances.
C. Civil penalties. In addition to those penalties prescribed by state law,
any person who violates any provision of the Building Code, Energy
Code, Fuel Gas Code, Mechanical Code, Plumbing Code, Residential
Code, Fire Code, Property Maintenance Code, or this chapter, or any
term or condition of any building permit, certificate of occupancy,
§ 33-16 CHARTER § 33-16
C:139
certificate of compliance, temporary certificate, stop-work order,
operating permit or other notice or order issued by the Code
Enforcement Officer or Fire Marshal's office pursuant to any provision
of this chapter, shall be liable to a civil penalty of not more than $1,000
for each day or part thereof during which such violation continues. The
civil penalties provided by this subsection shall be recoverable in an
action instituted in the name of this City.
D. Injunctive relief. An action or proceeding may be instituted in the name
of this City, in a court of competent jurisdiction, to prevent, restrain,
enjoin, correct, or abate any violation of, or to enforce, any provision of
the Building Code, Energy Code, Fuel Gas Code, Mechanical Code,
Plumbing Code, Residential Code, Fire Code, Property Maintenance
Code, or this chapter, or any term or condition of any building permit,
certificate of occupancy, temporary certificate, stop-work order,
operating permit, compliance order, or other notice or order issued by
the Code Enforcement Officer or Fire Marshal's office pursuant to any
provision of this chapter. In particular, but not by way of limitation,
where the construction or use of a building or structure is in violation of
any provision of the Building Code, Energy Code, Fuel Gas Code,
Mechanical Code, Plumbing Code, Residential Code, Fire Code,
Property Maintenance Code, or this chapter, or any stop-work order,
compliance order or other order obtained under the Building Code,
Energy Code, Fuel Gas Code, Mechanical Code, Plumbing Code,
Residential Code, Fire Code, Property Maintenance Code, or this
chapter, an action or proceeding may be commenced in the name of this
City, in the New York State Supreme Court or in any other court having
the requisite jurisdiction, to obtain an order directing the removal of
the building or structure or an abatement of the condition in violation of
such provisions. No action or proceeding described in this subsection
shall be commenced without the appropriate authorization from the
Common Council of this City.
E. Remedies not exclusive. No remedy or penalty specified in this section
shall be the exclusive remedy or penalty available to address any
violation described in this section, and each remedy or penalty specified
in this section shall be in addition to, and not in substitution for or
limitation of, the other remedies or penalties specified in this section, in
§ 33-6, Stop-work orders, of this chapter, in any other section of this
chapter, or in any other applicable law. Any remedy or penalty specified
in this section may be pursued at any time, whether prior to,
simultaneously with, or after the pursuit of any other remedy or penalty
specified in this section, in § 33-6, Stop-work orders, of this chapter, in
any other section of this chapter, or in any other applicable law. In
particular, but not by way of limitation, each remedy and penalty
specified in this section shall be in addition to, and not in substitution
for or limitation of, the penalties specified in Subdivision (2) of § 382 of
the Executive Law, and any remedy or penalty specified in this section
may be pursued at any time, whether prior to, simultaneously with, or
§ 33-16 ONEIDA CODE § 33-16
C:140
after the pursuit of any penalty specified in Subdivision (2) of § 382 of
the Executive Law.
§ 33-16 CHARTER § 33-16
C:141

ARTICLE VII
Fee Schedule
§ 33-17. Fees.
A fee schedule shall be established by resolution of the Common Council of
this City. Such fee schedule may thereafter be amended from time to time by
like resolution. The fees set forth in, or determined in accordance with, such
fee schedule or amended fee schedule shall be charged and collected for
the submission of applications, the issuance of building permits, amended
building permits, renewed building permits, certificates of occupancy,
certificates of compliance, temporary certificates, operating permits,
firesafety and property maintenance inspections, and other actions of the
Code Enforcement Officer described in or contemplated by this chapter.
§ 33-17 CHARTER § 33-17
C:143
Chapter 34
BUILDINGS, VACANT, ABANDONED, UNSAFE AND
COLLAPSED
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building Code administration and
enforcement — See Ch. 33.
Electrical standards — See Ch. 45.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 61.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 64.
Housing standards — See Ch. 77.
Mobile homes and mobile home parks — See
Ch. 92.
§ 33-17 ONEIDA CODE § 33-17
C:144
ARTICLE I
Administration and Enforcement
§ 34-1. Enforcing officer designated.
The Bureau of Fire is hereby designated as the agency to administer and
secure compliance with this chapter.
§ 34-1 CHARTER § 34-1
C:145

ARTICLE II
Abandoned Buildings
§ 34-2. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings ascribed
to them below:
ABANDONED BUILDING — A nonresidential or residential structure which
has remained unoccupied or unused for more than one year or for a sixmonth
period as measured below, whichever is sooner. Said six-month
period shall be measured from the date of service, as provided herein, of
notice of such nonuse or nonoccupancy to the owner.
NONRESIDENTIAL STRUCTURE — A structure which contains
nonresidential occupancies.
RESIDENTIAL STRUCTURE — A structure which contains residential
occupancies.
§ 34-3. Inspections and entry powers of City officials.
A. The Bureau of Fire of the City shall be authorized to make or cause to
be made inspections to determine the condition of premises in order to
safeguard the health, safety and welfare of the public. The Fire Marshal
or his designated representative shall be authorized to enter any
premises at any reasonable time during business hours, or at such other
time as may be necessary in any emergency, for the purpose of
performing his duties under this article. Inspections herein authorized
shall be limited to the provisions of this article.
B. Inspectors and authorized personnel of the Fire Marshal's office shall
be supplied with official identification and, upon request, shall exhibit
such identification when entering any premises and all parts thereof.
C. Access to all parts of any nonresidential structure or premises shall be
provided by the owner, operator, agent or occupant thereof to personnel
herein, for the purpose of making such inspections at any reasonable
time during business hours or at such other times as may be necessary
in an emergency. Whenever the Fire Marshal or his duly authorized
representative shall be unable to obtain access to premises for the
purpose of making an inspection as herein provided, a demand for
access to such premises shall be served upon the owner and/or
occupants thereof at least three days before the time for such
inspection. In the event the Fire Marshal or his duly authorized
representative finds that immediate action is or may be necessary to
abate a hazard or remove a danger, he may demand immediate access
from the owner, operator, agent or occupant and prior notice shall not
be required.
D. If after due demand the person entitled to possession of any dwelling or
dwelling unit refuses admittance thereto of the Fire Marshal or his duly
§ 34-2 CHARTER § 34-3
C:147
§ 34-4. Notice of violations and correction orders.
authorized representative for the purpose of making an examination
or inspection of the premises, the Fire Marshal or his duly authorized
representative shall seek authorization, by prompt legal means, from
a court of competent jurisdiction. The moving papers shall include an
affidavit from the Fire Marshal or his duly authorized representative
that he seeks access to the premises designated so that he can carry out
a regularly scheduled inspection pursuant to this article or because he
has probable cause to believe that an inspection of such premises will
reveal the existence of violations of this article and, further, that such
access has been denied. On presentation of such an affidavit and an
ex parte application for relief, the Judge shall issue a warrant or order
authorizing the Fire Marshal or his duly authorized representative to
inspect the premises named in the affidavit.
A. Whenever the Fire Marshal or his duly authorized representative
determines that there has been a violation or that there are reasonable
grounds to believe that there has been a violation of any provision of
this article or any rules or regulations adopted pursuant hereto, he shall
give written notice of such violation or alleged violation to the owner of
the property. Such notice shall specify that the alleged violations are to
be corrected immediately. Such notice shall also inform the person to
whom it is directed of his right to apply for an informal hearing within
five days of receipt of said notice before the Fire Marshal or his duly
authorized representative. Such notice may contain an outline of
remedial action which, if taken, shall effect compliance with the
provisions of this article and the rules and regulations adopted
pursuant thereto.
B. Upon the expiration of 30 days after service of such notice as herein
provided, the Fire Marshal or his duly authorized representative may
issue a final order. Such order shall allow 10 days from date of service
of said order within which to comply. Upon failure of the owner to
comply, the Fire Marshal or his duly authorized representative shall act
to obtain compliance as provided by this article.
C. Nothing herein shall authorize the Fire Marshal or his duly authorized
representative to issue any orders with respect to use of materials, size
of structural members or design, except that the Fire Marshal or his
duly authorized representative may prohibit use of any items which
conflict with the provisions of this article.
D. The Fire Marshal or his duly authorized representative may, for good
cause shown in his discretion, extend the compliance time specified in
any notice or order issued under the provisions of this article.
E. Whenever the Fire Marshal or his duly authorized representative finds
that a violation of this article exists which, in his opinion, requires
immediate action to abate a hazard or constitutes an immediate danger
to the health, safety or welfare of the occupants of a building or the
§ 34-3 ONEIDA CODE § 34-4
C:148
§ 34-5. Vacant structures.
Any vacant structure shall be secured against unlawful entry, and the
structure and adjoining yards shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary
condition and shall not present a hazard to adjoining property or the public.
All vehicular entrances to the property shall be closed to prevent unlawful
parking or storage of vehicles upon the premises.
§ 34-6. Abandoned structures.
§ 34-7. Dangerous structures.
Whenever the Fire Marshal or his duly authorized representative finds that
any building under construction or any existing nonresidential or residential
structure is weakened from any cause or constitutes a hazard or threat
public, he may, without prior notice of hearing, issue an order citing
the violation and directing that such action be taken as is necessary
to remove or abate the hazard or danger. Notwithstanding any other
provisions of this article, such an order shall be effective immediately
upon service and shall be complied with immediately or as otherwise
provided.
F. It shall be sufficient service of a notice or order of the Fire Marshal or
his duly authorized representative if said notice is mailed by certified or
registered mail to the person to whom it is directed, to his last known
place of residence.
A. Whenever the Fire Marshal or his duly authorized representative finds
that a nonresidential or residential structure is not used or occupied, he
shall serve notice of such finding upon the owner.
B. Whenever the Fire Marshal or his duly authorized representative finds
that a nonresidential or residential structure has been abandoned, he
may order the owner to demolish such structure or part thereof, upon
notice as prescribed in § 34-4. In making the determination to order
such demolition, the Fire Marshal or his duly authorized representative
must consider the following factors:
(1) Period of time of nonoccupancy or nonuse; occasional and
intermittent use shall not be a bar to determination that a building
has been abandoned.
(2) Whether the abandoned structure constitutes or may constitute a
hazard or threat to the public health, safety or welfare.
(3) Whether the abandoned structure hinders or may hinder the
conservation of property values or the use and enjoyment of nearby
property.
(4) Whether the structure is in any way illegal and the owner or
beneficial user cannot with reasonable diligence be located.
§ 34-4 CHARTER § 34-7
C:149
to the health, safety or welfare of the occupants or the public, he may
order said structure to be strengthened, repaired, secured, vacated or
demolished, as he may judge, upon notice as prescribed in § 34-4.
§ 34-8. Demolition and/or repair by City.
A. Whenever a final order to remove a violation, secure, vacate or
demolish a building has not been complied with, the Fire Marshal or his
duly authorized representative may proceed to cause the structure to
be demolished, repaired, altered, secured or vacated or to take such
other legal action as is necessary; provided, however, that nothing
herein shall authorize the Fire Marshal or his duly authorized
representative to cause any structure to be demolished unless and until
an appropriate order of the court has been obtained, as specified in
Subsection C.
B. The expense incurred by the City hereunder shall be charged to and
paid by the person responsible for such violation. The Fire Marshal or
his duly authorized representative shall file with the City Chamberlain a
statement of the items of expense and the date of execution of actions
authorized thereunder. The City Chamberlain shall proceed to collect
said sums owing the City in the manner provided by law.
C. Whenever the Fire Marshal or his duly authorized representative shall
determine pursuant to notice and order as provided herein that a
dangerous or abandoned structure or a part thereof shall be
demolished and the owner has failed to comply with a final order of
demolition within 10 days after service upon him of said order, the City
Attorney shall, upon eight days' notice to the property owner,
mortgagees, tenants and lienors, present said order to demolish and the
records and papers of all prior proceedings upon which said order is
based before a Justice holding a special term of the Supreme Court for
the county for review of said determination and confirmation thereof, at
which time the Court may either confirm or annul, wholly or in part, or
modify the determination reviewed.
§ 34-7 ONEIDA CODE § 34-8
C:150
ARTICLE III
Unsafe Buildings and Collapsed Structures
§ 34-9. Repair or removal by owner required.
The owner or person having any interest in any wall, building, structure
or foundation in the City which for any reason shall have become unsafe,
dangerous, unsightly or in any way endangers the health, safety or welfare
of the public shall, upon being directed thereto by the Common Council,
forthwith repair or remove the same.
§ 34-10. Determination of status; service of notice upon owner.
A. Whenever any wall, building or other structure has in any manner
become unfit for occupancy or shall be unsafe, detrimental or
dangerous to the public health, safety or general welfare, upon
inspection and report by the office of the Fire Marshal to the Common
Council and hearing held thereon as hereinafter set forth, the Common
Council may declare the premises a public nuisance and order the
owner, or person or persons having an interest therein, to repair or
remove the wall, building, structure or foundation and to clear away
any and all debris caused thereby and to fill in the excavation to the lot
level, requiring the same to be made safe and secure. After having
received and placed on file the report from the Fire Marshal's office, the
Common Council, if it appears that a nuisance exists, shall hold a
hearing thereon and shall serve notice upon the owner, and all others
having an interest therein, of the unsafe condition and the times and
place of said hearing.
B. The service of said notice shall be either by personal service or by
certified mail, addressed to the last known address as shown by the
records of the City Assessor's office. Said notice shall contain a
description of the premises and a clear and concise statement of the
particulars in which the building or structure is unsafe or dangerous,
shall set forth the date, time and place for a hearing thereon before the
Common Council and shall be served at least 10 days prior to said
hearing. If such service is by certified mail, a copy of said notice shall
also be posted by firmly affixing a copy thereof on said premises.
C. If it appears upon said hearing that an unsafe condition does in fact
exist, then the Common Council shall declare it to be a nuisance and
order the repair or removal thereof at or before a time to be fixed by it.
Notice of said determination and the order of the Common Council shall
be served upon the owner and other persons having an interest therein
in the same manner as the original notice hereinbefore set forth.
D. Where the identity and/or whereabouts of the owner of said building is
unknown, then the notice shall be published in two newspapers, at least
one in the English language, designated by the Common Council as
most likely to give notice to the person to be served, at least once in
each of four successive weeks. Service shall be complete on the 28th
§ 34-9 CHARTER § 34-10
C:151
§ 34-11. Filing of notice of hearing with County Clerk.
A copy of the original notice shall be filed in the office of the County Clerk
in the same manner as a notice of pendency pursuant to Article 65 of the
Civil Practice Law and Rules and shall have the same effect as a notice of
pendency as therein provided, except as otherwise provided in this section.
A notice so filed shall be effective for a period of one year from the date of
filing; provided, however, that it may be vacated on the order of the Judge or
Justice of a court of record or upon the consent of the Corporation Counsel.
§ 34-12. Repair or removal by City.
In the event such owner or other interested person fails or refuses to repair
or remove said building or structure within the time provided, the Common
Council may cause the repair or removal of said building, wall or structure
and fill in the excavation and level the property and assess the cost thereof
against said property, and said cost shall thereupon become a lien against
the property and be collectible in the same manner as taxes levied thereon
or by civil action.
§ 34-13. Penalties for offenses.
Any person who shall neglect or refuse to comply with the directions of
the Common Council shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor. In
addition to the remedies herein set forth, an action or proceeding may be
maintained in a court of competent jurisdiction to compel compliance with
or to restrain by injunction any violation of this article and any order or
finding made hereunder.
§ 34-14. When effective.
This chapter shall take effect immediately upon being published in the
official newspaper.
day after the day of first publication, and the hearing shall be held
not less than 10 days after service is complete nor later than 30 days
thereafter. Proof of said publication shall be filed with the Common
Council.
§ 34-10 ONEIDA CODE § 34-14
C:152
ARTICLE IV
Vacant Building Registry and Maintenance
[Added 4-18-2017 by L.L. No. 2-2017]
§ 34-15. Legislative findings and purpose.
It is the finding of the Common Council that buildings which remain vacant
and are not properly secured and maintained are unsightly, unsafe and
have a negative effect on the surrounding community. This is particularly
troublesome in residential and commercial neighborhoods. The purpose of
this article is to establish a program for identifying and registering vacant
buildings, to determine the responsibilities of owners of vacant buildings
and structures, and to speed the rehabilitation or demolition of vacant
properties.
§ 34-16. Definitions.
Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following terms shall, for purposes
of this article, have the meanings indicated in this section:
ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — The Fire Marshal of the City of Oneida or his/
her duly authorized representative.
OWNER — Those shown to be the owner or owners on the records of the
Assessor's Office of the City of Oneida, those identified as the owner or
owners on a vacant building registration form, or any other person, firm,
organization, association, partnership, company or corporation who holds
the legal or beneficial title to any building, facilities or premises subject to
the provisions of this article. Any and all such persons shall be jointly and
severally obligated to comply with the provisions of this article.
PROPERTY MANAGER — An employee of the City of Oneida designated
by the Mayor, responsible for maintaining the vacant building registry and
monitoring properties on the registry, in coordination with the enforcement
officer.
SECURED BY OTHER THAN NORMAL MEANS — A building secured by
means other than those used in the design of the building.
UNOCCUPIED — A building which is not being used for an occupancy
authorized by the owner.
UNSECURED — A building or portion of a building which is open to entry
by unauthorized persons without the use of tools or ladders.
VACANT BUILDING — A building or portion of a building which is:
A. Unoccupied and unsecured;
B. Unoccupied and secured by other than normal means;
Unoccupied and determined by an enforcement officer to be an
abandoned structure or a dangerous structure as set forth in Article II
of this Chapter;
C.
§ 34-15 CHARTER § 34-16
C:153
§ 34-17. Vacant building registration.
D. Unoccupied and has multiple housing or building code violations;
E. Illegally occupied;
F. Unoccupied for a period of time exceeding 180 days.
A. The owner of a vacant building shall register with the Property
Manager not later than 30 days after any building in the City becomes a
vacant building or not later than 30 days after being notified by the
Property Manager of the requirement to register. From the information
collected, the Property Manager shall maintain a database of vacant
properties. The Property Manager, or the enforcement officer, may
identify vacant buildings through their routine inspection process as
well as through notification by residents, neighborhood associations
and other community groups that a building may be eligible for
inclusion on the registry. The database of vacant properties shall be
made readily available to the Bureau of Fire, Police Department, City
Engineer, Housing Inspector and Code Enforcement Officer, as
necessary.
B. The registration shall be submitted on forms provided by the Property
Manager and shall include the following information supplied by the
owner:
(1) A description of the premises.
(2) The name, mailing address, physical address, e-mail address and
telephone number of the owner or owners.
(3) If the owner is a firm, organization, association, partnership,
company or corporation, or is a natural person and is not a resident
of Madison County or a neighboring county, said owner shall
designate a managing agent who resides in or maintains a business
office within Madison County or an adjoining county, and shall
provide the name, mailing address, e-mail address and telephone
number of said agent.
(4) The names and addresses of all known lienholders and all other
parties with an ownership interest in the building.
(5) A telephone number where the owner, managing agent or other
duly authorized representative can be reached at all times during
business and nonbusiness hours. This telephone number must be a
direct line to a natural person.
(6) A vacant building plan as described in Subsection C below.
C. The owner shall submit a vacant building plan which must meet the
approval of the enforcement officer. The plan, at a minimum, must
contain information from one of the following three choices for the
property:
§ 34-16 ONEIDA CODE § 34-17
C:154
§ 34-18. Vacant building registration fees; vacant building file.
(1) If the building is to be demolished, a demolition plan indicating the
proposed timeframe for demolition.
(2) If the building is to remain vacant, a plan for securing and
maintaining the building in accordance with standards provided in
§ 34-19 below, along with the procedure that will be used to
maintain the property, and a statement of the reasons why the
building will be left vacant.
(3) If the building is to be returned to appropriate occupancy or use, a
rehabilitation plan for the property. The rehabilitation plan shall
not exceed 365 days, unless the enforcement officer grants an
extension upon receipt of a written statement from the owner
detailing the reasons for the extension. Any repairs, improvements
or alterations to the property must comply with any applicable
zoning, housing, historic preservation or building codes and must
be secured in accordance with § 34-19 below during the
rehabilitation.
D. All applicable laws and codes shall be complied with by the owner. The
owner shall notify the enforcement officer in writing of any changes in
information supplied as part of the vacant building registration within
30 days of the change. If the plan or timetable for the vacant building is
revised in any way, the revisions must be in writing and be approved by
the enforcement officer.
E. The owner and any subsequent owners shall keep the building secured
and safe and the building and grounds properly maintained as provided
in § 34-19 below.
F. Any failure of the owner or any subsequent owners to maintain the
building and premises that results in remedial action taken by the City
shall be grounds for revocation of the approved plan and shall be
subject to any applicable penalties provided by law.
G. New owners of any vacant building shall notify the Property Manager
within 30 days of any transfer of an ownership interest in a vacant
building. The new owners shall comply with the approved plan and
timetable submitted by the previous owner until any proposed changes
are submitted in writing and are approved by the enforcement officer.
H. The enforcement officer shall keep the Property Manager apprised of
the approved plan and any revisions thereto.
A. Fees.
(1) The owner of a vacant building shall, within 30 days of the building
becoming vacant, pay an annual fee in an amount to be established
by resolution of the Common Council. An annual fee shall
thereafter be due and payable each year thereafter that the
§ 34-17 CHARTER § 34-18
C:155
§ 34-19. Vacant building maintenance.
building remains vacant upon the same date as the first annual
fee became due. The fee shall be reasonably related to the
administrative costs for registering and processing the vacant
building owner registration form and for the costs incurred by the
City in monitoring the vacant building site.
(2) The fee shall be paid in full prior to the issuance of any building
permits, with the exception of a demolition permit. The fee shall be
prorated, and a refund may be issued if the building is no longer
deemed vacant under the provisions of this article within 30 days of
its registry.
(3) All delinquent fees shall be paid by the owner prior to any transfer
of an ownership interest in any vacant building. If the fees are not
paid prior to any such transfer, the new owner shall pay the
delinquent fees no later than 30 days after the transfer of
ownership.
(4) Any owner of a vacant building who fails to register and/or submit a
vacant building plan within the time required by this article or any
owner who, having filed a vacant building plan, fails to follow such
plan, will cause the City to spend greater resources to administer
the vacant building registry and to monitor the vacant building site.
Consequently, the Property Manager may determine that, in such
circumstances, an additional registration fee, which shall be
established by resolution of the Common Council, should be
assessed against the owner of a vacant building. Such additional
fee shall cover the increased costs to the City of administering the
vacant building registry and of monitoring the vacant building site
caused by persons failing to timely file a plan or failing to follow
their filed plan. Prior to the imposition of an additional fee, a
Property Manager shall give the building owner notice of the
alleged failure and of his/her intent to assess an increased fee and
shall accord the building owner an opportunity to be heard at an
administrative hearing held in accordance with due process of law.
Actual notice is not required, but notice shall be given in a manner
reasonably calculated to provide the owner with actual notice of
the hearing.
B. In addition to the registry database, the Property Manager shall
maintain a separate file for each vacant building and shall include in the
file any property-specific written statements from community
organizations and other interested parties or citizens regarding the
history, problems, status or blighting influence of a vacant building.
A. All vacant buildings shall be kept secured or boarded up, both as
defined in Subsection A(1) and (2), and shall be maintained in
accordance with Subsection A(3) of this section.
§ 34-18 ONEIDA CODE § 34-19
C:156
(1) The term "secured," for the purposes of this section, shall mean
that all means of ingress and egress, including but not limited to all
doorways and windows, shall be in good state of repair, without any
broken glass or other damage that might allow entry or create an
eyesore, and shall be securely locked. Any building that is not so
secured shall be promptly "boarded up," that is, all means of
ingress and egress at all floor levels shall be covered over, as
specified hereinafter, so as to ensure the continued security of the
building and to reduce any negative impacts upon the
neighborhood.
(2) Boarding up shall be done by utilizing the following minimum
materials and methods unless another method is proposed in
writing and approved by the Property Manager:
(a) Exterior-grade plywood or sheathing-grade particle board, at
least 1/2 inch thick, shall be used for boarding material. It shall
be cut to fit neatly into each opening so that it covers the entire
window or door frame but does not overlap onto the adjacent
wall surfaces.
(b) Openings in excess of three feet wide shall be braced by
installing at least one two-inch-by-four-inch wood stud, or
equal, at the midspan and for the full height of the opening.
(c) The boarding material shall be secured to the building by
sixpenny (minimum size) coated nails spaced no more than six
inches on center at the edges and 12 inches on center at any
intermediate bracing, except that one doorway shall be
secured in such a manner that it can provide access to the
building by authorized persons. If such door contains any glass
panels or wood panels less than one inch thick, it shall be
entirely covered with boarding material.
(d) Doors shall be secured with at least two keyed locks, and their
hinges shall have concealed fastenings.
(e) All boarding material shall be finished on the exterior with one
coat of primer and two coats of exterior-grade paint in color
matching that of the adjacent walls.
(f) The secured building shall be provided with adequate
ventilation to prevent the accumulation of moisture which
might deteriorate the finishes and the structure. Adequate
ventilation shall be deemed to be a minimum of two louvered
and screened ventilation openings, each having an opening
size of at least 144 square inches and placed in opposite walls
of the building at the uppermost floor level. Interior doors at all
floor levels shall be left in the open position in order to allow
circulation of air. If circulation of air within and between all
floors is not possible using only two vents, then additional
vents shall be installed to achieve such circulation.
§ 34-19 CHARTER § 34-19
C:157
(3) In addition to securing or boarding up the building, the following
minimum requirements shall be met for all vacant buildings:
(a) The roof shall be structurally sound and weathertight. Any
damaged or missing rafters, decking or roofing materials shall
be repaired or replaced with equivalent material but in no case
less than two-inch-by-six-inch wood rafters, one-half-inch-thick
exterior plywood and ninety-pound roll roofing, respectively, all
installed in a workmanlike manner.
(b) All trash and debris shall be removed from the building. Any
portions of the exterior of the main building or accessory
buildings, including but not limited to walls, porches, stairs,
parapet walls and chimneys, that are deteriorated so as to be
in danger of collapse or to otherwise constitute a hazard or
allow penetration of water into the building shall be repaired
or replaced or otherwise made safe and weathertight.
(c) The grounds surrounding the building shall be cleared and
kept cleared of all litter, rubble, debris, trash and junk and of
all grass and weeds in excess of six inches in height.
(d) All buildings shall be kept free of insects, vermin and rodent
harborage and infestation.
(e) All vehicular entrances to the property shall be closed to
prevent unlawful parking or storage of vehicles upon the
premises.
(f) If the vacant building is a commercial or retail building, any
and all first floor windows shall be replaced by glass,
plexiglass, an approved mural, or an announcement sign. Such
coverings must be kept up and maintained.
(g) If the vacant building is a commercial or retail building, all
exterior signs, awnings and lighting systems, if not removed,
shall be maintained in a nondeteriorated and safe condition.
(4) When it is required by this article that a building be boarded up, it
shall be the responsibility of the owner to have the electric and gas
service, if any, temporarily shut off from the building. Service may
not be reconnected until repair and rehabilitation work or
occupancy actually commences.
(5) All plumbing and heating systems that contain water shall be
completely drained and kept empty between October 15 and April
15, and an antifreeze solution shall be added to all plumbing traps
in the building. This shall not apply if the building is adequately
heated during that time period.
§ 34-19 ONEIDA CODE § 34-19
C:158
§ 34-20. Inspections; enforcement.
(6) The owner shall arrange to provide access to the interior of the
building by enforcement officers to inspect for compliance with the
requirements above that pertain to the interior.
(7) The owners of buildings which for any reason remain vacant for a
period of three months or more shall be subject to the procedures
of this section. By the end of such three-month time period, the
owner of the vacant building shall demonstrate to the enforcement
officer that said owner has taken appropriate steps to abate the
vacancy of the building in an expeditious manner. These steps may
include but are not limited to:
(a) Applying for and obtaining a work permit to repair and
rehabilitate the building, or to demolish it, and proceeding
with the work in a timely fashion;
(b) Providing competent evidence that the building is listed for
sale by a licensed realtor and is being advertised for sale online
and/or in a local periodical; or
(c) Providing a proposed schedule of action to undertake repair
and rehabilitation of the building, including a detailed financial
plan for its accomplishment.
A. By registering a vacant building, an owner consents to an enforcement
officer inspecting the premises, upon request, for the purpose of
enforcing and assuring compliance with the provisions of this article.
Upon the request of the enforcement officer, an owner will provide
access to all interior portions of a vacant building in order to permit a
complete inspection. An enforcement officer shall conduct such
inspections in accordance with the provisions of § 34-3 of this chapter.
In the event of a refusal to cooperate with an inspection request, after
being provided with reasonable notice, a search warrant will be
requested from the courts and the enforcement officer will return with
the warrant and law enforcement personnel to make the inspection.
B. Whenever an enforcement officer determines that there has been a
violation or that there are reasonable grounds to believe that there has
been a violation of any provision of this article, he shall give written
notice of such violation or alleged violation to the owner of vacant
building. Such notice shall specify that the alleged violations are to be
corrected immediately. Such notice shall also inform the owner of his/
her/its right to apply for an informal hearing within five days of receipt
of said notice before an enforcement officer. Such notice may contain an
outline of remedial action which, if taken, shall affect compliance with
the provisions of this article.
§ 34-19 CHARTER § 34-20
C:159
C. It shall be sufficient service of a notice or order of an enforcement
officer if said notice is mailed by certified or registered mail to the
person to whom it is directed, to his/her last known place of residence.
D. A copy of a notice served in accordance with this section shall be filed in
the Madison County Clerk's Office, which notice shall be filed in the
same manner as a notice of pendency pursuant to Article 65 of the Civil
Practice Law and Rules, and shall have the same effect as a notice of
pendency as therein provided. A notice so filed shall be effective for a
period of one year from the date of filing, provided, however, that it may
be vacated upon the order of a judge or justice of a court of record or
upon the consent of the City Attorney. The Madison County Clerk shall
mark such notice and any record or docket thereof as canceled of
record upon the presentation and filing of such consent or of a certified
copy of such order.
E. Upon the expiration of 30 days after service of such notice as herein
provided, an enforcement officer may issue a final order. Such order
shall allow 10 days from date of service of said order within which to
comply. Upon failure of the owner to comply, an enforcement officer
shall take steps and perform acts as are required to bring the vacant
building and grounds into compliance with this article. Such acts
include, but are not limited to causing the vacant building to be secured
or boarded up, removing dangerous conditions, shutting off utilities,
clearing debris from the building and grounds and/or mowing the lawn.
F. An enforcement officer may, for good cause shown and in their
discretion, extend the time for compliance specified in any notice or
order issued under the provisions of this article.
G. Whenever an enforcement officer finds that a violation of this article
exists which, in their opinion, constitutes an emergency and requires
immediate action to abate a hazard or constitutes an immediate danger
to the health, safety or welfare of the occupants of a building or the
public, they may, without prior notice of hearing, issue an order citing
the violation and directing that such action be taken as is necessary to
remove or abate the hazard or danger. Notwithstanding any other
provisions of this article, such an order shall be effective immediately
upon service and shall be complied with immediately or as otherwise
provided.
H. Any expenses incurred by the City hereunder shall be charged to and
paid by the person responsible for such violation. An enforcement
officer shall file with the City Chamberlain a statement of the items of
expense and the date of execution of actions authorized thereunder.
The City Chamberlain shall then proceed to collect said sums owing the
City by assessment and levy upon the lots or parcels of land whereon
such work was performed, which charges shall be assessed and
collected in the same manner and at the same time as provided by law
for the collection of delinquent taxes.
§ 34-20 ONEIDA CODE § 34-21
C:160
§ 34-21. Exemptions.
§ 34-22. Quarterly reports.
The Property Manager shall submit a quarterly report not later than January
15, April 15, July 15 and October 15 of each year to the Mayor and Common
Council, with copies to the Fire Marshal and Housing Inspector, listing all
buildings in the City declared vacant under the provisions of this article, the
date upon which they were declared vacant and whether a vacant building
registration and vacant building plan has been filed for the building. The
report shall additionally include a list of all previously declared vacant
buildings, which are no longer subject to the provisions of this article.
§ 34-23. Penalties for offenses.
Any person violating any provision of Article IV or providing false
information to the enforcement officer relative to the vacant building
registry shall be guilty of a violation and, upon conviction, be subject to
a fine of $250 or imprisonment of up to 15 days, or both such fine and
imprisonment. Each day's violation shall be considered a new and separate
offense subject to a separate penalty.
A. A building which has suffered fire damage or damage caused by
extreme weather conditions shall be exempt from the registration
requirement for a period of 90 days after the date of the fire or extreme
weather event if the property owner submits a request for exemption in
writing to the enforcement officer. This request shall include the
following information supplied by the owner:
(1) A description of the premises.
(2) The names and addresses of the owner or owners.
(3) A statement of intent to repair and reoccupy the building in an
expedient manner, or the intent to demolish the building.
B. This article shall not apply to any person or entity whose only interest in
a vacant building is that of a lienor or mortgagor. Specifically, any state
or federally chartered bank, savings bank, savings and loan association
or credit union that originates, owns, services or maintains a mortgage
related to such is exempt from the provisions of this article. However,
this exemption shall not prevent the City from exercising its
enforcement rights upon such parties as provided by § 1308 of the Real
Property Actions and Proceedings Law.
§ 34-21 CHARTER § 34-23
C:161
Chapter 36
CONVEYANCE OF PROPERTY
§ 34-23 ONEIDA CODE § 34-23
C:162
ARTICLE I
Conveyance of Property to Madison County Industrial Development
Agency
[Adopted 9-4-2012 by L.L. No. 3-2012]
§ 36-1. Purpose.
The Common Council of the City of Oneida hereby declares it to be a
policy of the Common Council to protect, promote and revitalize economic
growth and commercial development within the City. To this same end, the
stated mission of the Madison County Industrial Development Agency is
to cultivate development throughout Madison County, New York, in order
to generate and enhance the livelihood of area businesses, industries,
communities, and citizens, and enrich the overall quality of life. At the heart
of the Agency's mission is the creation and retention of job opportunities,
diversification and strengthening of Madison County's economic base, and
developing the local economy in an organized, sustainable and
environmentally beneficial manner. As a public benefit company, the Agency
actively assists businesses by identifying appropriate properties,
introducing businesses to local government and business leaders, and
providing financial incentives. Because the mission and activities of the
Agency are consistent with and complimentary to the goals and policy of the
City, the purpose of this chapter shall be to facilitate the conveyance of real
and personal property owned by the City for use by the Agency.
§ 36-2. Definitions.
As used or referred to in this chapter, unless a different meaning clearly
appears from the context:
AFFECTED TAX JURISDICTION — Any municipality or school district, in
which a project is located, which will fail to receive real property tax
payments, or other tax payments which would otherwise be due, except for
the tax exempt status of the Agency involved in a project.
AGENCY — The Madison County Industrial Development Agency.
CITY — The City of Oneida.
PROJECT — Any land in one or more areas of the City and within, partially
within, outside or partially outside the City and any building, structure,
facility or other improvement thereon, including but not limited to
machinery and equipment and all real and personal property deemed
necessary in connection therewith, whether or not now in existence or
under construction, which shall be necessary or suitable for industrial,
warehousing, research or commercial purposes, or for use by a federal
agency or a medical facility and which may include or mean a civic facility;
provided, however, that the Agency shall not provide financial assistance
in respect of any project wholly or partially outside the City; provided,
however, that the Agency may provide financial assistance for such a project
where a portion of the project outside of the City is contiguous to a portion
of the project located within the City if the Agency obtains the prior consent
§ 36-1 CHARTER § 36-2
C:163
thereto by the governing body or bodies of all of the other towns or villages
in which a part or parts of the project is, or is to be, located.
PAYMENTS IN LIEU OF TAXES — Any payment made to any agency or
affected tax jurisdiction equal to the amount, or a portion, of real property
taxes or other taxes which would have been levied by or on behalf of the
affected tax jurisdiction if the project was not tax exempt by reason of
Agency involvement.
§ 36-3. Conveyance of real or personal property.
The City may, by duly adopted resolution of the Common Council or by
instruments authorized by such resolution, convey, with or without
consideration, to the Agency real and personal property owned by the City
for use by the Agency as a project. In case of real property so conveyed,
the title thereto shall remain in the City, but the Agency shall have the use
thereof for so long as its corporate existence shall continue and said real
property shall be under its jurisdiction, control and supervision and exempt
from all taxes and assessments, except such payments in lieu thereof as may
be contained in such resolution or instrument of conveyance. However, such
property may be sold, or auctioned for sale, by the Agency:
§ 36-4. Payment in lieu of taxes.
To the end that the City or any school district wherein a project or projects
or a part thereof of the Agency are located may not suffer undue loss of
taxes and local improvement assessments, the Agency, in connection with
property owned or held by it within the City and such district, shall pay
annually in lieu of taxes and local improvement assessments to the City
or such school district such sum as may be mutually agreed between the
Agency and the City or such school district as the case may be. The City and
any such school district wherein a project or part thereof of the Agency is
located is hereby authorized and empowered to enter into an agreement or
agreements with the Agency to accept such payment or payments from the
Agency. The sum so received by the City or any such school district shall be
devoted to purposes to which taxes may be applied.
§ 36-5. Installation of streets and utilities.
The City shall install streets and utilities in the area of the project and
contract with the Agency with respect to the payments in lieu of local
improvement assessments therefor, and the Agency shall so contract and
make appropriate payments in accordance therewith.
A. Under the payment or agreement to pay reasonable consideration to
the City or to the Agency according to the respective interests; and
B. Upon approval of the terms of such sale, or option for sale, by duly
adopted resolution of the Common Council.
§ 36-2 ONEIDA CODE § 36-6
C:164
§ 36-6. Lease of real property.
In the event the Agency leases any of the real property conveyed to it by
the City, a portion of the rental derived therefrom shall be allocated to the
aforesaid payments in lieu of taxes and assessments and shall be paid over
to the City or school district, as the case may be. The consent of the City
or school district as to the method and amount of such allocation shall be
appended to any such lease.
§ 36-6 CHARTER § 36-6
C:165
Chapter 40
CURFEW
§ 40-1. Curfew for minors.
It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 16 years old to remain
in or upon any public street, park, vacant lot or other public place between
the hours of 12:00 midnight and 5:00 a.m.
§ 40-2. Exceptions.
Exemptions to the curfew are as follows:
A. Any time that the minor is accompanied by his or her parent, legal
guardian or other responsible person over the age of 21 years of age
and approved by the minor's parent or legal guardian.
B. If the minor is on an errand as directed by his or her parent or legal
guardian.
C. If the minor is legally employed, for the period from 1/2 hour before to
1/2 hour after work, while going directly between his or her home and
place of employment. This exception shall also apply if the minor is in a
public place during the curfew hours in the course of his or her
employment. To come under the exception, the minor must be carrying
a written statement from the employer attesting to the place and hours
of employment.
D. Until the hours of 12:30 a.m., if the minor is on the property of or the
sidewalk directly adjacent to the building in which he or she resides or
the building immediately adjacent thereto, if the owner of the adjacent
building has not objected to the minor and the police.
E. If the minor is coming directly home from a school activity or an activity
of a religious or other voluntary association or a place of public
entertainment such as a movie, play or sporting event. This exception
will apply for 1/2 hour after the completion of such event, but in no case
beyond 12:30 a.m. If the event is not commercial entertainment in
nature and does not have a fixed, publicly known time at which it will
end, the sponsoring organization must register the event with the
Police Department at least 24 hours in advance, informing it of the time
such event is scheduled to begin, the place at which it shall be held, the
time at which it shall end and the name of the sponsoring organization.
F. If the minor is exercising the First Amendment rights protected by the
Constitution, such as the free exercise of religion, speech or assembly,
provided the minor first has given notice to the Mayor by delivering a
written communication signed by the minor and countersigned by a
parent or guardian of the minor which specifies when, where, in what
§ 36-6 ONEIDA CODE § 40-2
C:166
§ 40-3. Penalties for offenses.
Chapter 43
DRUGS
manner and for what First Amendment purpose the minor will be on the
streets at night during the curfew period.
A. A police officer who has probable cause to believe that a minor is in
violation of this chapter shall take such minor to the police station or to
the minor's residence and immediately notify the minor's parent or
guardian. If after investigation there is still probable cause to believe
that the minor was violating this chapter, the minor, if brought to the
station, shall be held until the parent or guardian arrives to take the
minor home. When the parent or guardian arrives, he or she must be
given a copy of this chapter. If no parent or guardian is available, the
minor shall be turned over to the custody of the juvenile authorities
until a parent or guardian can take custody of him or her.
B. In the case of a first violation by a minor, the police shall warn the minor
and notify the parent or guardian of the warning. The warning shall
include notice that further violations will result in imposition of the
penalties provided by the law. In the case of a second violation, the
minor shall be dealt with in accordance with the New York State Family
Court Act, or the minor may be issued a Youth Court appearance ticket
to appear before the City of Oneida Youth Court.
§ 40-2 CHARTER § 40-3
C:167

ARTICLE I
Synthetic Drugs and Other Similar Substances
[Adopted 7-7-2015 by L.L. No. 1-2015]
§ 43-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
SYNTHETIC DRUG — Any product, whether described as tobacco,
potpourri, herbs, incense, spice, aromatic, bath salts, synthetic marijuana,
synthetic stimulant or any combination thereof, and whether marketed for
the purpose of being ingested or otherwise marketed, which includes but is
not limited to one or more of the following hallucinogenic substances:
A. 1-pentyl-3-(1-naphthoyl) indole; some trade or other names: JWH-018.
B. 1-butyl-3-(1-naphthoyl) indole; some trade or other names: JWH-073.
1-[2-(4-morpholinyl) ethyl]-3-(1-naphthoyl) indole; some trade or other
names: JWH-200.
C.
5-(1,1-dimethyloctyl)-2-[(1R,3S)-3-hydroxycyclohexyl]-phenol; some
trade or other names: CP 47,497.
D.
5-(1,1-dimethyloctyl)-2-[(1R,3S)-3-hydroxycyclohexyl]-phenol; some
trade or other names: cannabicyclohexanol; CP-47,497 C8- homolog; or
E.
F. 4-methylmethcathinone (Mephedrone).
G. 3, 4-methylenedioxypyrovalerone (MDPV).
3,4-Methylenedioxy-N-methylcathinone, commonly known as
"Methylone."
H.
I. 3-methoxymethcathinone.
J. 3-fluoromethcathinone.
K. 4-fluoromethcathinone.
Any substance prohibited in an Order for Summary Action in the Matter
of the Sale and Distribution of Synthetic Cannabinoids issued by the
New York State Department of Health, dated March 28, 2012, and any
similar order subsequently issued by the State of New York Department
of Health.
L.
Any substance prohibited under federal law pursuant to the Synthetic
Drug Abuse Prevention Act of 2012.
M.
Any synthetic drug analog, which shall mean a substance containing the
following:
N.
§ 43-1 CHARTER § 43-1
C:169
§ 43-2. Prohibitions.
§ 43-3. Penalties for offenses.
Any person who violates the provisions of this article shall be guilty of
an unclassified misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of up to $1,000 and/or
imprisonment of up to one year, or a civil penalty of $1,000, to be recovered
by the City of Oneida in a civil action or proceeding.
The chemical structure of which is substantially similar to the
chemical structure of a synthetic drug as described above;
(1)
Which has a stimulant, depressant, or hallucinogenic effect on the
central nervous system that is substantially similar to or greater
than the stimulant, depressant or hallucinogenic effect on the
central nervous system of a synthetic drug as described above; or
(2)
Which such person represents or intends to have a stimulant,
depressant, or hallucinogenic effect on the central nervous system
that is substantially similar to or greater than the stimulant,
depressant or hallucinogenic effect on the central nervous system
of a synthetic drug as described above.
(3)
In order to prevent the creation, possession and use of the drug
commonly known as "water,'' the unauthorized use of embalming fluid
or similar compounds is hereby prohibited within the City of Oneida,
with such unauthorized use of embalming fluid or similar item defined
herein and pursuant to § 3400 of the New York State Public Health
Law and any applicable provision of federal law. For the purposes
of this article, "embalming fluid" means any chemicals or substances
manufactured primarily for use by licensed funeral directors,
undertakers or embalmers, or registered residents, to prepare,
disinfect or preserve, either hypodermically, arterially or by any other
recognized means, the body of a deceased person for burial, cremation
or other final disposition. In particular, such unauthorized use shall
include dipping a marijuana or regular cigarette in embalming fluid.
O.
A. No person shall sell, offer for sale, give away, barter, exchange or
otherwise furnish or provide any synthetic drug, as defined herein and
by any applicable federal or state law, in the City of Oneida, New York.
B. No person shall be in the possession of any synthetic drug, as defined
herein and by any applicable federal or state law, within the City of
Oneida, New York, unless said synthetic drug is expressly prescribed to
said person by a physician, psychiatrist or person otherwise duly
licensed and authorized to prescribe medication within the State of
New York and, at the time of the alleged violation, the person in
possession of the synthetic drug is able to provide written proof to the
law enforcement officer(s) that the synthetic drug was so prescribed.
§ 43-1 ONEIDA CODE § 43-3
C:170
Chapter 45
ELECTRICAL STANDARDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building Code administration and
enforcement — See Ch. 33.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 61.
Housing standards — See Ch. 77.
§ 45-1. Installations generally. [Amended 12-19-2000 by L.L. No.
6-2000]
All electrical installations and equipment in the City shall be installed in
conformity with the New York State Fire Prevention and Building Code.
§ 45-2. Inspections.
§ 45-3. Correction of defects and certificate of compliance.
[Amended 8-2-2000; 6-19-2012 by Ord. No. 12-03]
Where defective electrical installations or equipment are found, the owner
of such building or structure shall remedy such defects forthwith and
shall procure a certificate of compliance from a duly authorized inspector
approved by the Common Council, and file the same with the aforesaid local
inspection officials.
A. The Building Code Enforcing Officers and the Fire Department Building
Inspectors may request the assistance of inspectors, who will be
determined from time to time by resolution of the Common Council, in
making electrical inspections of all buildings or structures within the
City. [Amended 8-2-2000; 6-19-2012 by Ord. No. 12-03]
B. All inspections shall be commenced within 48 hours of notification of
the inspector and once commenced shall continue uninterrupted to
completion. Failure of the inspector notified to commence said
inspection with said forty-eight-hour period shall be sufficient cause to
notify the other designated inspector, and said inspection shall then be
conducted exclusively by such subsequently notified inspector and
terminate the request to the other. All reports and/or certificates shall
be completed, filed and delivered to the owner or his representative
within 30 days of the completion of the inspection.
C. Reports of such inspections may be adopted by the local officials
charged with the duty of making such inspections as part of their
official inspection report, and a copy shall be furnished to the owner or
lessee of the property where defective electrical installations and
equipment are found.
§ 43-3 CHARTER § 45-4
C:171
§ 45-4. Civil liability. [Amended 8-2-2000; 6-19-2012 by Ord. No.
12-03]
This chapter shall not be construed to relieve from or lessen the
responsibility of any person owning, operating, controlling or installing any
electric wiring, devices, appliances or equipment for loss of life or damage
to person or property caused by any defect therein, nor shall the City or
duly authorized inspectors approved by the Common Council be deemed to
have assumed any such liability by reason of any inspection made pursuant
to this chapter.
Chapter 46
ENERGIZE NY BENEFIT FINANCING PROGRAM
GENERAL REFERENCES
Energy efficiency, cost reduction and
greenhouse gas reduction — See Ch. 47.
§ 46-1. Legislative findings; intent and purpose; authority.
A. It is the policy of both the City of Oneida and the State of New York to
achieve energy efficiency and renewable energy goals, reduce
greenhouse gas emissions, mitigate the effect of global climate change,
and advance a clean energy economy. The City of Oneida finds that it
can fulfill this policy by providing property assessed clean energy
financing to property owners for the installation of renewable energy
systems and energy efficiency measures. This chapter establishes a
program that will allow the Energy Improvement Corporation ("EIC"), a
local development corporation, acting on behalf of the City of Oneida
pursuant to the municipal agreement to be entered into between the
City of Oneida and EIC pursuant to Article 5-G of the New York General
Municipal Law (the ''Municipal Agreement"), to make funds available to
qualified property owners that will be repaid by such property owners
through charges on the real properties benefited by such funds, thereby
fulfilling the purposes of this chapter and fulfilling an important public
purpose.
B. The City of Oneida is authorized to implement this Energize NY Benefit
Financing Program pursuant to the Municipal Home Rule Law and
Article 5-L of the New York General Municipal Law.
C. This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Energize NY
Benefit Financing Program Law of the City of Oneida."
§ 45-4 ONEIDA CODE § 46-2
C:172
§ 46-2. Definitions.
For purposes of this chapter, and unless otherwise expressly stated or
unless the context requires, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AUTHORITY — The New York State Energy Research and Development
Authority, as defined by Subdivision 2 of § 1851 of the Public Authorities
Law, or its successor.
EIC — The Energy Improvement Corporation, a local development
corporation, duly organized under § 1411 of the Not-For-Profit Corporation
Law, authorized hereby on behalf of the City of Oneida to implement the
Energize NY Benefit Financing Program by providing funds to qualified
property owners (as defined in this chapter) and providing for repayment
of such funds from monies collected by the Oneida City Chamberlain as a
charge to be levied on the real property and collected in the same manner
and same form as the City of Oneida real property taxes.
ENERGY AUDIT — A formal evaluation or "assessment" of the energy
consumption of a permanent building or structural improvement to real
property, conducted by a contractor certified by the Authority, or certified
by a certifying entity approved by the Authority, for the purpose of
identifying appropriate energy efficiency improvements that could be made
to the property.
ENERGY EFFICIENCY IMPROVEMENT — Any renovation or retrofitting
of a building to reduce energy consumption, such as window and door
replacement, lighting, caulking, weather-stripping, air sealing, insulation,
and heating and cooling system upgrades, and similar improvements,
determined to be cost-effective pursuant to criteria established by the
Authority, not including lighting measures or household appliances that are
not permanently fixed to real property.
QUALIFIED PROPERTY OWNER — An owner of residential or commercial
real property located within the boundaries of the City of Oneida that
is determined to be eligible to participate in the Energize NY Benefit
Financing Program under the procedures for eligibility set forth under this
chapter.
RENEWABLE ENERGY SYSTEM — An energy generating system for the
generation of electric or thermal energy, to be used primarily at such
property, except when the qualified property owner is a commercial entity
in which case the system may be used for other properties in addition
to the subject property, by means of solar thermal, solar photovoltaic,
wind, geothermal, anaerobic digester gas-to-electricity systems, fuel cell
technologies, or other renewable energy technology approved by the
Authority, not including the combustion or pyrolysis of solid waste.
RENEWABLE ENERGY SYSTEM FEASIBILITY STUDY — A written study,
conducted by a contractor certified by the Authority, or certified by a
certifying entity approved by the Authority, for the purpose of determining
the feasibility of installing a renewable energy system.
§ 46-2 CHARTER § 46-3
C:173
§ 46-3. Establishment of Energize NY Benefit Financing Program.
§ 46-4. Procedures for eligibility.
A. An Energize NY Benefit Financing Program is hereby established by the
City of Oneida, whereby EIC acting on its behalf pursuant to the
Municipal Agreement, may provide funds to qualified property owners
in accordance with the procedures set forth under this chapter, to
finance the acquisition, construction and installation of renewable
energy systems and energy efficiency improvements and the
verification of the installation of such systems and improvements.
B. For funds provided to a qualified property owner which is a commercial
entity, not-for-profit organization, or entity other than an individual, EIC
shall have the authority to impose requirements on the maximum
amount of funds to be provided, which may consider factors including
but not limited to the property value, projected savings, project cost,
and existing indebtedness secured by such property.
C. For financing made to a qualified property owner who is an individual,
the funds provided shall not exceed the lesser of 10% of the appraised
value of the real property where the renewable energy systems and/or
energy efficiency improvements will be located, or the actual cost of
installing the renewable energy systems and/or energy efficiency
improvements, including the costs of necessary equipment, materials,
and labor and the cost of verification of such systems and
improvements.
A. Any property owner in the City of Oneida may submit an application to
EIC on such forms as have been prepared by EIC and made available to
property owners on the website of EIC and at the City of Oneida offices.
B. Every application submitted by a property owner shall be reviewed by
EIC acting on behalf of the City of Oneida, which shall make a positive
or negative determination on such application based upon the criteria
for making a financing enumerated in § 46-5 of this chapter. EIC may
also request further information from the property owner where
necessary to aid in its determination.
C. If a positive determination on an application is made by EIC acting on
behalf of the City of Oneida, the property owner shall be deemed a
qualified property owner and shall be eligible to participate in the
Energize NY Benefit Financing Program in accordance with the
procedure set forth under § 46-6 of this chapter, provided that in no
case shall a property owner that has received funds from another
municipal corporation for the acquisition, construction and installation
of energy efficiency improvements and/or renewable energy systems be
deemed a qualified property owner.
§ 46-3 ONEIDA CODE § 46-5
C:174
§ 46-5. Application criteria.
Upon the submission of an application, ElC, acting on behalf of the City of
Oneida, shall make a positive or negative determination on such application
based upon the following criteria for the making of a financing:
§ 46-6. Energize NY Finance Agreement.
§ 46-7. Energy audit; renewable energy system feasibility study.
A. The proposed energy efficiency improvements and/or renewable energy
systems are determined to be cost effective based on guidelines issued
by the Authority;
B. The property owner may not be in bankruptcy and the property may not
constitute property subject to any pending bankruptcy proceeding;
C. The amount financed under the Energize NY Benefit Financing Program
shall be repaid over a term not to exceed the weighted average of the
useful life of renewable energy systems and energy efficiency
improvements to be installed on the property as determined by EIC;
D. Sufficient funds are available from EIC to provide financing to the
property owner;
E. The property owner is current in payments on any existing mortgage;
F. The property owner is current in payments on any existing real
property taxes and has been current on real property taxes for the
previous three years; and
G. Such additional criteria, not inconsistent with the criteria set forth
above, as the City of Oneida, or EIC acting on its behalf, may set from
time to time.
A. A qualified property owner may participate in the Energize NY Benefit
Financing Program through the execution of an Energize NY finance
agreement made by and between the qualified property owner and EIC,
acting on the behalf of the City of Oneida (the "Energize NY Finance
Agreement").
B. Upon execution of the Energize NY Finance Agreement, the qualified
property owner shall be eligible to receive funds from EIC, acting on
behalf of City of Oneida, for the acquisition, construction, and
installation of qualifying renewable energy systems and energy
efficiency improvements, provided the requirements of § 46-7 of this
chapter have been met.
C. The Energize NY Finance Agreement shall include the terms and
conditions of repayment set forth under § 46-8 of this chapter.
§ 46-5 CHARTER § 46-7
C:175
§ 46-8. Terms and conditions of repayment.
The Energize NY Finance Agreement between the qualified property owner
and EIC, acting on behalf of the City of Oneida, shall set forth the terms and
conditions of repayment in accordance with the following:
§ 46-9. Verification and report.
A. No funds shall be made available for energy efficiency improvements
unless determined to be appropriate through an energy audit as defined
in § 46-2.
B. No funds shall be made available for a renewable energy system unless
determined to be feasible through a renewable energy system
feasibility study as defined in § 46-2.
C. The cost of such energy audit and/or renewable energy system
feasibility study shall be borne solely by the property owner but may be
included in the financed amount if the work is approved.
A. The principal amount of the funds paid to the qualified property owner
hereunder, together with the interest thereon, shall be paid by the
property owner as a charge on their City of Oneida tax bill and shall be
levied and collected at the same time and in the same manner as City of
Oneida property taxes, provided that such charge shall be separately
listed on the tax bill. The City of Oneida shall make payment to EIC or
its designee in the amount of all such separately listed charges within
30 days of the date the payment is due to be made to City of Oneida.
B. The term of such repayment shall be determined at the time the
Energize NY Finance Agreement is executed by the property owner and
EIC, provided that in no case shall the term exceed the weighted
average of the useful life of the systems and improvements as
determined by EIC acting on behalf of the City of Oneida.
C. The rate of interest for the charge shall be fixed by EIC acting on behalf
of the City of Oneida at the time the Energize NY Finance Agreement is
executed by the property owner and EIC.
D. The charge shall constitute a lien upon the real property benefited by
the Energize NY Benefit Financing Program as set forth in Article 5-L of
the General Municipal Law and shall run with the land. A transferee of
title to the benefited real property shall be required to pay any future
installments, including interest thereon.
A. EIC shall be responsible for verifying and reporting to the City of
Oneida on the installation and performance of renewable energy
systems and energy efficiency improvements financed by such
Program.
B. The City of Oneida shall verify and report on the installation and
performance of renewable energy systems and energy efficiency
§ 46-7 ONEIDA CODE § 46-9
C:176
Chapter 47
ENERGY EFFICIENCY, COST REDUCTION AND GREENHOUSE
GAS REDUCTION
improvements financed by the Energize NY Benefit Financing Program
in such form and manner as the Authority may establish.
§ 46-9 CHARTER § 46-9
C:177

ARTICLE I
Community Choice Aggregation Program
§ 47-1. Legislative findings; intent and purpose; authority.
§ 47-2. Definitions.
For purposes of this article, and unless otherwise expressly stated or unless
the context otherwise requires, the terms in this article shall have the
A. It is the policy of both the City of Oneida and the State of New York to
seek to reduce the cost of natural gas and electricity to its residents and
provide cost certainty for the purpose of economic development, to
promote deeper penetration of energy efficiency and renewable energy
resources such as wind and solar, and wider development of distributed
energy resources as well as to examine the retail energy markets and
increase participation of and benefits for eligible consumers in those
markets. Among the policies and models that may offer benefits in New
York is community choice aggregation (CCA), which allows local
governments to determine the default supplier of electricity and natural
gas on behalf of eligible consumers.
B. The purpose of this CCA program is to allow participating local
governments, including the City of Oneida, to procure electricity or
natural gas supply service on behalf of their residential and commercial
customers while maintaining transmission and distribution service from
the existing distribution utility. Residential and commercial customers
will have the opportunity to opt out of any approved CCA program. This
article establishes a program that will allow the City of Oneida or its
designated agent or administrator for that purpose, to put out for bid
the total amount of natural gas and/or electricity being purchased by
residential and commercial customers participating in the CCA
program. Eligible consumers will have the opportunity to have more
control to lower their overall energy costs, to spur clean energy
innovation and investment, to improve customer choice and value, and
to protect the environment; thereby, fulfilling the purposes of this
article and fulfilling an important public purpose.
C. The City of Oneida is hereby authorized to participate in a community
choice aggregation program pursuant to § 10(1)(ii)(a)(12) of the New
York Municipal Home Rule Law; and State of New York Public Service
Commission Case No. 14-M-0224, Proceeding on Motion of the
Commission to Enable Community Choice Aggregation Programs
(issued April 21, 2016) as may be amended, including subsequent
orders of the Public Service Commission (PSC) issued in connection
with or related to Case No. 14-M-0224, to the extent that orders related
to Case No. 14-M-0224 enable actions by the City.
D. This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Community Choice
Aggregation Program Law" of the City of Oneida.
§ 47-1 CHARTER § 47-2
C:179
meanings employed in the State of New York Public Service Commission's
Uniform Business Practices or, if not so defined there, as indicated below:
AGGREGATED DATA — Aggregated and anonymized information including
the number of consumers by service class, the aggregated peak demand
(kW) (for electricity) by month for the past 12 to 24 months, by service class
to the extent possible, and the aggregated energy (kWh) for electricity or
volumetric consumption for gas by month for the past 12 to 24 months by
service class.
CCA ADMINISTRATOR — Shall refer to the entity selected by the City
of Oneida, as established by resolution of the Common Council, duly
authorized to put out the bid for the total amount of electricity and/or
natural gas being purchased by participating consumers. The CCA
Administrator is responsible for program organization, administration,
procurement, and communications, unless otherwise specified.
CCA ORDER — The PSC's Order Authorizing Framework for Community
Choice Aggregation Opt-Out Program, issued on April 21, 2016, in Case
14-M-0224, "Proceeding on Motion of the Commission to Enable Community
Choice Aggregation Programs."
COMMUNITY CHOICE AGGREGATION PROGRAM (CCA PROGRAM) —
A municipal energy procurement program, which replaces the incumbent
utility as the default supplier of energy for all residential and commercial
customers within the City of Oneida who have not opted out of the CCA
program. Notwithstanding the above, the incumbent utility will continue to
distribute energy as the distribution utility to all residential and commercial
customers within the CCA program.
CUSTOMER-SPECIFIC DATA — Customer-specific information, personal
data and utility data for all consumers in the City of Oneida eligible for
opt-out treatment based on the terms of the CCA Order and the CCA
program design including the customer of record's name, mailing address,
telephone number, account number, and primary language, if available, and
any customer-specific alternate billing name, address, and phone number.
DATA SECURITY AGREEMENT — An agreement between the distribution
utility and the City of Oneida that obligates each party to meet, collectively:
All national, state and local laws, regulations or other government
standards relating to the protection of information that identifies or can
be used to identify an individual eligible consumer with respect to the
CCA Administrator's or its representative's processing of confidential
utility information;
A.
The distribution utility's internal requirements and procedures relating
to the protection of information that identifies or can be used to identify
individual eligible consumer with respect to the CCA Administrator's or
its representative's processing of confidential utility information; and
B.
The CCA Order and PSC rules, regulations, and guidelines relating to
confidential data.
C.
§ 47-2 ONEIDA CODE § 47-2
C:180
DEFAULT SERVICE — Supply service provided by the distribution utility to
consumers who are not currently receiving service from an energy service
company (ESCO). Eligible consumers within the City of Oneida that receive
default service, and have not opted out, will be enrolled in the CCA
program.
DISTRIBUTED ENERGY RESOURCES (DER) — Local renewable energy
projects, shared renewables like community solar, energy efficiency,
demand response, energy management, energy storage, microgrid projects
and other innovative Reforming the Energy Vision (REV) initiatives that
optimize system benefits, target and address load pockets/profile within the
CCA's zone, and reduce cost of service for participating consumers.
DISTRIBUTION UTILITY — The local incumbent utility owning and
controlling the means of distribution of the natural gas or electricity that is
regulated by the PSC.
ELIGIBLE CONSUMERS — Eligible consumers of electricity and/or natural
gas who receive default service from the distribution utility as of the
effective date, or new consumers that subsequently become eligible to
participate in the CCA program, at one or more locations within the
geographic boundaries of the City of Oneida, except those consumers who
receive default service and have requested not to have their account
information shared by the distribution utility. For the avoidance of doubt,
all eligible consumers must reside or be otherwise located at one or more
locations within the geographic boundaries of the City of Oneida, as such
boundaries exist on the effective date of the Energy Services Agreement
(ESA) between the City of Oneida and the supplier.
NEW CONSUMERS — Consumers of electricity that become eligible
consumers after the effective date of the ESA between the City of Oneida
and the supplier, including those that opt in or move into the City of Oneida.
PARTICIPATING CONSUMERS — Eligible consumers enrolled in the CCA
program, either because they are consumers who receive default service
from the distribution utility as of the effective date of the ESA and have not
opted out, or are new consumers.
PUBLIC SERVICE COMMISSION (PSC) — New York State Public Service
Commission.
SUPPLIERS — An energy service company (ESCO) duly authorized to
conduct business in the State of New York as an ESCO and that produces
electric power and natural gas for eligible consumers in connection with
this article or, alternatively, generators of electricity and natural gas or
other entities who procure and resell electricity or natural gas.
§ 47-3. Establishment of a community choice aggregation program.
A. A community choice aggregation program is hereby established by the
City of Oneida, whereby the City of Oneida may implement a CCA
program to the full extent permitted by the CCA Order, and any
subsequent orders, as set forth more fully herein.
§ 47-2 CHARTER § 47-3
C:181
§ 47-4. Customer eligibility.
§ 47-5. Supplier selection; supplier contracts.
B. The City of Oneida may act as aggregator or broker for the sale of
electric supply, gas supply, or both to eligible consumers and may enter
into contracts with one or more suppliers, through the CCA
Administrator, for energy supply and other services on behalf of eligible
consumers.
C. The CCA Administrator and the City of Oneida may enter into
agreements and contracts with other municipalities to develop offers of
opt-in distributed energy resources (DER) products and services to
participating consumers, including opportunities to participate in local
renewable energy projects, solar, energy efficiency, benchmarking,
microgrids, storage, demand response, energy management, and other
innovative Reforming the Energy Vision (REV) initiatives and objectives
designed to optimize system benefits, target and address load pockets/
profile within the CCA zone, and reduce costs for CCA customers.
D. Under the CCA program, the operation and ownership of distribution
service shall remain with the distribution utility. The City of Oneida's
procurement of energy supply through a CCA program constitutes
neither the purchase of a public utility system, nor the furnishing of
utility service. The City of Oneida will not take over any part of the
electric or gas transmission or distribution system and will not furnish
any type of utility service, but will instead negotiate with suppliers
through the CCA Administrator on behalf of participating consumers.
A. All consumers within the City of Oneida, including residential and
nonresidential, regardless of size, shall be eligible to participate in the
CCA program in accordance with the CCA Order.
B. All consumers that are members of the eligible service classes listed by
utility in Appendix C of the CCA Order shall be enrolled on an opt-out
basis except for consumers 1) that are already taking service from an
ESCO, 2) that have placed a freeze or block on their account, or 3) for
whom inclusion in the CCA program will interfere with a choice the
consumer has already made to take service pursuant to a special rate.
Those consumers may be enrolled on an opt-in basis.
C. New consumers shall be enrolled on an opt-out basis. Those consumers
will be mailed an opt-out letter consistent with the requirements in the
CCA Order.
A. The CCA Administrator, on behalf of the City of Oneida, shall issue one
or more requests for proposals to suppliers to provide energy to
participants and may then award a contract in accordance with the CCA
program.
§ 47-3 ONEIDA CODE § 47-5
C:182
§ 47-6. Opt-out process.
An opt-out letter, printed on municipal letterhead and signed by a City
official, shall be mailed by the CCA Administrator to eligible consumers
at least 30 days prior to customer enrollment. The opt-out letter shall
include information on the CCA program and the contract signed with the
selected ESCO including specific details on rates, services, contract term,
cancellation fee, and methods of opting-out of the CCA program. The letter
shall explain that consumers who do not notify the CCA Administrator and/
or ESCO of their intention to opt-out will be enrolled in ESCO service under
the contract terms and that information on those consumers, including
energy usage data and APP status, will be provided to the ESCO.
§ 47-7. Customer service.
Customer service shall be available to participating consumers to resolve
concerns, answer questions, and transact business with respect to the
service received from the supplier. Both the CCA Administrator and ESCO
shall provide consumers with customer service contact information,
including a toll-free telephone number and representatives available during
normal business hours (9:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. Eastern Time, Monday
through Friday), to address customer issues.
§ 47-8. Data protection requirements.
B. The terms of the supplier contracts ("CCA contract") shall comply with
applicable laws and state programs and policies.
A. The CCA Administrator may request the distribution utility's
aggregated customer information on all participating consumers in the
City of Oneida.
B. Customer-specific data shall be protected in a manner compliant with,
collectively:
(1) All national, state and local laws, regulations or other government
standards relating to the protection of information that identifies or
can be used to identify an individual that apply with respect to the
City of Oneida or its representative's processing of confidential
utility information;
(2) The utility's internal requirements and procedures relating to the
protection of information that identifies or can be used to identify
an individual that apply with respect to the City of Oneida or its
representative's processing of confidential utility information; and
(3) The CCA Order and PSC rules, regulations and guidelines relating
to confidential data.
C. The City of Oneida shall enter into a "data security agreement" with the
distribution utility for the purpose of protecting customer data.
§ 47-5 CHARTER § 47-9
C:183
§ 47-9. Administration fee.
To cover the cost of the administrative fee assessed to the City of Oneida
by the CCA Administrator, the City of Oneida may collect, or cause to be
collected, funds from customer payments to pay for such administrative
costs associated with running the CCA program.
§ 47-10. Reporting.
§ 47-11. Severability.
The invalidity or unenforceability of any section, subsection, paragraph,
sentence, clause, provision or phrase of the aforementioned sections, as
declared by the valid judgment of any court of competent jurisdiction to
be unconstitutional, shall not affect the validity or unenforceability of any
other section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause, provision, or phrase,
which shall remain in full force and effect.
A. Annual reports shall be prepared by the CCA Administrator and filed
with the Common Council of the City of Oneida by March 31 of each
year and cover the previous calendar year.
B. Annual reports shall include, at a minimum: number of consumers
served; number of consumers cancelling during the year; number of
complaints received; commodity prices paid; value-added services
provided during the year (e.g., installation of DER or other clean energy
services); and administrative costs collected. The first report shall also
include the number of consumers who opted-out in response to the
initial opt-out letter or letters.
§ 47-9 ONEIDA CODE § 47-11
C:184
ARTICLE II
Energy Performance Contracts
§ 47-12. Intent and purpose; authority.
§ 47-13. Energy performance contracts.
§ 47-14. Leasing of City-owned land.
Notwithstanding any other provision of this Code or the Oneida City
Charter, in connection with any energy performance contract, the Common
Council may, by resolution and pursuant to § 9-103 of the New York State
Energy Law, lease City-owned real property to an energy performance
contractor for the same length of time as the term of such energy
performance contract, and on such terms and conditions as may be
agreeable to the parties thereto and are not otherwise inconsistent with law.
A. The purpose of this article is to obtain long-term energy and cost
savings by contracting for the provision of energy conservation
improvements and/or energy production equipment on or within
buildings, facilities or land owned by the City of Oneida. It is further the
intent of this article to encourage investment in such projects by
empowering the Common Council, when applicable, to enter into longterm
lease agreements of City-owned buildings, facilities or land to
providers of energy conservation or energy generation products and
services. Such arrangements will improve and protect the health,
safety, security, and welfare of the residents of the City of Oneida by
promoting energy conservation and independence, developing
alternate sources of energy and fostering business activity.
B. This article is adopted pursuant to Municipal Home Rule Law §§ 10(1)
and 22(1), and is intended to, and shall, for the purposes of this article
only, supersede Section 3.17 of the Oneida City Charter.
A. Pursuant to § 9-102 of the New York State Energy Law, the term
"energy performance contract" means an agreement for the provision
of energy services, including but not limited to electricity, heating,
ventilation, cooling, steam or hot water, in which a person agrees to
install, maintain or manage energy systems or equipment to improve
the energy efficiency of, or produce energy in connection with, a
building or facility in exchange for a portion of the energy savings or
revenues.
B. All energy performance contracts between the City and an energy
performance contractor or contractors shall be made in accordance
with § 9-103 of the New York State Energy Law as it currently exists,
and as may be amended from time to time.
§ 47-12 CHARTER § 47-15
C:185
§ 47-15. Severability.
The invalidity or unenforceability of any section, subsection, paragraph,
sentence, clause, provision or phrase of the aforementioned sections, as
declared by the valid judgment of any court of competent jurisdiction to
be unconstitutional, shall not affect the validity or unenforceability of any
other section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause, provision, or phrase,
which shall remain in full force and effect.
§ 47-15 ONEIDA CODE § 47-15
C:186
Chapter 49
ETHICS, CODE OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Officers and employees — See Ch. 104.
§ 49-1. Purpose.
Pursuant to the provisions of § 806 of the General Municipal Law, the
Common Council of Oneida, New York, recognizes that there are rules of
ethical conduct for public officers and employees which must be observed
if a high degree of moral conduct is to be obtained and if public confidence
is to be maintained in our unit of local government. It is the purpose of
this chapter to promulgate these rules of ethical conduct for the officers
and employees of the city. The rules of ethical conduct of this chapter, as
adopted, shall not conflict with but shall be in addition to any prohibition of
Article 18 of the General Municipal Law or any other general or special law
relating to ethical conduct and interest in contracts of municipal officers
and employees.
§ 49-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CONFLICT OF INTEREST — A conflict of interest is a limitation on the
holding of a municipal office when the holder of the office has certain other
private interests affecting the municipality.
INTEREST — Except as provided in General Municipal Law § 802, "interest"
is defined as a direct or pecuniary or material benefit accruing to a
municipal officer or employee as the result of a contract with the
municipality in which such officer or employee serves. An officer or
employee shall be deemed to have an interest in the contract of:
Spouse, minor children and dependents, except a contract of
employment with the municipality which such officer or employee
serves;
A.
A firm, partnership or association of which such officer or employee is
a member or employee;
B.
A corporation of which such officer or employee is an officer, director
or employee; and
C.
A corporation any stock of which is owned or controlled directly or
indirectly by such officer or employee.
D.
§ 47-15 CHARTER § 49-2
C:187
MUNICIPAL OFFICER OR EMPLOYEE — An officer or employee of the City
of Oneida, whether paid or unpaid, including members of any administrative
board, commission or other agency thereof. No person shall be deemed to
be a municipal officer or employee solely by reason of being a volunteer
fireman or civil defense volunteer.
§ 49-3. Standards of conduct.
Every officer or employee of the City of Oneida shall be subject to and abide
by the following standards of conduct:
A. Gifts. He shall not, directly or indirectly, solicit any gift or accept or
receive any gift having a value of $75 or more, whether in the form of
money, services, loan, travel, entertainment, hospitality, thing or
promise, or any other form, under circumstances in which it could
reasonably be inferred that the gift was intended to influence him, or
could reasonably be expected to influence him, in the performance of
his official duties or was intended as a reward for any official action on
his part.
B. Confidential information. He shall not disclose confidential information
acquired by him in the course of his official duties or use such
information to further his personal interest.
C. Representation before one's own agency. He shall not receive or enter
into any agreement, express or implied, for compensation for services
to be rendered in relation to any matter before any municipal agency of
which he is an officer, member or employee or of any municipal agency
over which he has jurisdiction or to which he has the power to appoint
any member, officer or employee.
D. Representation before any agency for a contingent fee. He shall not
receive or contract to receive payment for services to be rendered in
relation to any matter before any agency of the City of Oneida, whereby
his compensation is dependent on the outcome of such matter and not
based upon the reasonable value of the services rendered.
E. Disclosure of interest in legislation. To the extent that he knows thereof,
a member of the Common Council and any other officer or employee of
the City of Oneida, whether paid or unpaid, who participates in the
discussion or gives official opinion to the Common Council on any
legislation before the Common Council shall publicly disclose on the
official record the nature and extent of any direct or indirect financial or
other private interest he has in such legislation.
F. Disclosure of conflict. An officer or employee is required to inform the
City Clerk of a conflict of interest in a contract or other matter whether
or not prohibited unless the interest is exempt under General Municipal
Law § 802(2). However, disclosure does not cure the conflict and the
action is still prohibited.
§ 49-2 ONEIDA CODE § 49-3
C:188
§ 49-4. Personal claims.
Nothing herein shall be deemed to bar or prevent the timely filing by a
present or former municipal officer or employee of any claim, account,
demand or suit against the City of Oneida, or any agency thereof, on behalf
of himself or any member of his family arising out of any personal injury or
property damage or for any lawful benefit authorized or permitted by law.
§ 49-5. Distribution of Code of Ethics.
The Mayor of the City of Oneida shall cause a copy of this Code of Ethics
to be distributed to every officer and employee of the city within 30 days
after the effective date of this chapter. Each officer and employee elected
or appointed thereafter shall be furnished a copy before entering upon the
duties of his office or employment.
§ 49-6. Penalties for offenses.
In addition to any penalty contained in any other provision of law, any
person who shall knowingly and intentionally violate any of the provisions of
this code may be fined, suspended or removed from office or employment,
as the case may be, in the manner provided by law.
§ 49-7. Board of Ethics.
G. Investments in conflict with official duties. He shall not invest or hold
any investment, directly or indirectly, in any financial, business,
commercial or other private transaction which creates a conflict with
his official duties.
H. Private employment. He shall not engage in, solicit, negotiate for or
promise to accept private employment or render services for private
interests when such employment or service creates a conflict with or
impairs the proper discharge of his official duties.
I. Future employment. He shall not, after the termination of service or
employment with such municipality, appear before any board or agency
of the City of Oneida, in relation to any case, proceeding or application
in which he personally participated during the period of his service or
employment or which was under his active consideration.
A. Establishment; members; terms of office. There is hereby established a
Board of Ethics consisting of the Mayor and four members to be
appointed by the Mayor and shall serve without compensation and at
the pleasure of the Mayor. Terms shall be for four years and staggered.
(Initial member appointments shall be for one-, two-, three- and fouryear
terms, with subsequent four-year appointments.) A majority of
such members shall be persons other than officers or employees of the
City of Oneida.
§ 49-3 CHARTER § 49-7
C:189
Chapter 53
FAIR HOUSING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alarms — See Ch. 5.
Building construction — See Ch. 34.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 61.
Health and sanitation — See Ch. 73.
Housing standards — See Ch. 77.
§ 53-1. Policy.
The Common Council hereby finds and declares it to be the public policy
of the city to promote fair dealing in real estate transactions, to maintain
community stability and security and to foster racial and social harmony.
This chapter is adopted in order to reinforce this policy and to supplement
the federal and state laws pertaining to fair housing.
§ 53-2. Definitions. [Amended 12-3-1991 by Ord. No. 91-10]
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings and
interpretations indicated, unless the context clearly requires otherwise:
DISCRIMINATE — Extend differential treatment on the basis of race, creed,
color, national origin, sex, handicap or marital status or family status, and
including discrimination because of the race, color, creed, national origin,
sex, handicap or marital status of friends and associates, or familial status.
DWELLING — Any building, structure or portion thereof which is occupied
as or designed and intended for occupancy as a residence by one or more
families or any vacant land which is offered for sale or lease for the
construction or location thereon of any such building, structure or portion
thereof.
FAIR HOUSING OFFICER — The Director of Community Development in
the city.
B. Powers and duties. The Board of Ethics shall have the powers and
duties prescribed by Article 18 of the General Municipal Law and shall
render advisory opinions to the officers and employees of the City of
Oneida with respect to Article 18 of the General Municipal Law and any
Code of Ethics adopted pursuant to such article, under such rules and
regulations as the Board may prescribe. In addition, the Board may
make recommendations with respect to the drafting and adoption of a
Code of Ethics or amendments thereto upon request of the Common
Council. The legal counsel of the Board of Ethics shall be the City
Attorney.
§ 49-7 ONEIDA CODE § 53-2
C:190
FAMILIAL STATUS —
FAMILY — Includes a single individual.
HANDICAP — Includes a bodily or mental disablement which may be the
result of injury, illness or congenital condition for which reasonable
accommodation can be made.
HOUSING ACCOMMODATION — Includes any building, structure or
portion thereof which is used or occupied or is intended, arranged or
designed to be used or occupied as the home, residence or sleeping place of
one or more human beings.
LEASE — Includes sublease, assignment and rental and includes any
contract to do any of the foregoing.
LENDING INSTITUTION — Any bank, insurance company, savings and
loan association, other person in the business of obtaining, arranging or
negotiating loans or guaranties as agent or broker, and any person in the
business of buying or selling loans or instruments for the payment of money
which are secured by title to or a security interest in real property, but shall
not include any religious institution or organization nor any charitable or
educational organization operated, supervised or controlled by a religious
institution or organization.
MARITAL STATUS — Includes the state of being married, single, divorced,
separated or widowed and the usual conditions associated therewith,
including pregnancy or parenthood.
OWNER — Includes any person, or any one of a number of persons, in whom
is vested all or any part of the legal or equitable ownership, dominion or
title to any real property.
§ 53-3. Prohibited acts. [Amended 12-3-1991 by Ord. No. 91-10]
Includes one or more individuals (who have not attained the age of 18
years) being domiciled with:
A parent or another person having legal custody of such individual
or individuals; or
(1)
The designee of such parent or other person having such custody,
with the written permission of such parent or other person.
(2)
A.
The protections afforded against discrimination on the basis of familial
status shall apply to any person who is pregnant or is in the process of
securing legal custody of any individual who has not attained the age of
18 years.
B.
A. No person who receives or expects to receive pecuniary gain from the
sale or rental of real property shall:
(1) Refuse to sell, lease, rent, furnish services or otherwise deny or
withhold any housing accommodation constructed or to be
constructed in the city to any person or refuse to negotiate for the
§ 53-2 CHARTER § 53-3
C:191
lease or rental of housing accommodation or otherwise make
unavailable to any person by reason of the race, creed, color,
national origin, sex, handicap or marital status or familial status of
such person.
(2) Represent to any person that any dwelling is not available for
inspection, sale or rental when such dwelling is in fact so available.
(3) Discriminate against any person because of his race, creed, color,
national origin, sex, handicap, marital status or familial status in
the terms, conditions or privileges of the sale, rental or lease of any
housing accommodation constructed or to be constructed.
(4) Discriminate in the furnishing of information, services or facilities
to any person in connection with the sale or rental of real property
because of the race, creed, color, national origin, sex, handicap,
marital status or familial status of such person.
(5) Print or circulate or cause to be printed or circulated any
statement, advertisement or publication, or use any form or
application for the purchase, lease or rental of any housing
accommodation, or make any record or inquiry in connection with
the prospective purchase, lease or rental of any housing
accommodation which expresses, directly or indirectly, any
limitation, specification or discrimination as to race, creed, color,
national origin, sex, handicap, marital status or familial status, or
any intent to make any such limitation, specification or
discrimination.
(6) Display listings or show prospective purchasers or renters units for
sale or lease on the basis of race, creed, color, national origin, sex,
handicap, marital status, or familial status, or display listings or
show prospects units for sale or lease in areas of the city based on
race, creed, color, national origin, sex, handicap, marital status, or
familial status.
(7) Induce a real estate transaction from which any such person may
benefit financially, by representing that a change has occurred or
will or may occur in the composition of the block, neighborhood or
area with respect to the race, creed, color, national origin,
handicap, marital status or family status of the owners or
occupants in the block, neighborhood or area in which the real
property is located, and to represent, directly or indirectly, that this
change will or may result in undesirable consequences in the block,
neighborhood or area in which the real property is located,
including but not limited to the physical deterioration of dwellings,
the lowering of property values, and increase in criminal or
antisocial behavior, or a decline in the quality of schools or other
facilities.
B. It shall be unlawful for any real estate broker or dealer, or any agent or
employee of a real estate broker or dealer, to influence or attempt to
§ 53-3 ONEIDA CODE § 53-3
C:192
§ 53-4. Exceptions. [Amended 12-3-1991 by Ord. No. 91-10]
influence any other person who purports or represents himself to be
a prospective purchaser, seller, occupant or tenant or landlord of real
property to purchase, sell or rent or to refrain from purchasing or
renting or selling real property by referring to the race, creed, color,
national origin, sex, handicap, marital status or familial status of
occupants or prospective occupants of other real property in the area.
C. No bank, trust company, savings bank, savings and loan association or
other lending institution, insurance company, finance company or
financial services company, to whom application is made for financial
assistance for the purchase, acquisition, construction, improvement,
repair or maintenance of housing on behalf of such person shall
discriminate against any applicant because of race, creed, color,
national origin, sex, handicap, marital status or familial status in the
granting, withholding, extending or renewing or in the fixing of the
amount, interest rate, duration or other terms or conditions of any such
financial assistance nor shall any such institution refuse financial
assistance because such housing accommodation lies in a particular
area of the city, if real property is located within the geographic area
ordinarily served by such bank or within the community within which
the principal or any branch office of such banks is located. For the
purpose of this section, "discrimination" shall include refusal to make
loans, differentiating in the type or terms of loans, including interest
rates, charges to buyer and seller, duration and amount of loans,
influencing appraisals in connection with loans or delaying of loan
applications.
D. No person shall aid, abet, incite, compel or coerce the doing of any of
the acts forbidden under this chapter, or attempt to do so. This section
may be enforced by appropriate civil actions.
E. No person engaged in any of the prohibited acts as hereinabove defined
shall retaliate or discriminate against any person because such person
has filed a complaint, testified or assisted in any proceeding under the
article.
A. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to apply to:
(1) The rental of a housing accommodation in a building which
contains housing accommodations for not more than two families
living independently of each other, if the owner or members of his
family reside in one of such housing accommodations.
(2) The restriction of the rental of all rooms in a housing
accommodation to individuals of the same sex.
(3) The rental of a room or rooms in a housing accommodation, if such
rental is by the occupant of the housing accommodation or by the
§ 53-3 CHARTER § 53-4
C:193
§ 53-5. Duty of fair housing officer.
It shall be the duty of the Fair Housing Officer to initiate, receive and
investigate written complaints charging discrimination, make findings of
fact, seek conciliation of such complaints, seek compliance by violators and
take all other actions as authorized by law.
§ 53-6. Complaints.
owner of the housing accommodation and he or members of his
family reside in such housing accommodation.
B. This section shall in no manner prevent the requirement for additional
structural, emergency alarm and/or fire prevention precautions as may
be required by any ordinance, nor shall it be interpreted to prevent
enforcement of local building code and zoning requirements and use
limitations for special residence facilities, as defined by local law. This
chapter shall not be interpreted to allow for any unilateral change in
occupancy or creation of special occupancy uses licensed or regulated
by the state, without first obtaining all required permits and certificates
of occupancy to ascertain full compliance with local laws and building
codes.
C. Nothing in this chapter shall require an owner to offer for sale or lease
real property to the public at large, nor shall this chapter be deemed to
prohibit discrimination for any reason other than race, creed, color,
national origin, sex, handicap, marital status, or familial status and not
otherwise prohibited by law.
A. Any person aggrieved in any manner by a violation of any provision of
this chapter may file a written complaint with the Fair Housing Officer
or his designee. The complaint shall be addressed to the Fair Housing
Officer and shall state:
(1) The name and address of the complainant;
(2) The name and address of the person or persons against whom the
complainant is brought, if known to the complainant;
(3) The address of the property involved;
(4) The name and address of all persons believed to have knowledge
concerning the alleged violation;
(5) The facts surrounding the alleged violation of this chapter; and
(6) Such other information as may be required by the Fair Housing
Officer.
B. The Fair Housing Officer shall provide a printed form of complaint for
the use of aggrieved persons. No fee shall be charged for the filing of
the complaint. Any complaint shall be barred from consideration unless
it is filed with the Fair Housing Officer or his designee within six months
§ 53-4 ONEIDA CODE § 53-6
C:194
§ 53-7. Penalties for offenses.
after the alleged discriminatory practice has occurred. The Fair
Housing Officer may end the time for filing the complaint for an
additional 60 days when conciliation efforts are pending.
C. The Fair Housing Officer shall furnish a copy of the complaint, to the
person or persons against whom the complaint is brought, in person or
by certified mail within five business days of receipt of the complaint
from the complainant. The Fair Housing Officer shall investigate the
complaint and determine whether or not, in his opinion, probable cause
exists for believing that the allegations made in the complaint are true.
If, after such investigation, the Fair Housing Officer determines that
probable cause does not exist to believe that the allegations made in the
complaint are true, he shall dismiss the complaint and shall so notify
the complainant and all other parties interested. If, after such
investigation, the Fair Housing Officer determines that probable cause
does exist to believe that the allegations made in the complaint are
true, he shall set a date for a conference and notify the parties of the
time and place thereof; at such conference, the Fair Housing Officer
shall interview the complainant and the person or persons against
whom the complaint has been directed and shall attempt to resolve the
complaint by conciliation.
D. The Fair Housing Officer is authorized to hold closed meetings for
conciliation of complaints of discrimination brought pursuant to this
chapter. Nothing said or done in the course of such meetings shall be
made public by the Fair Housing Officer, the complainant or by any
other party to the proceedings without the written consent of all
persons concerned.
E. If the Fair Housing Officer has been unable to secure voluntary
compliance, and if he has made a determination of the probable
occurrence of one or more of the prohibited acts as hereinabove
defined, the Fair Housing Officer may request the City Attorney to
institute and maintain an action provided for below. The City Attorney
shall, within 30 days of such request, make a determination as to
whether to proceed with such action. If the City Attorney determines to
proceed, he shall institute an action in a court of competent jurisdiction
within 30 days after such determination.
A. The City Attorney, on behalf of the city, may institute and maintain an
action in a court of competent jurisdiction to restrain by injunction any
violation of this chapter, or to impose any fines or to enter a judgment
for any penalties provided for violations of this chapter.
B. Upon a finding by the court that any person has engaged in any of the
acts prohibited in this chapter, he shall be punished as provided in
§ 1-14 of this Code.
§ 53-6 CHARTER § 53-8
C:195
§ 53-8. Prevention of multiplicity of proceedings.
In order to prevent multiplicity of proceedings, the provisions of this
chapter shall not be operative where there is pending or there has been a
determination in any other proceeding or action authorized under laws or
ordinances of another governmental body based upon the identical acts or
acts prohibited under § 53-3 of this chapter.
Chapter 57
FIREARMS AND WEAPONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Noise — See Ch. 98. Peace and good order — See Ch. 113.
§ 57-1. Discharge of firearms.
Any person who, otherwise than in self-defense or in the discharge of official
duty, willfully discharges any species of firearms in the inside tax district
of the City of Oneida, Madison County, New York, or within the following
described area in the outside tax district of the City of Oneida, Madison
County, New York, being the area bounded as follows: "Commencing at
the intersection of Route 5 and Glenwood Avenue; thence southerly along
Glenwood Avenue to Fairview Avenue; thence westerly along Fairview
Avenue to a point being an extension of the westerly line of the Baker
Reservoir premises; thence northerly along said extension to Route 5;
thence westerly along Route 5 to the westerly city line; thence northerly
along said westerly city line to West Elm Street; thence easterly along West
Elm Street to the inside tax district line; thence northerly along the inside
tax district line extending to the New York State Thruway; thence easterly
along the thruway and the inside tax district lien to Oneida Creek," other
than under supervised instruction by properly authorized instructors at an
established rifle range or target range shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
§ 57-2. Air guns, pellet guns, etc.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge a gun on any premises
within the city except with the express permission of the owner of such
premises. No owner of premises shall permit a gun to be fired or
discharged on his premises without first ascertaining that the person or
persons to whom such permission is granted is of sufficient age,
judgment and understanding to fire or discharge the same so as not to
injure the person or property of another. No person shall fire or
discharge a gun in a public place or place frequented by the public, nor
shall any person carry such gun in any public place or place frequented
by the public except while en route to or from such person's place of
residence.
§ 53-8 ONEIDA CODE § 57-2
C:196
Chapter 61
FIRE PREVENTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alarm systems — See Ch. 5.
Building Code administration and
enforcement — See Ch. 33.
Abandoned, unsafe and collapsed
buildings — See Ch. 34.
Electrical standards — See Ch. 45.
Housing standards — See Ch. 77.
B. The term "gun" as used herein shall include BB guns, air rifles, air
pistols, pellet guns and any gun, whether of the rifle or pistol type, by
means of which a pellet or bullet is propelled therefrom by compressed
air or springs.
§ 57-2 CHARTER § 57-2
C:197

ARTICLE I
(Reserved)22
§ 61-1. (Reserved)
22.Editor's Note: Former Art. I, Fire Protection Districts, was repealed 4-3-2007 by Ord. No.
07-04.
§ 61-1 CHARTER § 61-1
C:199

ARTICLE II
Bureau of Fire Prevention
§ 61-2. Bureau established.
A Bureau of Fire Prevention in the Bureau of Fire is hereby established and
shall be operated under the supervision of the Fire Chief.
§ 61-3. Personnel.
The Fire Chief shall appoint a Chief Inspector (Fire Marshal) and an
Assistant Fire Inspector with the approval of the Commissioner of Public
Safety and they will hold office during good behavior. The Chief Inspector
(Fire Marshal) shall, when duly qualified by the Civil Service Commission,
attain the rank of Lieutenant in the Bureau of Fire. The Fire Chief may
designate such number of assistant fire inspectors as shall from time to time
be necessary and authorized by the Commissioner of Public Safety.
§ 61-4. Functions generally.
§ 61-5. Investigations and reports of causes of fires.
A. It shall be the duty of the inspectors of the Bureau of Fire Prevention to
enforce all laws and ordinances of the state and the City covering the
following:
(1) Prevention of fires.
(2) Storage and use of explosives and inflammables.
(3) Installation and maintenance of automatic and other fire alarm
systems and fire-extinguishing equipment.
(4) Maintenance and regulation of fire escapes.
(5) The means and adequacy of exit in case of fire from factories,
schools, hotels, lodging houses, asylums, hospitals, nursing homes,
churches, halls, theaters, amphitheaters and all other places in
which any number of persons work, live or congregate from time to
time for any purpose.
(6) The investigation of the cause, origin and circumstances of all fires.
B. Such persons shall have other powers and perform such other duties as
may be imposed from time to time.
C. The Fire Chief may delegate any of his powers or duties under this
article to the Chief Inspector of the Bureau of Fire Prevention.
A. The Bureau of Fire Prevention shall investigate the cause or origin and
circumstances of every fire occurring in the City or its Fire Protection
Districts by which property has been destroyed or damaged and so far
as possible shall determine whether the fire is a result of carelessness
§ 61-2 CHARTER § 61-5
C:201
§ 61-6. Instructions for use of forms.
The Fire Chief shall prepare instructions for the Chief Inspector and his
assistants and all forms for their use in the reports required by this article.
§ 61-7. Annual report.
An annual report of the Bureau of Fire Prevention shall be made on or
before February 1 of each year and transmitted to the Commissioner of
Public Safety and the Common Council. It shall contain all proceeding under
this chapter with such statistics as the Fire Chief may wish to include
therein.
or design. Such investigations shall be begun immediately upon the
occurrence of such a fire by the assistant on duty, and if it appears
to the Inspector making such an investigation that such fire is of
suspicious origin, the Fire Chief shall be immediately notified of the
fact. The inspector shall take charge immediately of the physical
evidence and shall notify the proper authorities designated by law to
pursue the investigation of such matters and shall further cooperate
with the authorities in the collection of evidence and in the prosecution
of the case.
B. Every fire shall be reported in writing by the officer in charge the day
the fire occurs. Such report shall be in such form as shall be prescribed
by the Chief and contain such information as may be required.
C. The City Attorney, upon the request of the Bureau of Fire Prevention,
shall assist the inspectors in the investigation of any fire which, in their
opinion, is of suspicious origin.
D. The Fire Chief shall keep in the office of the Bureau of Fire Prevention a
record of all fires and of all the facts concerning the same, including
statistics as to the extent of such fires, damage caused, whether such
losses were covered by insurance and, if possible, the amount paid by
the insurance companies on the losses. Such records shall be made
from the fire reports made by the officer in charge the day the fire
occurs.
§ 61-5 ONEIDA CODE § 61-7
C:202
ARTICLE III
Administration and Enforcement of New York State Uniform Fire
Prevention and Building Code
[Amended 12-18-1990 by Ord. No. 90-11; 10-15-1995]
§ 61-8. Scope.
This article shall provide the basic method for administration and
enforcement of the New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building
Code in the City and shall establish powers, duties and responsibilities in
connection therewith.
§ 61-9. Administrative and enforcing officers designated. [Amended
3-9-1996 by Ord. No. 96-02]
Except as provided in § 34-1 of this Code, the Fire Marshal is hereby
designated to administer and enforce the New York State Uniform Fire
Prevention and Building Code within the City.
§ 61-10. Adoption of rules and regulations authorized.
The Fire Marshal, subject to the approval of the Common Council, may
adopt rules and regulations for the administration and enforcement of the
New York State Uniform Fire Protection and Building Code. Such rules
and regulations shall not conflict with such code, this article or any other
provisions of law. The Fire Marshal shall publish all rules and regulations at
least 30 days prior to the effective date thereof in a newspaper of general
circulation within the City.
§ 61-11. Inspections.
The Fire Marshal shall conduct periodic inspections for compliance with
the provisions of the New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building
Code. Such inspections may be made at any reasonable time. If entrance
to make an inspection is refused or cannot be obtained, the Fire Marshal
may apply for a warrant to make an inspection to a court of competent
jurisdiction.
§ 61-12. Records.
The Fire Marshal shall keep official records of all permits, inspection
reports, recommendations, complaints and violation orders.
§ 61-13. Registration of solid-fuel-burning devices.
A. The owner of real property containing premises in which is located a
solid fuel-burning-device shall register the device with the Fire Marshal
or his duly designated representative within 20 days of the latest of:
(1) The effective date of this amended section; or
§ 61-8 CHARTER § 61-13
C:203
§ 61-14. Storage of chemicals or pesticides.
The following provisions shall apply to the storage of chemicals and
pesticides:
(2) The date of acquisition of the device or of premises containing the
device; or
(3) Completion of the construction of the premises containing the
device prior to occupancy of the premises. This may be done in
writing or by a telephone call to the Fire Marshal; in the latter case,
the Fire Marshal shall confirm in writing that the device is
registered. A record of all existing solid-fuel-burning devices shall
be compiled by the Fire Marshal or his duly designated
representative. An inspection will be made by the Fire Marshal's
office of all solid-fuel-burning devices and the owner, tenant or
lessee shall be notified of all violations in writing. Solid-fuelburning
devices previously registered with the Fire Marshal need
not be reregistered, except that the provisions in Subsections B and
C hereof shall remain applicable.
B. The owner of any real property containing premises in which is situated
a solid-fuel-burning device, whether or not operable, is hereby required
to notify, in writing, the Fire Marshal at least 20 business days in
advance of the proposed closing of sale (whether by deed transfer or
land contract) that such premises contain such a device, that the
premises are about to be sold, and stating the closing date. The Fire
Marshal shall thereupon inspect the device.
C. The purchaser of real property containing premises in which is situated
a solid-fuel-burning device shall not operate or permit such a device to
be operated by any tenant, lessee or guest, unless and until an
inspection of such device has been made by the Fire Marshal and
operation thereof approved.
D. "Solid-fuel-burning device," as used herein, shall have the meaning
prescribed by the New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building
Code and shall include any solid-fuel-burning heating appliance,
fireplace, wood stove, coal stove or solid-fuel-burning furnace.
A. Such substances shall be stored in a single isolated building if possible.
One area only shall be used for pesticide storage. Herbicides shall be
stored separately from other pesticides; a separate room, cabinet or
corner shall be used for pesticides.
B. The following shall apply if using existing buildings:
(1) Use a separate building if possible.
(2) If not, choose a wing or corner preferably on the first floor with a
window in it for direct access in case of fire.
§ 61-13 ONEIDA CODE § 61-14
C:204
(3) Do not store pesticides in the same area with or above feeds or
livestock or near other fire hazards such as ammonium nitrate.
(4) Be aware of potential runoff from fire fighting and plan control
through diking, collecting pools, etc.
(5) Ensure drainage away from building but minimize runoff into
sensitive areas.
(6) Install automatic sprinkler system and/or fire detector alarm when
large quantities of chemicals are to be stored.
C. Every business selling hazardous materials shall report to the City Fire
Chief on an annual basis. The date for filing to be determined by the
State Fire Administrator. (See General Municipal Law § 209-U.)
D. The following rules shall apply to pesticide storage:
(1) Identify pesticide storage with prominent waterproof signs over
each entrance, including windows if present, and on all sides of
building as shown in NFPA Pamphlet 43A.
(2) Keep locked when not in use.
(3) Inform police, Fire Department and public health officials, in
writing, of the location and layout of the storage, types of materials
stored and hazards involved. Leave phone numbers of persons
responsible for storage with Fire Chief. Fire companies should map
locations of pesticide chemical storages in their respective areas.
(4) The owners must inform local physicians and hospital of potential
hazards and be sure they know how to treat the same and that
antidotes are on hand. The Clinical Handbook on Economic Poisons
should be available. Antidotes should include an adequate supply of
atropine sulphate and 2-PAM (Protopam chloride).
(5) Post a list of chemicals on outside of building, along with storage
plan. If a diamond symbol is used, this rating would be common to
most storages, as shown in NFPA Pamphlet 57.
(6) Obtain desirable fire-fighting equipment, familiarize yourself and
your help with its operation. Be sure it works, as shown in NFPA
Pamphlet 43A.
(7) Keep pesticide containers, particularly glass, away from windows
and out of the sun so they will not be subject to heat and ignition.
(8) Do not store partly empty containers of pesticides containing
chlorates.
(9) Keep combustibles away from steam lines and heat. Read labels for
information on flammability and store accordingly.
(10) Store highly toxic pesticides in one area.
§ 61-14 CHARTER § 61-14
C:205
§ 61-15. Removal of dangerous buildings or structures.
(11) Store herbicides separately from other pesticides to prevent crosscontamination
and to prevent mistakes in choice of materials.
(12) Dispose of unlabeled pesticides. Treat them as highly toxic.
(13)Keep quantity of hydrated lime on hand for detoxification of spills.
(14) The following NFPA standards must be taken into consideration:
(a) NFPA Pamphlet No. 43A, Storage of Liquid and Oxidizing
Material.
(b) NFPA Pamphlet No. 49, Hazardous Chemicals Data.
(c) NFPA Pamphlet No. 57, Appendix C.
(d) NFPA Pamphlet No. 490, Storage of Ammonium Nitrate.
E. Registration of chemicals and pesticides. All storage of chemicals and
pesticides in existence on December 2, 1980, shall, within 90 days
thereof, be registered with the Fire Marshal or his duly designated
representative. A record of all storage of chemicals and pesticides shall
be compiled by the Fire Marshal or his duly designated representative.
An inspection will be made by the Fire Marshal's office and a permit
must be obtained by the owner, tenant or lessee.
A. A building or structure or part thereof, which is an imminent danger to
life and safety of the public is hereby declared to be a public nuisance.
[Amended 4-3-2007 by Ord. No. 07-04]
B. Whenever the Fire Marshal finds a building or structure, or part
thereof, to be an imminent danger to life and safety of the public, the
Fire Marshal, with approval of the Common Council, may cause it to be
demolished and removed or may cause work to be done in and about the
building or structure as may be necessary to remove the danger.
[Amended 4-3-2007 by Ord. No. 07-04]
C. The Fire Marshal may require the occupants of any such building or
structure, or part thereof, to vacate the premises forthwith. No person
shall use or occupy such building or structure, or part thereof, until it is
made safe. Except for the owner, no person shall enter premises which
have been ordered vacated unless authorized to perform inspections or
repairs or to demolish and remove such building or structure or part
thereof.
D. All costs and expenses incurred by the City in connection with any work
done to remove the danger or in connection with the demolition and
removal of any such building or structure shall be assessed against the
land on which such building or structure is located, and a bill for such
expenses shall be presented to the owner of the property, or if the
owner cannot be ascertained, then such bill shall be posted in a
§ 61-14 ONEIDA CODE § 61-15
C:206
§ 61-16. (Reserved)23
§ 61-17. Compliance required; violation orders; penalties for
offenses.
conspicuous place on the premises. Such assessment shall be and
constitute a lien upon such land. If the owner shall fail to pay for
such expenses within 10 days after the bill is presented or posted, a
legal action may be brought to collect such assessment or to foreclose
such lien. As an alternative to the maintenance of any such action,
the Fire Marshal may file a certificate of the actual expenses incurred
as aforesaid, together with a statement identifying the property in
connection with which the expenses were incurred, and the owner
thereof, with the Assessor, who shall in the preparation of the next
assessment roll assess such amount upon such property. Such amount
shall be included in the levy against such property, shall constitute a
lien and shall be collected and enforced in the same manner, by the
same proceedings, at the same time, and under the same penalties, as
is provided by law for the collection and enforcement of real property
taxes in the City.
A. A person owning, operating, occupying or maintaining property or
premises within the scope of the New York State Uniform Fire
Prevention and Building Code or this article shall comply with all the
provisions of such code, this article and all orders, notices, rules,
regulations or determinations issued in connection therewith.
B. Whenever the Fire Marshal finds that there has been a violation of such
code, this article, or any rule or regulation adopted pursuant to this
article, a violation order shall be issued to the persons responsible.
Violation orders shall be in writing; shall identify the property or
premises; shall specify the violation and remedial action to be taken;
shall provide a reasonable time limit for compliance; and shall state the
time within which an appeal may be taken. Violation orders may be
served by personal service; by mailing by certified mail; or by posting a
copy thereof in a conspicuous place on the premises, and by mailing a
copy thereof to the premises on the same day as posted, enclosed in a
postpaid wrapper addressed to the person responsible. In case the
owner, lessor, occupant or the agent of any of them shall fail, neglect or
refuse to remove, eliminate or abate the violation within the time
specified in the violation order, enforcement procedure shall be
initiated by the Fire Marshal's office, pursuant to provisions of this
article.
C. Failure to comply with any provision of the New York State Uniform Fire
Prevention and Building Code, this article, rules or regulations adopted
pursuant to this chapter or a violation order shall be a misdemeanor. An
action or proceeding in the name of the City may be commenced in any
23.Editor's Note: Former § 61-16, Review board, as amended, was repealed 4-3-2007 by Ord.
No. 07-04.
§ 61-15 CHARTER § 61-17
C:207
§ 61-18. Permits required.
court of competent jurisdiction to compel compliance with or restrain
by injunction the violation of any provision of the New York State
Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code, this article, rule or
regulation adopted pursuant to this chapter or a violation order, or to
vacate the occupancy or building in the case of imminent danger to life
or property. Such remedy shall be in addition to penalties otherwise
prescribed by law.
A. Permits shall be obtained for the following:
(1) Acetylene generators: To operate an acetylene generator having a
calcium carbide capacity exceeding five pounds.
(2) Automobile tire rebuilding plants: To operate an automobile tire
rebuilding plant.
(3) Automobile wrecking yards: To operate an automobile wrecking
yard.
(4) Bowling establishments: For bowling pin refinishing and bowling
lane resurfacing operations involving the use and application of
flammable or combustible liquids or materials.
(5) Cellulose nitrate motion-picture film: To store, keep or have on
hand more than 25 pounds of cellulose nitrate motion-picture film.
(6) Cellulose nitrate plastics (pyroxylin):
(a) To store, keep or have on hand more than 25 pounds of
cellulose nitrate plastics (pyroxylin).
(b) To manufacture articles of cellulose nitrate plastics (pyroxylin)
which shall include the use of cellulose nitrate plastics
(pyroxylin) in the manufacture or assembling of other articles.
(7) Chemicals or pesticides: To store chemicals or pesticides.
(8) Combustible fibers: To store, handle or use combustible fibers in
quantities in excess of 100 cubic feet, except agricultural products
on a farm.
(9) Combustible materials: To store combustible materials, including
but not limited to empty combustible packing cases, boxes, barrels
or similar containers, rubber tires, baled cotton, rubber, cork or
other similar materials in excess of 2,500 cubic feet gross volume,
on any premises.
(10) Compressed gases:
(a) To store, handle or use at normal temperatures and pressures
more than:
§ 61-17 ONEIDA CODE § 61-18
C:208
[1] Two thousand cubic feet of flammable compressed gas; or
[2] Six thousand cubic feet of nonflammable compressed gas.
(b) To store, handle or use any quantity of liquefied natural or
hydrogen gas.
(11) Cryogenics: To store, handle or use cryogenic fluids, except
cryogenics used as a motor fuel and stored in motor vehicle tanks,
as follows:
(a) Production, sale or storage of cryogenic fluids.
(b) Storage or use of flammable cryogenic fluids, cryogenic
oxidizers or liquefied oxygen in excess of 10 gallons.
(12) Dry-cleaning plants: To use in excess of four gallons of solvents or
cleaning agents classified as flammable or combustible.
(13) Dust-producing plants: To operate any grain elevator, flour, starch
or feed mill, woodworking plant or plant pulverizing aluminum,
coal, cocoa, plastics, magnesium, spices, sugar, sulfur or other
materials producing explosive-potential dust.
(14) Explosives, ammunition, blasting agents, and fireworks.
[Amended 4-2-2019 by Ord. No. 19-01]
(a) To manufacture, possess, store, sell or otherwise dispose
explosives and blasting agents.
(b) To use explosives or blasting agents.
(c) To operate a terminal for handling explosives or blasting
agents.
(d) To display fireworks.
(15) Flammable and combustible liquids:
(a) Flammable liquids.
[1] To store, handle or use flammable liquids in excess of 6 1/2
gallons inside dwellings; or in excess of 10 gallons inside
any other building or other occupancy; or in excess of 60
gallons outside of any building.
[2] The provisions of Subsection A(15)(a)[1] above shall not
apply to:
[a] Liquids in the fuel tank of a motor vehicle, aircraft,
portable or stationary engine, boat or portable heating
plant;
§ 61-18 CHARTER § 61-18
C:209
[b] Paints, oils, varnishes or similar flammable mixtures,
when such liquids are stored for maintenance,
painting or similar purposes.
(b) Combustible liquids.
[1] To store, handle or use combustible liquids in excess of 25
gallons inside a building or in excess of 60 gallons outside
of a building.
[2] The provisions of Subsection A(15)(b)[1] above shall not
apply to fuel oil used in connection with oil-burning
equipment.
(c) A permit shall be obtained for the initial installation of any oil
burner and a fuel oil tank used in connection therewith. A
permit shall be required for the replacement of a fuel oil tank
connected to an oil burner.
(d) For processing, blending or refining of flammable or
combustible liquids.
(16) Flammable finishing: For spraying, coating or dipping operations
utilizing flammable or combustible liquids.
(17) Fruit ripening process: To conduct a fruit ripening process using
ethylene gas.
(18) Fumigation and thermal insecticidal fogging: To conduct
fumigation or thermal insecticidal fogging operations.
(19) Hazardous chemicals:
(a) To store, handle or use more than 55 gallons of corrosive
liquids; or more than 50 pounds of oxidizing materials; or more
than 10 pounds of organic peroxides; or more than 50 pounds
of nitromethane; or 1,000 pounds or more of ammonium
nitrate, ammonium nitrate fertilizers and fertilizer mixtures
containing 60% or more ammonium or any amount of toxic
material or poisonous gas.
(b) To store, handle or use any quantity of air reactive, water
reactive or unstable materials.
(20) Junkyards: To operate a junkyard.
(21) Liquefied petroleum gas: For each installation of liquefied
petroleum gas employing a container or an aggregate of
interconnected containers of over 2,000 gallons' water capacity,
and for each permanent installation, irrespective of size of
containers, made at buildings in which 20 or more persons
congregate for civic, political, educational, religious, social or
recreational purposes. Installers shall maintain a record of all
§ 61-18 ONEIDA CODE § 61-18
C:210
installations and replacement of portable cylinders and have it
available for inspection.
(22) Lumberyards: To operate a lumberyard.
(23) Magnesium: For melting, casting, heat treating, machining or
grinding of more than 10 pounds of magnesium per working day.
(24) Matches:
(a) To manufacture matches.
(b) To store matches in excess of 25 cases. (Note: One case equals
one matchman's gross of 14,400 matches.)
(25) Organic coatings: To perform organic coating operations utilizing
more than one gallon of organic coating on any working day.
(26) Ovens and furnaces: To operate industrial processing ovens and
furnaces operating at approximately atmospheric pressures and
temperatures not exceeding 1,400º F. which are heated with oil or
gas fuel or which during operation contain flammable vapors from
the material in the oven or catalytic combustion system.
(27) Places of assembly: To maintain, operate or use a place of assembly.
(28) Service stations and repair garages: To operate a service station or
repair garage.
(29) Solid-fuel-burning device: Including but not limited to wood stoves,
coal stoves or the burning of any substance other than liquid or gas.
(30)Welding and cutting: To operate a welding and cutting business. A
record of all locations where welding or cutting operations are
performed shall be maintained and kept available for inspection by
the permit holder.
(31) Tents:
(a) Permits shall be issued for a maximum of 30 days.
(b) Adequate exits shall be provided as per inspection.
(c) No portable heaters to be used in tents.
(d) All exits and aisles shall be kept clear at all times.
(e) Approved extinguishers shall be provided.
(f) "No Smoking" signs shall be posted inside tent.
(g) All decorative material, if used, shall be of flameproof material.
(h) Evidence of fire flameproofing and insurance shall be provided
to the Fire Marshal's office.
§ 61-18 CHARTER § 61-18
C:211
§ 61-19. Permit application; fee; issuance of permit. [Amended
4-17-2012 by Ord. No. 12-01]
A completed application form and payment of the fee must be submitted to
the City of Oneida Clerk on the forms provided by the City of Oneida Clerk.
Upon approval of the Fire Marshal or his duly designated representative,
permits shall be issued by the City Clerk who is hereby authorized to
issue the same upon approval by the Fire Marshal or his duly designated
representative. The application fee as prescribed by resolution of the City
of Oneida Common Council will be charged.
§ 61-20. Consolidated permits.
When more than one permit is required for the same property or premises,
a single permit may be issued listing all materials or operations covered.
Revocation of a portion or portions of such consolidated permit, for specific
hazardous materials or operations, shall not invalidate the remainder.
§ 61-21. Transfer of permits.
Permits shall not be transferable and any change in activity, operation,
location, ownership or use shall require a new permit.
§ 61-22. Duration of permit.
Permits shall continue until revoked or for a period of time designated at
the time of issuance. An extension of the permit time period may be granted
provided a satisfactory reason can be shown for failure to start or complete
the work or activity authorized within the required time period.
§ 61-23. Location of permit.
Permits shall be kept on the property or premises covered by the permit or
carried by the permit holder.
§ 61-24. Revocation of permit.
Permits may be suspended or revoked when it is determined there is a
violation of a condition under which the permit was issued or there has been
misrepresentation or falsification of material facts in connection with the
permit application or a condition of the permit.
(i) Subject of this permit shall be open to inspection by the Fire
Department at any time.
§ 61-18 ONEIDA CODE § 61-24
C:212
ARTICLE IV
Enhanced 911 Building Numbers
[Added 8-6-2002 by L.L. No. 3-2002]
§ 61-25. Findings.
The City of Oneida Common Council hereby recognizes that timely and
appropriate emergency assistance rendered to protect the lives and
property of the City of Oneida residents is of paramount importance to the
health, safety and welfare of the residents of the City of Oneida.
§ 61-26. Display of number required.
Every owner of a structure in the City of Oneida shall cause to be displayed
and maintained thereon the enhanced 911-assigned number for said
structure.
§ 61-27. Assignment of numbers.
§ 61-28. Methodology for establishing addressing.
The following methodology shall be utilized in establishing enhanced 911
addressing:
A. The City of Oneida Fire Department shall assign an Arabic number to all
existing structures, and to any new structures constructed or erected
after the effective date of this article.
B. Upon the issuance of a building permit for construction of a structure
by the Code Enforcement Officer, the Fire Department will be notified
as to the site of the proposed structure. The Fire Department will then
assign an Arabic number to that structure.
C. All other permits as required by the Code Enforcement Officer, Water
Department and Department of Public Works, will display this enhanced
911 address on its face.
A. The center of the City shall be at the intersection of Main Street and
Oneida Street.
B. Odd numbers will be assigned on the left side of a street as you leave
the center of the City.
C. Even numbers will be assigned on the right side of a street as you leave
the center of the City.
D. There shall be no letter or fractional addresses.
E. All structures in the outside corporation district shall be addressed with
four digits.
§ 61-25 CHARTER § 61-28
C:213
§ 61-29. Proper method of display.
§ 61-30. Penalties for offenses.
F. All structures in the inside corporation district shall be addressed with
three digits.
A. The enhanced 911-assigned number shall be conspicuously displayed
upon the structure as follows:
(1) The number shall be at least four inches in height, and shall be in
contrasting color to the color of the structure.
(2) The number shall be displayed in such a manner as to be readily
visible from the adjacent public road or highway.
(3) The number shall be placed upon the structure so that it will not be
obstructed in any way and wherever practicable shall be placed
near some illumination, so that it may be readily seen at night.
B. In addition to the other requirements of this article, whenever any
structure is more than 75 feet from the public road or highway, the 911
Arabic number shall be displayed in a manner in conformity with the
article, on a sign, post or a mail box readily visible from the road or
highway from both directions of travel, but in no event further than 20
feet from the roadway.
C. On all commercial structures (industrial, institutional, educational,
mercantile, storage, assembly and business), the 911 Arabic number
shall be displayed over the front entrance. If this is not practicable, then
the Fire Marshal shall determine placement of the number.
A. Any owner of a structure within the City of Oneida who fails or refuses
or neglects to place the proper designated enhanced 91l Arabic
numbers on said structure, for a period of 30 days after issuance of a
notice of violation from the Fire Department, shall be deemed in
violation of this article.
B. The notice of violation provided for in Subsection A may be given by
personal service, or by mailing a copy thereof to the last known address
of the owner.
C. Any property owner who fails to comply with this article shall be liable
for a civil penalty in a sum not exceeding $250 for each month that the
violation exists following the issuance of a notice of violation as herein
before provided. The penalty herein is declared to be civil in nature, and
may be assessed upon the real property upon which the structure is
located.
§ 61-28 ONEIDA CODE § 61-30
C:214
Chapter 64
FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building code — See Ch. 33.
Freshwater wetlands — See Ch. 68.
Mobile homes and mobile home parks — See
Ch. 92.
Site plan review — See Ch. 143.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 155.
Zoning — See Ch. 190.
§ 61-30 CHARTER § 61-30
C:215

ARTICLE I
Statutory Authorization and Purpose
§ 64-1. Statutory authorization.
The people of the State of New York have in the New York State
Constitution, Article IX, Section 2, delegated the responsibility to local
governmental units to adopt regulations designed to promote the public
health, safety and general welfare of their citizenry. In this regard, the
Common Council of the City of Oneida finds that the potential and/or actual
damages from flooding and erosion may be a problem to the residents of
the City of Oneida and that such damages may include: destruction or loss
of private and public housing, damage to public facilities, both publicly and
privately owned, and injury to and loss of human life. Therefore, and in
order to minimize the threat of such damages and to achieve the purposes
and objectives hereinafter set forth, this chapter, in consonance with New
York State Environmental Conservation Law Article 36 and to comply with
the floodplain management requirements of the National Flood Insurance
Program contained in 44 CFR 60.3(b, c and d), is enacted as follows.
§ 64-2. Statement of purpose.
It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety and
general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood
conditions in specific areas by provisions designed:
§ 64-3. Objectives.
The objectives of this chapter are:
A. To regulate uses which are dangerous to health, safety and property
due to water or erosion hazards, or which result in damaging increases
in erosion or in flood heights or velocities.
B. To require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which
serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial
construction.
C. To control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels and
natural protective barriers which are involved in the accommodation of
floodwaters.
D. To control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may
increase erosion or flood damages.
E. To regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally
divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands.
F. To qualify for and maintain participation in the National Flood
Insurance Program.
A. To protect human life and health.
§ 64-1 CHARTER § 64-3
C:217
B. To minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control
projects.
C. To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with
flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public.
D. To minimize prolonged business interruptions.
E. To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities, such as water and
gas mains, electric, telephone, sewer lines, streets and bridges located
in areas of special flood hazard.
F. To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and
development of areas of special flood hazard so as to minimize future
flood blight areas.
G. To provide that developers are notified that property is in an area of
special flood hazard.
H. To ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard
assume responsibility for their actions.
§ 64-3 ONEIDA CODE § 64-3
C:218
ARTICLE II
Definitions
§ 64-4. Word usage; terms defined.
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter
shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common
usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application.
APPEAL — A request for a review of the City Engineer's interpretation of
any provision of this chapter or a request for a variance.
AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING — A designated AO, AH or VO Zone on
a community's Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) with a one-percent-orgreater
annual chance of flooding to an average annual depth of one to
three feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path
of flooding is unpredictable and where velocity flow may be evident. Such
flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow.
AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD — The land in the floodplain within
a community subject to a one-percent-or-greater chance of flooding in any
given year. This area may be designated as Zone A, AE, AH, AO, A1-A30,
A99, V, VO, VE or V1-V30. It is also commonly referred to as the "base
floodplain" or "100-year floodplain."
BASE FLOOD — The flood having a one-percent chance of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year.
BASEMENT — That portion of a building having its floor subgrade (below
ground level) on all sides.
BUILDING — See "structure."
CELLAR — Has the same meaning as "basement."
CRAWL SPACE — An enclosed area beneath the lowest elevated floor, 18
inches or more in height, which is used to service the underside of the
lowest elevated floor. The elevation of the floor of this enclosed area, which
may be of soil, gravel, concrete or other material, must be equal to or above
the lowest adjacent exterior grade. The enclosed crawl space area shall be
properly vented to allow for the equalization of hydrostatic forces which
would be experienced during periods of flooding.
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real
estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining,
dredging, filling, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of
equipment or materials.
ELEVATED BUILDING — A nonbasement building built, in the case of a
building in Zone A1-A30, AE, A, A99, AO, AH, B, C, X or D, to have the
top of the elevated floor, or in the case of a building in Zone V1-30, VE
or V, to have the bottom of the lowest horizontal structure member of
the elevated floor, elevated above the ground level by means of pilings,
columns (posts and piers) or shear walls parallel to the flow of the water
and adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of the
§ 64-4 CHARTER § 64-4
C:219
building during a flood of up to the magnitude of the base flood. In the case
of Zone A1-A30, AE, A, A99, AO, AN, B, C, X or D, "elevated building" also
includes a building elevated by means of fill or solid foundation perimeter
walls with openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movement of
floodwaters. In the case of Zone V1-V30, VE or V, "elevated building" also
includes a building otherwise meeting the definition of "elevated building,"
even though the lower area is enclosed by means of breakaway walls that
meet the federal standards.
EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A
manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of
facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to
be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the
construction of streets and either final site grading or the pouring of
concrete pads) is complete before the effective date of the floodplain
management regulations adopted by the community.
EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR
SUBDIVISION — The preparation of additional sites by the construction of
facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be
affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets and
either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
FEDERAL EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY — The federal agency
that administers the National Flood Insurance Program.
FLOOD or FLOODING —
FLOOD BOUNDARY AND FLOODWAY MAP (FBFM) — An official map of the
community published by the Federal Emergency Management Agency as
part of a riverine community's flood insurance study. The FBFM delineates
a regulatory floodway along watercourses studied in detail in the flood
insurance study.
FLOOD ELEVATION STUDY — An examination, evaluation and
determination of the flood hazards and, if appropriate, corresponding water
A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of
normally dry land areas from:
(1) The overflow of inland or tidal waters.
The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters
from any source.
(2)
A.
"Flood" or "flooding" also means the collapse or subsidence of land
along the shore of a lake or other body of water as a result of erosion
or undermining caused by waves or currents of water exceeding
anticipated cyclical levels or suddenly caused by an unusually high
water level in a natural body of water, accompanied by a severe storm,
or by an unanticipated force of nature, such as a flash flood or an
abnormal tidal surge, or by some similarly unusual and unforeseeable
event which results in flooding as defined in A above.
B.
§ 64-4 ONEIDA CODE § 64-4
C:220
surface elevations, or an examination, evaluation and determination of
flood-related erosion hazards.
FLOOD HAZARD BOUNDARY MAP (FHBM) — An official map of a
community, issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, where
the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard have been designated as
Zone A but no flood elevations are provided.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM) — An official map of a community,
on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated both
the areas of special flood hazard and the risk premium zones applicable to
the community.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY — See "flood elevation study."
FLOODPLAIN or FLOOD-PRONE AREA — Any land area susceptible to
being inundated by water from any source (see definition of "flooding").
FLOODPROOFING — Any combination of structural and nonstructural
additions, changes or adjustments to structures which reduces or eliminates
flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary
facilities, structures and their contents.
FLOODWAY — Has the same meaning as "regulatory floodway."
FUNCTIONALLY DEPENDENT USE — A use which cannot perform its
intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to
water, such as a docking or port facility necessary for the loading and
unloading of cargo or passengers, shipbuilding, and ship repair facilities.
The term does not include long-term storage, manufacturing, sales or
service facilities.
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE — The highest natural elevation of the ground
surface, prior to construction, next to the proposed walls of a structure.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE - Any structure that is: —
Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing
maintained by the Department of the Interior) or preliminarily
determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the
requirements for individual listing on the National Register;
A.
Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior
as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic
district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify
as a registered historic district;
B.
Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states
with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the
Secretary of the Interior; or
C.
Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities
with historic preservation programs that have been certified either:
By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of
the Interior; or
(1)
D.
§ 64-4 CHARTER § 64-4
C:221
LOCAL ADMINISTRATOR — The person appointed by the community to
administer and implement this chapter by granting or denying development
permits in accordance with its provisions. In the City of Oneida, the City
Engineer is designated as the local administrator.
LOWEST FLOOR — Lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement or cellar). An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, usable
solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other
than a basement area, is not considered a building's lowest floor; provided,
however, that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in
violation of the applicable nonelevation design requirements of this chapter.
MANUFACTURED HOME — A structure, transportable in one or more
sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used with
or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities.
The term does not include a recreational vehicle.
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A parcel (or
contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home
lots for rent or sale.
MEAN SEA LEVEL — For purposes of the National Flood Insurance
Program, the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929, or other
datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a community's Flood
Insurance Rate Map are referenced.
MOBILE HOME — Has the same meaning as "manufactured home."
NATIONAL GEODETIC VERTICAL DATUM (NGVD) — As corrected in 1929,
is a vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations
within the floodplain.
NEW CONSTRUCTION — Structures for which the start of construction
commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain management
regulation adopted by the community and includes any subsequent
improvements to such structure.
NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A manufactured
home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for
servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed
(including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of
streets and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is
completed on or after the effective date of floodplain management
regulations adopted by a community.
ONE-HUNDRED-YEAR FLOOD or 100-YEAR FLOOD — Has the same
meaning as "base flood."
PRINCIPALLY ABOVE GROUND — At least 51% of the actual cash value of
the structure, excluding land value, is above ground.
Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved
programs.
(2)
§ 64-4 ONEIDA CODE § 64-4
C:222
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE - A vehicle which is: —
REGULATORY FLOODWAY — The channel of a river or other watercourse
and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge
the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation
more than a designated height as determined by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency in a flood insurance study or by other agencies as
provided in § 64-15, Use of other flood data, of this chapter.
REPETITIVE LOSS — Flood-related damages sustained by a structure on
two separate occasions during a ten-year period for which the cost of
repairs at the time of each such flood event, on the average, equals or
exceeds 25% of the market value of the structure before the damage
occurred.
START OF CONSTRUCTION — Includes substantial improvement and
means the initiation, excluding planning and design, of any phase of a
project, physical alteration of the property, and shall include land
preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; installation of streets
and/or walkways; excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations
or the erection of temporary forms. It also includes the placement and/or
installation on the property of accessory buildings (garages, sheds), storage
trailers and building materials. For manufactured homes the "actual start"
means affixing of the manufactured home to its permanent site.
STRUCTURE — A walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid
storage tank, that is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured
home.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE — Damage of any origin sustained by a structure
whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged condition
would be equal to or exceed 50% of the market value of the structure before
the damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Any reconstruction, rehabilitation,
addition or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals
or exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure before the start of
construction of the improvement. The term includes structures which have
incurred repetitive loss or substantial damage, regardless of the actual
repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either:
A. Built on a single chassis;
Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest
horizontal projections;
B.
Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-duty
truck; and
C.
Not designed primarily for use as a permanent dwelling but as
temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel or seasonal
use.
D.
§ 64-4 CHARTER § 64-4
C:223
VARIANCE — A grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter which
permits construction or use in a manner that would otherwise be prohibited
by this chapter.
Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations
of state or local health, sanitary or safety code specifications which
have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which
are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or
A.
Any alteration of an historic structure, provided that the alteration
will not preclude the structure's continued designation as an historic
structure.
B.
§ 64-4 ONEIDA CODE § 64-4
C:224
ARTICLE III
General Provisions
§ 64-5. Lands to which this chapter applies.
This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the
jurisdiction of the City of Oneida.
§ 64-6. Basis for establishing areas of special flood hazard.
§ 64-7. Interpretation and conflict with other laws.
§ 64-8. Severability.
The invalidity of any section or provision of this chapter shall not invalidate
any other section or provision thereof.
§ 64-9. Penalties for noncompliance.
No structure in an area of special flood hazard shall hereafter be
constructed, located, extended, converted or altered and no land shall be
excavated or filled without full compliance with the terms of this chapter
and any other applicable regulations. Any infraction of the provisions of
this chapter by failure to comply with any of its requirements, including
infractions of conditions and safeguards established in connection with
conditions of the permit, shall constitute a violation. Any person who
A. The areas of special flood hazard are identified and defined on the
following documents prepared by the Federal Emergency Management
Agency:
(1) Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) Index No. 360408 0001-0007,
the effective date of which is February 23, 2001.
(2) A scientific and engineering report entitled "Flood Insurance Study,
City of Oneida, New York, Madison County," dated February 23,
2001.
B. The above documents are hereby adopted and declared to be a part of
this chapter. The flood insurance study and the Flood Insurance Rate
Map (FIRM) are on file at the office of the Oneida City Clerk.
A. This chapter includes all revisions to the National Flood Insurance
Program through November 1, 1989, and shall supersede all previous
laws adopted for the purpose of flood damage prevention.
B. In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter
shall be held to be minimum requirements, adopted for the promotion
of the public health, safety and welfare. Whenever the requirements of
this chapter are at variance with the requirements of any other lawfully
adopted rules, regulations or ordinances, the most restrictive, or that
imposing the higher standards, shall govern.
§ 64-5 CHARTER § 64-9
C:225
violates this chapter or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall,
upon conviction thereof, be fined no more than $1,000 or imprisoned for not
more than 15 days, or both. Each day of noncompliance shall be considered
a separate offense. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the City of
Oneida from taking such other lawful action as necessary to prevent or
remedy an infraction. Any structure found not compliant with the
requirements of this chapter for which the developer and/or owner has not
applied for and received an approved variance under Article VI, Variance
Procedure, will be declared noncompliant and notification sent to the
Federal Emergency Management Agency.
§ 64-10. Warning and disclaimer of liability.
The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and
engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare
occasions. Flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes.
This chapter does not imply that land outside the area of special flood
hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or
flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the
City of Oneida, any officer or employee thereof, or the Federal Emergency
Management Agency, for any flood damages that result from reliance on this
chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder.
§ 64-9 ONEIDA CODE § 64-10
C:226
ARTICLE IV
Administration
§ 64-11. Designation of City Engineer as local administrator.
The City Engineer is hereby appointed local administrator to administer
and implement this chapter by granting or denying floodplain development
permits in accordance with its provisions.
§ 64-12. Floodplain development permit.
§ 64-13. Application for permit.
The applicant shall provide the following information, as appropriate.
Additional information may be required on the permit application form.
A. Purpose. A floodplain development permit is hereby established for all
construction and other development to be undertaken in areas of
special flood hazard in this community for the purpose of protecting its
citizens from increased flood hazards and ensuring that new
development is constructed in a manner that minimizes its exposure to
flooding. It shall be unlawful to undertake any development in an area
of special flood hazard, as shown on the Flood Insurance Rate Map
enumerated in § 64-6, Basis for establishing areas of special flood
hazard, without a valid floodplain development permit. Application for a
permit shall be made on forms furnished by the City Engineer and may
include, but not be limited to: plans, in duplicate, drawn to scale and
showing the nature, location, dimensions and elevations of the area in
question; existing or proposed structures, fill, storage of materials,
drainage facilities and the location of the foregoing.
B. Fees. All applications for a floodplain development permit shall be
accompanied by an application fee of $25. In addition, the applicant
shall be responsible for reimbursing the City of Oneida for any
additional costs necessary for review, inspection and approval of this
project. The City Engineer may require a deposit of no more than $500
to cover these additional costs.
A. The proposed elevation, in relation to mean sea level, of the lowest floor
(including basement or cellar) of any new or substantially improved
structure to be located in Zone A1-A30, AE or AH, or Zone A if base
flood elevation data are available. Upon completion of the lowest floor,
the permittee shall submit to the City Engineer the as-built elevation,
certified by a licensed professional engineer or surveyor.
B. The proposed elevation, in relation to mean sea level, to which any new
or substantially improved nonresidential structure will be floodproofed.
Upon completion of the floodproofed portion of the structure, the
permittee shall submit to the City Engineer the as-built floodproofed
elevation, certified by a professional engineer or surveyor.
§ 64-11 CHARTER § 64-13
C:227
§ 64-14. Duties and responsibilities of City Engineer.
C. A certificate from a licensed professional engineer or architect that any
utility floodproofing will meet the criteria in § 64-23C, Utilities.
D. A certificate from a licensed professional engineer or architect that any
nonresidential floodproofed structure will meet the floodproofing
criteria in § 64-25, Elevation of nonresidential structures.
E. A description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or
relocated as a result of proposed development. Computations by a
licensed professional engineer must be submitted that demonstrate
that the altered or relocated segment will provide equal or greater
conveyance than the original stream segment. The applicant must
submit any maps, computations or other material required by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) to revise the
documents enumerated in § 64-6, Basis for establishing areas of special
flood hazard, when notified by the local administrator, and must pay any
fees or other costs assessed by FEMA for this purpose. The applicant
must also provide assurances that the conveyance capacity of the
altered or relocated stream segment will be maintained.
F. A technical analysis, by a licensed professional engineer, if required by
the City Engineer, which shows whether proposed development to be
located in an area of special flood hazard (may result in physical
damage to any other property.
G. In Zone A, when no base flood elevation data are available from other
sources, base flood elevation data shall be provided by the permit
applicant for subdivision proposals and other proposed developments
(including proposals for manufactured home and recreational vehicle
parks and subdivisions) that are greater than either 50 lots or five
acres.
A. Duties of the City Engineer shall include, but not be limited to the
following.
B. Permit application review. The City Engineer shall conduct the
following permit application review before issuing a floodplain
development permit:
(1) Review all applications for completeness, particularly with the
requirements of § 64-13, Application for permit, and for compliance
with the provisions and standards of this chapter.
(2) Review subdivision and other proposed new development,
including manufactured home parks, to determine whether
proposed building sites will be reasonably safe from flooding. If a
proposed building site is located in an area of special flood hazard,
all new construction and substantial improvements shall meet the
applicable standards of Article V, Construction standards, and, in
particular,§ 64-22A, Subdivision proposals.
§ 64-13 ONEIDA CODE § 64-14
C:228
§ 64-15. Use of other flood data.
§ 64-16. Alteration of watercourses.
The City Engineer shall:
§ 64-17. Construction stage.
(3) Determine whether any proposed development in an area of special
flood hazard may result in physical damage to any other property
(e.g., stream bank erosion and increased flood velocities). The City
Engineer may require the applicant to submit additional technical
analyses and data necessary to complete the determination. If the
proposed development may result in physical damage to any other
property or fails to meet the requirements of Article V,
Construction Standards, no permit shall be issued. The applicant
may revise the application to include measures that mitigate or
eliminate the adverse effects and resubmit the application.
(4) Determine that all necessary permits have been received from
those governmental agencies from which approval is required by
state or federal law.
A. When the Federal Emergency Management Agency has designated
areas of special flood hazard on the community's Flood Insurance Rate
map (FIRM) but has neither produced water surface elevation data
(these areas are designated Zone A or V on the FIRM) nor identified a
floodway, the City Engineer shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize
any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal,
state or other source, including data developed pursuant to § 64-13G,
as criteria for requiring that new construction, substantial
improvements or other proposed development meet the requirements
of this chapter.
B. When base flood elevation data are not available, the City Engineer may
use flood information from any other authoritative source, such as
historical data, to establish flood elevations within the areas of special
flood hazard, for the purposes of this chapter.
A. Notify adjacent communities and the New York State Department of
Environmental Conservation prior to permitting any alteration or
relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification to
the Regional Director, Region II, Federal Emergency Management
Agency.
B. Determine that the permit holder has provided for maintenance within
the altered or relocated portion of said watercourse so that the floodcarrying
capacity is not diminished.
A. In Zones A1-A30, AE and AH, and also Zone A if base flood elevation
data are available, upon placement of the lowest floor or completion of
§ 64-14 CHARTER § 64-17
C:229
§ 64-18. Inspections.
The City Engineer and/or the developer's engineer or architect shall make
periodic inspections at appropriate times throughout the period of
construction in order to monitor compliance with permit conditions and
enable said inspector to certify, if requested, that the development is in
compliance with the requirements of the floodplain development permit
and/or any variance provisions.
§ 64-19. Stop-work orders.
§ 64-20. Certificate of compliance.
floodproofing of a new or substantially improved structure, the City
Engineer shall obtain from the permit holder a certification of the asbuilt
elevation of the lowest floor or floodproofed elevation, in relation
to mean sea level. The certificate shall be prepared by or under the
direct supervision of a licensed land surveyor or professional engineer
and certified by same. For manufactured homes, the permit holder
shall submit the certificate of elevation upon placement of the structure
on the site. A certificate of elevation must also be submitted for a
recreational vehicle if it remains on a site for 180 consecutive days or
longer (unless it is fully licensed and ready for highway use).
B. Any further work undertaken prior to submission and approval of the
certification shall be at the permit holder's risk. The City Engineer shall
review all data submitted. Deficiencies detected shall be cause to issue
a stop-work order for the project unless immediately corrected.
A. The City Engineer shall issue, or cause to be issued, a stop-work order
for any floodplain development found ongoing without a development
permit. Disregard of a stop-work order shall subject the violator to the
penalties described in § 64-9, Penalties for noncompliance, of this
chapter.
B. The City Engineer shall issue, or cause to be issued, a stop-work order
for any floodplain development found noncompliant with the provisions
of this chapter and/or the conditions of the development permit.
Disregard of a stop-work order shall subject the violator to the penalties
described in § 64-9, Penalties for noncompliance, of this chapter.
A. In areas of special flood hazard, as determined by documents
enumerated in § 64-6, Basis for establishing areas of special flood
hazard, it shall be unlawful to occupy or to permit the use or occupancy
of any building or premises, or both, or part thereof hereafter created,
erected, changed, converted or wholly or partly altered or enlarged in
its use or structure, until a certificate of compliance has been issued by
the City Engineer stating that the building or land conforms to the
requirements of this chapter.
§ 64-17 ONEIDA CODE § 64-20
C:230
§ 64-21. Information to be retained.
The City Engineer shall retain and make available for inspection copies of
the following:
B. A certificate of compliance shall be issued by the City Engineer upon
satisfactory completion of all development in areas of special flood
hazard.
C. Issuance of the certificate shall be based upon the inspections
conducted as prescribed in § 64-18, Inspections, and/or any certified
elevations, hydraulic data, floodproofing, anchoring requirements or
encroachment analyses which may have been required as a condition of
the approved permit.
A. Floodplain development permits and certificates of compliance.
B. Certifications of as-built lowest floor elevations of structures, required
pursuant to § 64-17A and B, Construction stage, and whether or not the
structures contain a basement.
C. Floodproofing certificates required pursuant to § 64-17A, Construction
stage, and whether or not the structures contain a basement.
D. Variances issued pursuant to Article VI, Variance Procedures.
E. Notices required under § 64-16, Alteration of watercourses.
§ 64-20 CHARTER § 64-21
C:231

ARTICLE V
Construction Standards
§ 64-22. General standards.
The following standards apply to new development, including new and
substantially improved structures, in the areas of special flood hazard
shown on the Flood Insurance Rate Map designated in § 64-6, Basis for
establishing areas of special flood hazard.
A. Subdivision proposals. The following standards apply to all new
subdivision proposals and other proposed development in areas of
special flood hazard (including proposals for manufactured home and
recreational vehicle parks and subdivisions):
(1) Proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood
damage;
(2) Public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and
water systems shall be located and constructed so as to minimize
flood damage; and
(3) Adequate drainage shall be provided to reduce exposure to flood
damage.
B. Encroachments.
(1) Within Zones A1-A30 and AE, on streams without a regulatory
floodway, no new construction, substantial improvements or other
development (including fill) shall be permitted unless:
(a) The applicant demonstrates that the cumulative effect of the
proposed development, when combined with all other existing
and anticipated development, will not increase the water
surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any
location; or
(b) The City of Oneida agrees to apply to the Federal Emergency
Management Agency (FEMA) for a conditional FIRM revision,
FEMA approval is received and the applicant provides all
necessary data, analyses and mapping and reimburses the City
of Oneida for all fees and other costs in relation to the
application. The applicant must also provide all data, analyses
and mapping and reimburse the City of Oneida for all costs
related to the final map revision.
(2) On streams with a regulatory floodway, as shown on the Flood
Boundary and Floodway Map or the Flood Insurance Rate Map
adopted in § 64-6, Basis for establishing areas of special flood
hazard, no new construction, substantial improvements or other
development in the floodway (including fill) shall be permitted
unless:
§ 64-22 CHARTER § 64-22
C:233
§ 64-23. Standards for all structures.
(a) A technical evaluation by a licensed professional engineer
shows that such an encroachment shall not result in any
increase in flood levels during occurrence of the base flood; or
(b) The City of Oneida agrees to apply to the Federal Emergency
Management Agency (FEMA) for a conditional FIRM and
floodway revision, FEMA approval is received and the
applicant provides all necessary data, analyses and mapping
and reimburses the City of Oneida for all fees and other costs
in relation to the application. The applicant must also provide
all data, analyses and mapping and reimburse the City of
Oneida for all costs related to the final map revisions.
A. Anchoring. New structures and substantial improvement to structures
in areas of special flood hazard shall be anchored to prevent flotation,
collapse or lateral movement during the base flood. This requirement is
in addition to applicable state and local anchoring requirements for
resisting wind forces.
B. Construction materials and methods.
(1) New construction and substantial improvements to structures shall
be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to
flood damage.
(2) New construction and substantial improvements to structures shall
be constructed using methods and practices that minimize flood
damage.
(3) For enclosed areas below the lowest floor of a structure within
Zone A1-A30, AE or AH, and also Zone A if base flood elevation data
are available, new and substantially improved structures shall have
fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are usable solely for
parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other
than a basement and which are subject to flooding, designed to
automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by
allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs for meeting
this requirement must either be certified by a licensed professional
engineer or architect or meet or exceed the following minimum
criteria:
(a) A minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less
than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area
subject to flooding; and
(b) The bottom of all such openings no higher than one foot above
the lowest adjacent finished grade.
(c) Openings may be equipped with louvers, valves, screens or
other coverings or devices, provided that they permit the
§ 64-22 ONEIDA CODE § 64-23
C:234
§ 64-24. Elevation of residential structures.
The following standards, in addition to the standards in § 64-22A,
Subdivision proposals; § 64-22B, Encroachments; and § 64-23, Standards
for all structures, apply to structures located in areas of special flood hazard
as indicated:
automatic entry and exit of floodwaters. Enclosed areas
subgrade on all sides are considered basements and are not
permitted.
C. Utilities.
(1) Machinery and equipment servicing a building must either be
elevated to or above the base flood level or designed to prevent
water from entering or accumulating within the components during
a flood. This includes heating, ventilating and air-conditioning
equipment, hot water heaters, appliances, elevator lift machinery
and electrical junction and circuit breaker boxes. When located
below the base flood elevation, a professional engineer's or
architect's certification of the design is required.
(2) New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system.
(3) New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed
to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters. Sanitary sewer
and storm drainage systems for buildings that have openings below
the base flood elevation shall be provided with automatic backflow
valves or other automatic backflow devices that are installed in
each discharge line passing through a building's exterior wall.
(4) On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid
impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding.
A. Within Zones A1-A30, AE and AH, and also Zone A if base flood
elevation data are available, new construction and substantial
improvements shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated
to or above the base flood level.
B. Within Zone A, when no base flood elevation data are available, new
and substantially improved structures shall have the lowest floor
(including basement) elevated at least three feet above the highest
adjacent grade.
C. Within Zone AO, new and substantially improved structures shall have
the lowest floor (including basement) elevated above the highest
adjacent grade at least as high as the depth number specified in feet on
the community's Flood Insurance Rate Map enumerated in § 64-6, Basis
for establishing areas of special flood hazard (at least two feet if no
depth number is specified).
§ 64-23 CHARTER § 64-24
C:235
§ 64-25. Elevation of nonresidential structures.
The following standards apply to new and substantially improved
commercial, industrial and other nonresidential structures, in addition to
the requirements in § 64-22A, Subdivision proposals; § 64-22B,
Encroachments; and § 64-23, Standards for all structures:
D. Within Zones AH and AO, adequate drainage paths are required to
guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures on
slopes.
A. Within Zones A1-A30, AE and AH, and also Zone A if base flood
elevation data are available, new construction and substantial
improvements of any nonresidential structure, together with attendant
utility and sanitary facilities, shall either:
(1) Have the lowest floor, including basement or cellar, elevated to or
above the base flood elevation; or
(2) Be floodproofed so that the structure is watertight below the base
flood level with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of
water. All structural components located below the base flood level
must be capable of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads
and the effects of buoyancy.
B. Within Zone AO, new construction and substantial improvements of
nonresidential structures shall:
(1) Have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated above the
highest adjacent grade at least as high as the depth number
specified in feet on the community's FIRM (at least two feet if no
depth number is specified); or
(2) Together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, be
completely floodproofed to that level to meet the floodproofing
standard specified in § 64-25A(2), Elevation of nonresidential
structures.
C. If the structure is to be floodproofed, a licensed professional engineer
or architect shall develop and/or review structural design,
specifications and plans for construction. A floodproofing certificate or
other certification shall be provided to the City Engineer that certifies
that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with
accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions of
§ 64-25A(2), Elevation of nonresidential structures, including the
specific elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which the structure
is to be floodproofed.
D. Within Zones AH and AO, adequate drainage paths are required to
guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures on
slopes.
§ 64-24 ONEIDA CODE § 64-25
C:236
§ 64-26. Manufactured homes and recreational vehicles.
The following standards, in addition to the standards in § 64-22, General
standards, and § 64-23, Standards for all structures, apply, as indicated, in
areas of special flood hazard to manufactured homes and to recreational
vehicles which are located in areas of special flood hazard.
E. Within Zone A, when no base flood elevation data are available, the
lowest floor (including basement) shall be elevated at least three feet
above the highest adjacent grade.
A. Recreational vehicles placed on sites within Zones A1-A30, AE and AH
shall either:
(1) Be on site fewer than 180 consecutive days;
(2) Be fully licensed and ready for highway use (a recreational vehicle
is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is
attached to the site only by quick-disconnect-type utilities and
security devices and has no permanently attached additions); or
(3) Meet the requirements for manufactured homes in § 64-26B,
§ 64-26D and § 64-26E.
B. A manufactured home that is placed or substantially improved in Zones
A1-A30, AE and AH that is on a site either outside of an existing
manufactured home park or subdivision as herein defined; in a new
manufactured home park or subdivision as herein defined; in an
expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision as
herein defined; or in an existing manufactured home park or
subdivision as herein defined on which a manufactured home has
incurred substantial damage as the result of a flood shall be elevated on
a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor is elevated to or
above the base flood elevation and is securely anchored to an
adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse and
lateral movement. Elevation on piers consisting of dry stacked blocks is
prohibited. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to,
use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors.
C. A manufactured home to be placed or substantially improved in Zones
A1-A30, AE and AH in an existing manufactured home park or
subdivision that is not to be placed on a site on which a manufactured
home has incurred substantial damage shall be:
(1) Elevated in a manner such as required in § 64-26B; or
(2) Elevated such that the manufactured home chassis is supported by
reinforced piers or other foundation elements of at least equivalent
strength that are no less than 36 inches in height above grade and
are securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation
system to resist flotation, collapse or lateral movement. Elevation
on piers consisting of dry stacked blocks is prohibited.
§ 64-25 CHARTER § 64-26
C:237
D. Within Zone A, when no base flood elevation data are available, new
and substantially improved manufactured homes shall be elevated such
that the manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced piers or
other foundation elements of at least equivalent strength that are no
less than 36 inches in height above grade and are securely anchored to
an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse
or lateral movement. Elevation on piers consisting of dry stacked blocks
is prohibited.
E. Within Zone AO, the floor shall be elevated above the highest adjacent
grade at least as high as the depth number specified on the Flood
Insurance Rate Map enumerated in § 64-6, Basis for establishing areas
of special flood hazard (at least two feet if no depth number is
specified). Elevation on piers consisting of dry stacked blocks is
prohibited.
§ 64-26 ONEIDA CODE § 64-26
C:238
ARTICLE VI
Variance Procedure
§ 64-27. Appeals board. [Amended 11-8-2017 by L.L. No. 5-2017]
A. The Joint Zoning Board of Appeals/Planning Commission as established
by the City of Oneida shall hear and decide appeals and requests for
variances from the requirements of this chapter.
B. The Joint Zoning Board of Appeals/Planning Commission shall hear and
decide appeals when it is alleged there is an error in any requirement,
decision or determination made by the City Engineer in the
enforcement or administration of this chapter.
C. Those aggrieved by the decision of the Joint Zoning Board of Appeals/
Planning Commission may appeal such decision to the Supreme Court
pursuant to Article 78 of the Civil Practice Law and Rules.
D. In passing upon such applications, the Joint Zoning Board of Appeals/
Planning Commission shall consider all technical evaluations, relevant
factors, standards specified in other sections of this chapter and:
(1) The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the
injury of others;
(2) The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;
(3) The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood
damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner;
(4) The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to
the community;
(5) The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where
applicable;
(6) The availability of alternative locations for the proposed use which
are not subject to flooding or erosion damage;
(7) The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated
development;
(8) The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan
and floodplain management program of that area;
(9) The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary
and emergency vehicles;
(10) The costs to local governments and the dangers associated with
conducting search-and-rescue operations during periods of
flooding;
§ 64-27 CHARTER § 64-27
C:239
§ 64-28. Conditions for variances.
(11) The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment
transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if
applicable, expected at the site; and
(12) The costs of providing governmental services during and after
flood conditions, including search-and-rescue operations,
maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as
sewer, gas, electrical and water systems and streets and bridges.
E. Upon consideration of the factors of § 64-27D(1) through (12) and the
purposes of this chapter, the Joint Zoning Board of Appeals/Planning
Commission may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as
it deems necessary to further the purposes of this chapter.
F. The City Engineer shall maintain the records of all appeal actions,
including technical information, and report any variances to the Federal
Emergency Management Agency upon request.
A. Generally, variances may be issued for new construction and
substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of 1/2 acre or less in
size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures
constructed below the base flood level, provided that items in
§ 64-27D(1) through (12) have been fully considered. As the lot size
increases beyond the 1/2 acre, the technical justification required for
issuing the variance increases.
B. Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic
structures upon determination that:
(1) The proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the
structure's continued designation as an historic structure.
(2) The variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic
character and design of the structure.
C. Variances may be issued by a community for new construction and
substantial improvements and for other development necessary for the
conduct of a functionally dependent use, provided that:
(1) The criteria of Subsections A, D, E and F of this section are met.
(2) The structure or other development is protected by methods that
minimize flood damages during the base flood and create no
additional threat to public safety.
D. Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any
increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result.
E. Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is
the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief.
§ 64-27 ONEIDA CODE § 64-28
C:240
F. Variances shall only be issued upon receiving written justification of:
(1) A showing of good and sufficient cause;
(2) A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in
exceptional hardship to the applicant; and
(3) A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in
increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety,
extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or
victimization of the public or conflict with existing local laws or
ordinances.
G. Any applicant to whom a variance is granted for a building with the
lowest floor below the base flood elevation shall be given written notice
over the signature of a community official that the cost of flood
insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from
lowest floor elevation.
§ 64-28 CHARTER § 64-28
C:241
Chapter 68
FRESHWATER WETLANDS
§ 68-1. Adoption and exercise of authority over freshwater
wetlands.
There is hereby adopted by reference the provisions of Article 24 of the
Environmental Conservation Law of the State of New York as those
provisions relate to the city, and the city does exercise its authority
thereunder.
Chapter 70
(RESERVED)
Chapter 73
HEALTH AND SANITATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Housing standards — See Ch. 77.
Junkyards — See Ch. 85.
Sewers — See Ch. 139.
Solid waste — See Ch. 147.
Swimming pools — See Ch. 159.
§ 64-28 ONEIDA CODE § 68-1
C:242
ARTICLE I
In General
§ 73-1. Endangering health and comfort.
No person shall knowingly or carelessly or negligently do or contribute
to the doing of any act dangerous to the life or detrimental to the health
or the comfort of any human being; nor shall any person omit to do any
reasonable and proper act or take any reasonable or proper precaution to
protect human life and health and comfort.
§ 73-2. (Reserved)24
§ 73-3. Toxic substances.
No toxic substances banned by either the state or federal government shall
be transported into or retained within the city.
24.Editor's Note: Former § 73-2, Tattooing prohibited, was repealed 3-4-2008 by Ord. No.
08-01.
§ 73-1 CHARTER § 73-3
C:243

ARTICLE II
Public Nuisances
§ 73-4. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
NUISANCE — A public nuisance affecting health.
PUBLIC NUISANCE AFFECTING HEALTH — A nuisance which is a thing,
act, use of property, premises, equipment or structure affecting the health
of one or more persons.
§ 73-5. Designated nuisances. [Amended 6-5-2018 by Ord. No.
3-2018]
A. The following are hereby declared to be nuisances affecting health as
well as and in addition to any act, omission of act, occupation and/or use
of property, premises, equipment or structure deemed to be a menace
to the health of the inhabitants of and within the City or so declared in
any section of this chapter.
(1) All decayed or unwholesome food offered for sale to the public.
(2) All diseased animals running at large.
(3) All ponds or pools of stagnant water.
(4) Carcasses of animals not buried or destroyed within 24 hours after
death.
(5) Accumulations of manure or rubbish not conforming with
provisions of this code.
(6) Garbage cans which are not fly or rodent tight.
(7) The pollution of any well, cistern, spring, underground water
stream, lake, canal or body of water by sewage or industrial wastes
or other substances harmful to human beings.
(8) All noxious weeds and other rank growths upon public or private
property.
(9) All public exposure of persons having a contagious disease.
(10) The use of a common drinking cup or roller towel.
(11) The distribution of samples of medicines or drugs, except to
members of the medical profession.
(12) Any animals or creatures so maintained as to constitute a public
nuisance.
§ 73-4 CHARTER § 73-5
C:245
§ 73-6. Abatement by Common Council.
Whenever the Common Council shall determine the existence and direct the
removal of a nuisance in any part of the city, if the same is not removed
within such time as the Common Council shall direct, it may cause the same
to be removed at the expense of the city, and declare such expense to be a
lien on the lot and enforce a collection thereof in the manner provided in
the Charter for the collection of taxes or assessments, or by action against
the owners of the lot or any other person who may have erected, suffered or
maintained such nuisance, and in case of the nonremoval or nonabatement
of any such nuisance by the person creating the same, after notice by the
Common Council to abate such nuisance, within the time fixed as aforesaid,
such person shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
(13) All buildings and all alterations to buildings made or erected in
violation of the provisions of this chapter.
(14) Any insanitary use of property within City limits.
(15) All dangerous or insanitary, unguarded, unprotected machinery or
equipment in any public place or situated or operated on private
property in violation of provisions of this chapter.
(16) All infestations of flies, fleas, roaches, lice, ticks, rats, mice, fly
maggots, mosquito larvae and hookworm lice.
(17) Any box, refrigerator, trunk or similar device which cannot be
opened from the inside which is discarded intact or placed when
unused where it may be available to the public, whose door latch or
hinges have not been removed.
(18) All defective or insanitary plumbing such as leaking or back
flooding.25
25.Editor’s Note: Former Subsection B, regarding the cutting of grass and weeds, which
immediately followed, was repealed 6-5-2018 by Ord. No. 3-2018.
§ 73-5 ONEIDA CODE § 73-6
C:246
ARTICLE III
Brush, Grass and Weeds
[Added 6-5-2018 by Ord. No. 3-2018]
§ 73-7. Growth and maintenance restrictions.
It shall be unlawful for any owner, lessee or occupant or any agent, servant,
representative or employee of any owner, lessee or occupant having control
over any lot or land adjoining land on which is situated a dwelling house or
building to permit or maintain on any such lot or land any growth of weeds,
grass, brush or other rank vegetation to a height higher than eight inches,
on the average, on such portion of the lot or land, including the public rightof-
way, that is bounded by the street or highway abutting the property on
the front and the front line of the dwelling house or building, including, as
well, any side lawn or lawns abutting upon any lot upon which is situated a
dwelling house or building, and to a depth at least equal to 50 feet beyond
the rear line of the dwelling house or building or to the rear property line,
whichever is lesser. All such grass, brush, weeds, or other rank vegetation
shall be maintained and kept uniformly in height so as not to detract or
devalue adjoining properties. It shall also be unlawful for any such person
or persons to cause, suffer or allow poison ivy, ragweed, Canada thistle or
other poisonous plant or plants detrimental to health to grow on any such
lot or land in such manner that any part of such ivy, ragweed, Canada thistle
or other poisonous or harmful weed shall extend upon, overhang or border
any public place or allow to seed or allow pollen or other poisonous particles
or emanations therefrom to be carried through the air into any public place.
§ 73-8. Duty of owner, lessee or occupant.
It shall be the duty of any owner, lessee or occupant of any lot or land to cut
and remove or cause to be cut and removed all such weeds, grass, brush or
other rank, poisonous or harmful vegetation as often as may be necessary
to comply with the provisions of § 73-7.
§ 73-9. Exceptions.
The provisions of §§ 73-7 and 73-8, insofar as they relate to cutting weeds,
grass, brush and rank vegetation from lots or lands, shall not apply to any
lots or lands which are under cultivation in a good manner from which crops
are regularly harvested for actual use.
§ 73-10. Notice to correct violations; failure to comply.
A. If the provisions of the foregoing sections are not complied with, a Code
Enforcement Official for the City of Oneida, which may include the
Codes Enforcement Officer, Community Service Officer, and/or Housing
Inspector, shall serve written notice upon the owner to comply with the
provisions of this article. Such written notice shall be served by
certified mail, return receipt requested, or personal service upon the
owner, as set forth in the last filed tax roll.
§ 73-7 CHARTER § 73-10
C:247
§ 73-11. Storage of compost.
Any and all properties, tracts or parcels having or maintaining any type of
material used or kept as or for the purpose of composting must be contained
or stored in compliance with applicable setback requirements and must be
contained and kept in a manner as not to spread, leak or scatter from such
containment. Contents used for this purpose may not contain sticks, brush,
wood, animal feces or other material not meant for normal composting and
in a manner which is not unsightly, does not emit any noxious odor, and
which does not detract or devalue adjoining properties. Such containment
or storage may not exceed five feet by 10 feet and shall not exceed a height
of four feet.
§ 73-12. Multiple violations.
Once the notice has been sent to the property owner in accordance with
§ 73 -10A and the City has removed the weeds, grass, brush or other
vegetation in accordance with § 73-10B, then no further notice is required
in the same calendar year before the City removes said weeds, grass, brush
or vegetation. The City will be entitled to perform said removal once the
property is in violation of § 73-7 again. Each separate removal will become
an additional lien on the property in accordance with § 73-10B. The notice
required in § 73-10A shall recite that no further notice will be given for
subsequent violations in the same calendar year.
§ 73-13. Penalties for offenses.
Any person who shall neglect to cut and remove weeds, grass, brush or
other vegetation as directed in this article or who shall fail, neglect or
refuse to comply with the provisions of any notice herein provided or who
shall violate any of the provisions of this article or who shall resist or
obstruct the Common Council as officers of the City of Oneida or its/their
employees or designees in the cutting and removal of weeds, grass, brush
B. If the person upon whom the notice is served fails, neglects or refuses
to cut and remove or to cause to be cut and removed such weeds, grass,
brush or vegetation within five days after receipt of such notice or if
such notice was served by posting upon the premises, then, within five
days after such posting upon the premises, the aforementioned Code
Enforcement Official shall cause such weeds, grass, brush or other
vegetation on such lot or land to be cut and removed without need of
Council resolution, and the actual cost of such cutting and removal,
plus 50% for administrative expenses, shall be presented to the City
Chamberlain; said costs shall thereupon become a lien upon the
property on which such weeds, grass, brush and other vegetation were
located and shall be added to become a part of the taxes next to be
assessed and levied upon such lot or land, shall bear interest at the
same rate as taxes and shall be collected and enforced by the same City
official and in the same manner as taxes. In no event shall the special
assessment levied under this section be less than $100.
§ 73-10 ONEIDA CODE § 73-13
C:248
and other vegetation shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a fine of
not less than $100 nor more than $250. These penalties shall be in addition
to the special assessment imposed under § 73-10B.
§ 73-13 CHARTER § 73-13
C:249
Chapter 77
HOUSING STANDARDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Animals — See Ch. 17.
Appearance tickets — See Ch. 21.
Building code — See Ch. 33.
Vacant, abandoned, unsafe and collapsed
buildings — See Ch. 34.
Electrical standards — See Ch. 45.
Energy efficiency — See Ch. 47.
Fair housing — See Ch. 53.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 61.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 64.
Health and sanitation — See Ch. 73.
Mobile homes — See Ch. 92.
Public nuisance abatement — See Ch. 122.
Sewers — See Ch. 139.
Solid waste — See Ch. 147.
Capital improvements to residential
buildings — See Ch. 165, Art. V.
§ 73-13 ONEIDA CODE § 73-13
C:250
ARTICLE I
General Standards
§ 77-1. Title; applicability.
This chapter shall be known as "The Housing Code of the City of Oneida,
New York," which provides housing standards applicable to residential
premises within the boundaries of said City, including inside and outside
districts.
§ 77-2. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to provide basic and uniform standards,
in terms of performance objectives implemented by specific requirements
governing the condition, occupancy and maintenance of residential
premises and establishing reasonable safeguards for the safety, health and
welfare of the occupants and users thereof.
§ 77-3. Scope of provisions.
This chapter shall apply to premises as follows:
§ 77-4. Exceptions.
This chapter shall not apply to tourist camps, farm labor camps, travel
trailers and trailer parks.
§ 77-5. Definitions.
The words and terms used in this chapter shall have the following
meanings:
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE — A structure, the use of which is incidental to
that of the residential building and which is located on the same premises.
ACCESSORY USE — A use, occupancy or tenancy customarily incidental
to the principal use or occupancy of a residential building. Such accessory
uses may include, among others, the following: offices for the building
management, dining rooms, banquet rooms, public kitchens, ballrooms,
recreation and play rooms, laundries for the use of tenants and occupants
and in connection with the management and operation of a residential
building, maintenance and work shops, storage rooms for linen, bedding,
A. Lots, plots or parcels of land on which residential buildings, buildings of
mixed occupancy or accessory structures may be or are located.
B. Residential buildings, including one- and two-family dwellings, rooming
and lodging houses and multiple dwellings, except as specifically
excluded in § 77-4.
C. Residential occupancies in buildings of mixed occupancy.
D. Structures accessory to residential occupancies.
§ 77-1 CHARTER § 77-5
C:251
furniture, supplies and tenants, equipment and effects, rooms or space for
the incidental sale or display of merchandise to occupants and tenants, such
as newspaper, candy and cigar stands, garages within a residential building
or on the premises thereof used primarily for the storage of passenger type
motor vehicles. Such term shall have a uniform meaning and shall apply
in the same manner and under the same conditions or restrictions to all
residential buildings.
AGENCY — The department designated by the Common Council to carry
out the duties of enforcing and administering this chapter.
APPROVED — Approved by the administrative officer under the regulations
of this chapter or approved by an authority designated by law or this
chapter.
BASEMENT — That space of a building that is partly below grade which has
more than half its height, measured from floor to ceiling, above the average
established curb level or average finished grade of the ground adjoining the
building.
BATHROOM — Enclosed space containing one or more bathtubs or showers
or both and which may also contain water closets, lavatories or fixtures
serving similar purposes.
BUILDING — A structure wholly or partially enclosed within exterior walls
or within exterior or party walls and a roof, affording shelter to persons,
animals or property.
CELLAR — That space of a building that is partly or entirely below grade,
which has more than half of its height, measured from floor to ceiling, below
the average established curb level or average finished grade of the ground
adjoining the building.
DORMITORY — Any room occupied for sleeping purposes by five or more
persons. A cubicle is a small, partially enclosed, sleeping space within a
dormitory, with or without a window.
DORMITORY BUILDING — This term shall be synonymous with the terms
"college dormitory," "school dormitory" and "faculty residence." A dormitory
building is a multiple dwelling owned and/or operated by an educational
institution for the primary purpose of providing sleeping rooms for students
enrolled in the educational institution and/or members of the educational
institution's faculty. A dormitory building may or may not have additional
facilities for dining and/or recreation. This definition has been included to
provide the distinction between a structure which is a dormitory building
and a dormitory which, as defined in this chapter, is a room.
DWELLING — A building containing not more than two dwelling units
occupied exclusively for residential uses.
DWELLING UNIT — One or more rooms with provisions for living, cooking,
sanitary and sleeping facilities arranged for the use of one family.
DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY — A building containing not more than two
dwelling units occupied exclusively for residential purposes.
§ 77-5 ONEIDA CODE § 77-5
C:252
DWELLING, ONE-FAMILY — A building containing not more than one
dwelling unit occupied exclusively for residential purposes.
EXIT — A way of departure from the interior of a building or structure, to
the exterior at street or grade, including doorways, passageways, hallways,
corridors, stairways, ramps, fire escapes and all other elements necessary
for egress or escape.
EXTERMINATION — Control and elimination of insects, rodents and vermin
by eliminating their harborage places; by removing or making inaccessible
materials that may serve as their food; by poisoning, spraying, fumigating,
trapping; or by any other means of pest elimination.
FAMILY — A household constituting a single housekeeping unit occupied by
one or more persons.
FARM LABOR CAMP — A property consisting of a tract of land and tents,
vehicles, buildings or other structure pertaining thereto, any part of which
may be occupied by persons employed as laborers in farm activities who
are provided with sleeping facilities in whole or in part by the owner,
lessee or operator thereof, with or without stipulated agreements as to the
duration of their stay, whether or not they are supplied with meals, who are
supplied with such services or facilities as are necessary for their use of
such property.
FINISHED GRADE — The natural surface of the ground or surface of
ground after completion of any change in contour, abutting building or
premises.
FLOOR AREA — The horizontal areas of a building which are enclosed by
the exterior walls of the building.
GARBAGE — The animal, vegetable and mineral waste resulting from
handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food.
GENERALLY ACCEPTED STANDARD — A specification, code rule, guide or
procedure in the field of construction or related thereto, recognized and
accepted as authoritative.
HABITABLE SPACE — Space occupied by one or more persons for living,
sleeping, eating or cooking. Kitchenettes shall not be deemed to be
habitable space.
HOTEL — A dwelling in which there are 30 or more sleeping rooms in one
building or structure occupied primarily by transients who are lodged with
or without meals; and there are provided such services as are incidental to
the use thereof as a temporary residence.
INFESTATION — The presence, within or contiguous to a dwelling, dwelling
unit, rooming house, rooming unit, lodging house, lodging unit or premises,
of wild rodents, insects, vermin or other pests.
KITCHEN — Space, 60 square feet or more in floor area with a minimum
width of five feet, used for cooking or preparation of food.
§ 77-5 CHARTER § 77-5
C:253
KITCHENETTE — Space, less than 60 square feet in floor area, used for
cooking or preparation of food.
LODGING HOUSE — A dwelling, other than a hotel, in which persons are
housed in a dormitory or dormitories, whether or not the space for sleeping
accommodations therein is divided into cubicles.
LODGING UNIT — A room or group of rooms forming a single habitable
unit, used or intended to be used for lodging.
MIXED OCCUPANCY — Occupancy of a building in part for residential use
and in part for some other use not accessory thereto.
MOBILE HOME — A movable living unit equipped with a chassis and
provided with the following mechanical systems and equipment: plumbing,
heating, electrical, cooking and refrigeration.
MOBILE HOME COURT — A parcel of land which has been planned and
improved for the placement of two or more mobile homes.
MOTEL — A multiple dwelling not over two stories in height, intended
primarily for motorists, in which the exit from each dwelling unit or sleeping
room is directly to the exterior, The definition includes, but is not limited to,
the terms "motor court," "motor hotel," "tourist court."
MULTIPLE DWELLING —
MUNICIPALITY — A city, town or village.
NONHABITABLE SPACE — Space used as kitchenettes, pantries, bath,
toilet, laundry, rest, dressing, locker, storage, utility, heater and boiler
rooms, closets and other spaces for service and maintenance of the building
and those spaces used for access and vertical travel between stories. See
definitions of "habitable space, public space and exit.
NURSING HOME — A home for the care of the sick or infirm for
compensation, where three or more inmates thereof are or may be
accommodated, including nursing homes, homes for the care of the sick,
convalescent or infirm patients or inmates.
A. A building containing three or more dwelling units.
A building containing living, sanitary and sleeping facilities occupied by
one or two families and more than four lodgers residing with either one
of such families.
B.
A building with one or more sleeping rooms, other than a one- or twofamily
dwelling, used or occupied by permanent or transient paying
guests or tenants.
C.
A building with sleeping accommodations for more than five persons
used or occupied as a club, dormitory, fraternity or sorority house or for
similar uses.
D.
A building used or occupied as a convalescent, old-age or nursing home,
but not including private or public hospitals or public institutions.
E.
§ 77-5 ONEIDA CODE § 77-5
C:254
OCCUPANT — Any person, including an owner or operator, over one year of
age, living, sleeping, cooking or eating in or having actual possession of a
dwelling unit or room in a rooming house.
OPENINGS FOR EMERGENCY USE — This term shall be as defined in the
New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code applicable to
one- and two-family dwellings.
OWNER — Any person who, alone, jointly or severally with others, holds
legal or equitable title to any dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming house or
rooming unit.
PLUMBING SYSTEM — The water supply system, the drainage system, the
vent system, fixtures and traps, including their various connections, devices
and appurtenances within the property lines of the premises.
POTABLE WATER — Water which is approved for drinking, culinary and
domestic purposes.
PREMISES — A lot, plot or parcel of land including the building or
structures thereon.
PRIVY — Any place for the voiding of excreta that is not connected by
plumbing to an approved sewage disposal system.
PUBLIC SPACE — Space within a residential building for public use, such
as lobbies, lounges, reception, ball, meeting, lecture and recreation rooms,
banquet and dining rooms and their kitchens and swimming pools.
ROOMING HOUSE — A multiple dwelling, in which there are less than
30 sleeping rooms occupied primarily by transients who are lodged with
or without meals and in which there are provided such services as are
incidental to its use as a temporary residence. Also a dwelling two or
more stories in height, occupied by one or two families and with five or
more transient boarders, roomers or lodgers residing with any one family.
Where rooming house is used in this chapter, it shall mean boardinghouse,
furnished room house or tourist house.
ROOMING UNIT — Any room or group of rooms forming a single habitable
unit used or intended to be used for living or sleeping but not for cooking or
eating purposes.
RUBBISH — All combustible and noncombustible waste, except garbage.
SEWAGE — A liquid waste containing animal or vegetable matter in
suspension or solution and which may include industrial wastes and liquids
containing chemicals.
STRUCTURE — An assembly of materials, forming a construction framed of
component structural parts for occupancy or use, including buildings.
TOILET ROOM — An enclosed space, containing one or more water closets
and one or more lavatories, which may also contain urinals and other
plumbing fixtures. (See definition of "bathroom.")
VENTILATION — Supply and removal of air to and from a space by natural
or mechanical means.
§ 77-5 CHARTER § 77-5
C:255
WATER CLOSET — A toilet, with a bowl and trap, which is connected to the
City water and sewer system or to other approved water supply and sewer
system.
§ 77-6. Compliance required; penalties for offenses.
§ 77-7. Installations and repairs to conform to certain regulations.
Installations, alterations and repairs to residential premises and materials,
assemblies and equipment utilized in connection therewith, shall be
reasonably safe to persons and property and in conformity with applicable
laws of the state and City and orders, rules and regulations issued by
authority thereof. Conformity of such work, materials, assemblies or
equipment with the applicable requirements of the New York State Uniform
Fire Prevention and Building Code shall be prima facie evidence that the
same is reasonably safe to person and property.
§ 77-8. Responsibilities of owners.
VENTILATION, MECHANICAL — Ventilation by power-driven devices,
other than wind-driven.
A.
VENTILATION, NATURAL — Ventilation by openings to outer air
through windows, skylights, doors, louvers or stacks, with or without
wind-driven devices.
B.
A. Failure to comply with a violation order, within the time limit stated
therein, shall constitute a misdemeanor. Any person who shall
knowingly and willfully violate or assist in the violation of this chapter
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. The term "person," as used in this
section, shall include the owner, occupant, mortgagee or vendee in
possession, assignee of rents, receiver, executor, trustee, lessee, agent
or any other person, firm or corporation directly or indirectly in control
of a building or part thereof.
B. No penalty shall be imposed upon a person who by operation of law
acquires premises containing violations for which a violation order has
been issued, for a period of six months after the date of such acquisition
of the premises. Nevertheless, the penalties provided shall attach and
apply, either upon the expiration date of such six-month period or upon
transfer of title to the premises before the expiration of such period,
whichever first occurs.
A. Owners of premises shall be responsible for compliance with all
provisions of this chapter and shall remain responsible therefor
regardless of the fact that this chapter may also place certain
responsibilities on operators and occupants and regardless of any
agreements between owners and operators or occupants as to which
party shall assume such responsibility.
B. Owners of premises shall also be responsible for proper maintenance,
condition and function of service facilities. Unless otherwise agreed in
§ 77-5 ONEIDA CODE § 77-8
C:256
§ 77-9. Duties of rooming and lodging house operators.
Rooming and lodging house operators shall be responsible for compliance
with this chapter in regard to the following:
§ 77-10. Duties of occupants.
Occupants of dwelling units shall be responsible for compliance with this
chapter in regard to the following:
writing with tenant, the owner shall be responsible for furnishing
adequate heat and hot water supply, except in units with individual
heating system or domestic hot water supply.
C. In the event that cooking and/or refrigeration equipment is provided by
the owner, the owner shall maintain the same in proper operating
condition.
A. Limiting occupancy to the maximum permitted by this chapter.
B. Maintenance of safe and sanitary conditions in all parts of rooming and
lodging house premises.
C. Maintenance and operation of all required service facilities.
D. Maintenance of cooking and refrigeration fixtures and appliances
within his control and all plumbing and other building equipment and
facilities, in an operative, clean and sanitary condition.
E. Sanitary maintenance of walls, floors and ceilings.
F. Keeping exits clean and unencumbered.
G. Disposal of building garbage and refuse in a clean and sanitary manner.
H. Extermination of insects, rodents or other pests on the premises.
I. Installation and maintenance of required screens.
A. Limiting occupancy of that part of the premises which he occupies or
controls to the maximum permitted by this chapter.
B. Maintaining that part of the premises which he occupies or controls in a
clean, sanitary and safe condition.
C. Maintaining in a sanitary condition all plumbing, cooking and
refrigeration fixtures and appliances, as well as other building
equipment and storage facilities in that part of the premises which he
occupies or controls, in a clean and sanitary condition and providing
reasonable care in the operation and use thereof.
D. Keeping exits from his dwelling unit clean and unencumbered.
§ 77-8 CHARTER § 77-10
C:257
§ 77-11. Discontinuance of utilities in occupied dwellings;
limitation.
No owner, operator or occupant shall cause any service, facility, equipment
or utility which is required to be supplied by the provisions of this chapter,
to be removed or shut off from or discontinued for any occupied dwelling
unit except for necessary repairs, alterations or emergencies.
§ 77-12. Effect of conflicting provisions; remedies deemed
cumulative.
E. Disposal of garbage and refuse into provided facilities in a clean and
sanitary manner.
F. Extermination of insects, rodents or other pests within his dwelling unit
if his unit is the only one infested in the premises.
G. Keeping his domestic animals and pets in an appropriate manner and
under control.
H. In the event that cooking and/or refrigeration equipment is provided by
the owner, the owner shall maintain the same in proper operating
condition.
A. The provisions of this chapter shall supplement local laws, ordinances,
codes or regulations. When a provision of this chapter is found to be
inconsistent with any provisions of a statute, local law, ordinance, code
or regulations, the provisions or requirement which is the more
restrictive or which establishes the highest standard shall prevail. A
greater penalty shall not be considered as more restrictive or a higher
standard.
B. Notwithstanding the availability of other remedies for enforcement of
the provisions contained in the New York State Uniform Fire Prevention
and Building Code, Sanitary Code and Zoning Ordinances of the City,
the remedies and enforcement procedures as set forth in this chapter
may be used to enforce the provisions of the aforesaid enumerated City
codes and ordinances and shall be deemed cumulative to other
procedures and remedies.
§ 77-10 ONEIDA CODE § 77-12
C:258
ARTICLE II
Administration and Enforcement
§ 77-13. Enforcement Agency designated. [Amended 12-18-1990 by
Ord. No. 90-10]
The Bureau of Fire is hereby designated as the Agency to administer and
secure compliance with this chapter.
§ 77-14. Enforcement officer to direct Agency; appointment of
assistants. [Amended 12-18-1990 by Ord. No. 90-10]
The Agency shall be under the direction and charge of the Fire Chief. As
Chief Officer of said Agency, the Fire Chief may designate the Fire Marshal
as Chief Inspector and such assistants and inspectors who have completed
the code and code enforcement training as may be required by law to carry
out effectively the powers and duties of the Agency.
§ 77-15. Powers and duties of Enforcement Agency. [Amended
12-18-1990 by Ord. No. 90-10]
A. The Agency shall be empowered to adopt rules and regulations
necessary for securing such compliance and for its own organization
and internal management, provided that such rules and regulations
shall not be in conflict with this chapter.
B. It shall be the duty of the Chief Officer, through his designate:
(1) To make inspections of premises of all dwellings which contain two
or more apartments. This shall be done within four years after
enactment of this amendment, then at least once every two years
thereafter.
(2) To cause an investigation of all complaints of alleged housing
violations or other unsafe or unsanitary conditions. All complaints
must be in writing, setting forth the alleged violation or other
unsafe or unsanitary conditions and shall be signed by the
complainant with his or her address. Such complaints shall be filed
with or addressed to the "Chief Officer, Housing Code Enforcement,
Oneida City Fire Department, City Hall, Oneida, New York".
(3) To request the Chief Legal Officer of the City to take appropriate
legal action upon failure of the responsible party to comply with
any violation order within the time specified therein.
(4) To cooperate with other municipal governmental and private
agencies engaged in the survey, study and improvement of housing
conditions.
§ 77-13 CHARTER § 77-16
C:259
§ 77-16. Records of complaints, violations; searches; fee. [Amended
12-19-2000 by L.L. No. 6-2000]
Records shall be kept of all complaints received, inspections made and
violations found regarding premises regulated by this chapter. Records shall
be available for public inspection. Upon request, the Agency shall make a
search and issue a certificate of its records, including violations upon the
payment of a fee of $0.25 per page.
§ 77-17. Chief Enforcement Officer to take action upon failure to
comply with final order.
Whenever a final order to remove a violation, secure, vacate or demolish a
building has not been complied with, the Chief Officer of the Agency may
proceed to cause the structure to be demolished, repaired, altered, secured
or vacated or to take such other legal action as is necessary.
§ 77-18. Violator to pay costs; City Comptroller to recover unpaid
costs.
The expenses incurred by the City pursuant to the preceding section of this
chapter shall be charged to and paid by the person responsible for said
violation. The Chief Officer of the Enforcement Agency shall file with the
Comptroller a statement of the items of expense and the date of execution
of actions authorized by § 77-17. The Comptroller shall proceed to collect
said sums owing the City, by direct action against the aforesaid person or
persons or by adding the sums owing to the next City tax bill of said person
or persons, the same to be a lien upon their real property until paid and
collectible in the same manner as City taxes.
§ 77-19. Liability of City officers, employees, agents; defense and
indemnification.
No officer, agent or employee of the City shall be personally liable for any
damage resulting from any official determination, order or action required
or permitted in the discharge of his duties under this chapter. The City shall
defend and indemnify the Chief Officer of the Agency and the Fire Chief
or other officer of their departments or bureaus specifically designated and
authorized by them to make such official determination, order or action in
the discharge of their duties under this chapter, against any judgments or
liability that may arise as a result of any such official determination, order
or action made or taken by them in the discharge of their duties under this
chapter.
§ 77-16 ONEIDA CODE § 77-19
C:260
ARTICLE III
Inspections
§ 77-20. Authorization to perform inspections.
In the course of investigating a complaint hereunder, the Chief Officer of
the Agency shall be authorized to make or cause to be made inspections
to determine the condition of premises in order to safeguard the health,
safety and welfare of the public. The Chief Officer of the Agency or his
designated representatives shall be authorized to enter any premises at any
reasonable time during business hours or at such other time as may be
necessary in an emergency, for the purpose of performing his duties under
this chapter. Inspections herein authorized shall be limited to the provisions
of this chapter.
§ 77-21. Access to premises for inspections.
Access to all parts of any dwelling, dwelling unit and premises shall be
provided by the owner, operator, agent or occupant thereof to personnel
authorized in § 77-20 for the purpose of making such inspections at any
reasonable time during business hours or at such other times as may be
necessary in an emergency. Whenever the Chief Officer shall have cause
to suspect that a condition exists on the premises that is detrimental or
injurious to the health, safety or welfare of the public or the occupants
thereof, he may demand entry regardless of the consent of the owner or
occupant and if the owner or occupant shall refuse or delay in opening said
premises for a full and free inspection, he shall be guilty of a misdemeanor
for each and every refusal and the Chief Officer may adopt such other
means to enforce entry as may be available under law.
§ 77-22. Identification furnished inspectors; showing of
identification required when entering premises.
Inspectors and authorized personnel of the Agency shall be supplied with
official identification and shall exhibit such identification when entering any
premises and all parts thereof.
§ 77-20 CHARTER § 77-22
C:261

ARTICLE IV
Unfit Premises
§ 77-23. Designation; grounds enumerated.
Unfit premises shall be any premises within the scope of this chapter,
having any of the following defined defects and may be designated by the
Chief Officer of the Agency as unfit for human habitation and may be so
placarded if:
§ 77-24. Notice of intent by Chief Enforcement Officer to order
premises vacated.
Whenever the Chief Officer of the Agency determines that any premises are
unfit for human habitation as provided in the preceding section, he must
include finding within the notice of violation provided for in § 77-32, along
with a statement of his intent to order the premises vacated and to placard
said premises, if compliance with the provisions of the notice of violation
has not been secured.
§ 77-25. Order to vacate.
Whenever a notice of violation, as provided in the preceding section, has not
been complied with, the Chief Officer of the Agency may placard and issue
a final order, pursuant to § 77-34, directing the premises or any part thereof
to be vacated and a copy of said order shall be served, in addition to the
persons responsible, on the tenants affected thereby.
§ 77-26. Vacating to be within reasonable time; approval required
for rehabilitation.
Any premises ordered placarded and vacated as provided in § 77-25 shall
be vacated within such reasonable time as the Chief Officer of the Agency
may specify in the order. No such premises shall again be used for human
A. The structure lacks illumination, ventilation, sanitation, heat or other
facilities adequate to protect the health and safety of the occupants or
the public.
B. The structure or premises is damaged, decayed, dilapidated, insanitary,
unsafe or vermin-infested in such a manner as to create a serious
hazard to the health and safety of the occupants or the public.
C. The structure or premises, because of the location, general condition,
state of the premises or number of occupants, is so unsanitary, unsafe,
overcrowded or otherwise detrimental to health and safety that it
creates a serious hazard to the occupants or the public.
D. The structure, because of the failure of the owner or occupant to
comply with such notices or orders pursuant to this chapter, is unfit for
human habitation.
§ 77-23 CHARTER § 77-26
C:263
habitation and the placard removed until written approval is secured from
the Chief Officer of the Agency.
§ 77-27. Defacing, removal of placard.
No person shall deface or remove the placard from any such premises which
has been designated as unfit for human habitation, except as provided in
§ 77-26.
§ 77-28. Dwelling to be made safe and secure.
The owner, agent or operator of any premises which has been designated as
unfit for human habitation and vacated shall make such premises safe and
secure for the protection of the public in a manner satisfactory to the Chief
Officer of the Agency.
§ 77-29. Demolition.
A. Whenever the Chief Officer of the Agency designates a building unfit for
human habitation, he may include within the notice of violation
provided for in § 77-32 a statement of his intent to order the demolition
of the structure. The owner may demolish such structure or correct the
violation regardless of cost, provided that the requirements of the
building code in effect at the time of attempted compliance are
satisfied.
B. Whenever a notice of violation as provided in Subsection A has not been
complied with, the Chief Officer of the Agency may issue a final order,
pursuant to § 77-34, ordering the building demolished within the time
specified by the Chief Officer of the Agency.
§ 77-26 ONEIDA CODE § 77-29
C:264
ARTICLE V
Board of Appeals
[Amended 12-19-2000 by L.L. No. 6-2000; 11-8-2017 by L.L. No.
5-2017]
§ 77-30. Appeals generally.
An appeal from a determination of the enforcement officer may be taken
by any aggrieved person or by any officer, department or board of the City
to the Joint Zoning Board of Appeals/Planning Commission as provided in
Chapter 190, Zoning. Appeals shall be submitted to the enforcement officer,
who shall then transmit to the Board all the papers constituting the record
upon which the action appealed from was taken. The Joint Zoning Board of
Appeals/Planning Commission shall have the powers and duties prescribed
by statute, this chapter and Chapter 190, Zoning.
§ 77-30 CHARTER § 77-30
C:265

ARTICLE VI
Violations
§ 77-31. Referral to certain officers; reports from same.
§ 77-32. Notice of violation; contents, service.
A. Violations of the provisions of this chapter which are specifically
covered by or within the scope of the Bureau of Fire Prevention shall be
referred to the Fire Chief or his designated representative, and
violations of such provisions of this chapter which are specifically
covered by or within the scope of the Sanitary Code of the City and/or
the public health laws of the state shall be referred to the Health Officer
or his designated representative.
B. The referrals shall be for the purpose of making inspections of said
referred alleged violations and report in writing the results thereof to
the Chief Officer of this Agency.
C. At the time of submitting such report, the Fire Chief or his designated
representative making the report shall inform the Chief Officer of this
Agency in writing that:
(1) The violations contained in the report will be processed under and
compliance secured in accordance with the provisions of said Fire
Prevention Code or said Sanitary Code and/or public health laws.
(2) The violations contained in the report may be processed under and
compliance secured in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter, and the inspector making such inspection as contained in
the report shall cooperate with the Chief Officer to obtain
compliance. The items of violation contained in the report shall be
included in any notice or order issued by the Chief Officer and in all
legal proceedings pertaining thereto.
A. Whenever the Chief Officer of the Agency determines that there has
been a violation or that there are reasonable grounds to believe that
there has been a violation of any provision of this chapter or any rule or
regulation adopted pursuant hereto, he shall give written notice of such
violation or alleged violation to the persons responsible for such
violation. Such notice shall specify the alleged violations and shall
provide 10 days for compliance.
B. Service of such notice upon the persons responsible for such violation
or violations shall be deemed sufficient:
(1) If a copy is served upon him personally; or
(2) If a copy thereof is sent by registered mail, return receipt
requested, to the last known address of such person; or
§ 77-31 CHARTER § 77-32
C:267
§ 77-33. Chief Officer to set time, place of hearing.
If an application for a hearing as provided for in § 77-32 is properly made,
the Chief Officer of the Agency shall set a time and place for and conduct
said hearing.
§ 77-34. Final order.
Upon the conclusion of such a hearing or upon the expiration of 10 days
after receipt of such notice if no hearing is requested, the Chief Officer
of the Agency may issue a final order. A copy of the final order shall be
served in the same manner as provided for service of the notice of violation
in § 77-32. Such order shall give the person responsible a reasonable time
from date of service of said order within which to comply. Upon failure of
such person to comply, the Chief Officer shall act to obtain compliance as
provided by this chapter.
§ 77-35. Extension of compliance time.
The Chief Officer of the Agency may in his discretion extend the compliance
time specified in any notice or order, issued under the provisions of this
chapter where there is evidence of intent to comply within the period
specified, provided that reasonable conditions exist which prevent
immediate compliance. No such extension shall be granted except on
written application stating the reasons therefor nor shall it be given for
more than 90 days without further written application.
§ 77-36. Duties of City Attorney.
The City Attorney shall, upon complaint of the Chief Officer of the Agency
or upon his own motion, institute appropriate action to restrain, prevent,
enjoin, abate, correct or remove violations of this chapter and to take such
other legal action as is necessary to carry out the terms and provisions of
this chapter. The remedies provided for herein shall be cumulative and not
exclusive and shall be in addition to any other remedies provided by law
and as provided in § 77-12. All remedies may be pursued concurrently or
consecutively and the pursuit of any remedy shall not be construed as an
election or the waiver of the right to pursue any and all of the others.
(3) If a copy is posted in a conspicuous place in or about the building
affected by the notice and if a copy mailed by registered mail on the
same day it is posted to the person responsible.
C. Such notice shall inform the person, to whom it is directed, of his right
to apply in writing within 10 days for a hearing before the Chief Officer
of the Agency or his designated assistant. Such notice may contain an
outline of remedial action which, if taken, will effect compliance with
the provisions of this chapter and with rules and regulations adopted
pursuant hereto.
§ 77-32 ONEIDA CODE § 77-37
C:268
§ 77-37. Emergency action.
Whenever the Chief Officer of the Agency finds that a violation of this
code exists, which, in his opinion, requires immediate action to abate a
hazard or constitutes an immediate danger to health, safety or welfare of
the occupants of a building or of the public, he may, without prior notice
or hearing, issue an order citing the violation and directing that such
action be taken as is necessary to remove or abate the hazard or danger.
Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, such an order shall be
effective immediately upon service and shall be complied with immediately
or as otherwise provided.
§ 77-37 CHARTER § 77-37
C:269

ARTICLE VII
Minimum Standards
§ 77-38. General equipment requirements.
§ 77-39. General maintenance requirements.
Residential premises shall be maintained in conformity with the provisions
of this code so as to assure the desirable residential character of the
property.
§ 77-40. Fuel oil storage, equipment and piping.
All fuel-oil-burning equipment, storage facilities, piping, etc., shall be
installed, used and maintained as required by the New York State Uniform
Fire Prevention and Building Code and approved standards.
§ 77-41. Elevators, dumbwaiters and moving stairs in multiple
dwellings.
A. Plumbing, heating, electrical, ventilating, air-conditioning,
refrigerating, cooking, fire protection and radiation production
equipment, elevators, dumbwaiters, moving stairs and other
mechanical additions, installations or systems for the use of the
building shall be installed, located and maintained so that under normal
conditions of use such equipment and systems will not be a danger to
health or welfare, a danger because of structural defects or a source of
ignition or a radiation hazard and will not create excessive noise or
otherwise become a nuisance or a hazard. Equipment and systems
include, but are not limited to, apparatus, devices, fixtures, piping, pipe
hangers, pipe covering, wiring, fittings and materials used as part of or
in connection with such installations.
B. Equipment and systems subject to damage from freezing shall be
adequately protected against freezing.
C. Moving parts of equipment which may be a potential hazard shall be
guarded to protect against accidental contact.
A. Elevators, dumbwaiters and moving stairs shall be maintained so as to
be free from physical and fire hazards.
B. Elevator and power-operated dumbwaiter cars shall be provided with
durable signs in conspicuous locations on which the rated capacity shall
be indicated.
C. Elevator cars shall be provided with approved means for transmitting a
signal outside the hoistway in case of emergency.
D. Hoistways and pits shall be maintained free of refuse.
§ 77-38 CHARTER § 77-41
C:271
§ 77-42. Disposal of refrigerators.
Every person who discards a gas-fired, electric or other refrigerator shall,
before removing such refrigerator from the room in which it was installed,
remove the locking device or hinges of the refrigerator.
§ 77-43. General requirements for chimneys, flues and gas vents.
§ 77-44. Installation and maintenance of chimneys, flues and gas
vents.
Chimneys, flues and gas vents shall be installed and maintained so that
under conditions of use, the temperature of any combustible material
adjacent thereto, insulated therefrom or in contact therewith does not
exceed a safe temperature.
E. Machine rooms shall be maintained free of oil and grease and shall not
be used for storage of articles or materials unnecessary for the
maintenance of the elevator or dumbwaiter. Flammable liquids shall not
be kept in such rooms.
F. No person shall at any time make any required safety device or
electrical protective device inoperative, except where necessary during
tests, inspections or maintenance.
A. Chimneys, flues, gas vents and their supports shall be installed and
maintained so as to be structurally safe, durable, smoketight,
noncombustible and capable of withstanding the action of flue gases
without softening, cracking, corroding or spalling.
B. Such facilities shall effectively convey the products of combustion to the
outer air.
C. Masonry chimneys shall have noncombustible foundations. Approved
prefabricated chimneys shall be installed according to manufacturer's
specifications.
D. Flue linings shall be capable of withstanding the action of flue gas
without softening, cracking, corroding or spalling at the temperature to
which they will be subjected.
E. Openings for smoke pipes or gas vent connections shall be provided
with means for easy connection without restriction of flue.
F. No flue shall have smoke pipe or gas vent connections in more than one
story of a building.
G. Fuel-burning equipment and fireplaces located in different tenancies
shall not be connected to the same flue.
H. Smoke pipes and gas vents shall be securely supported and be
prevented from falling out of the flue.
§ 77-41 ONEIDA CODE § 77-45
C:272
§ 77-45. Chimney or flue spark arresters.
A chimney or flue connected to an incinerator and a chimney or flue which
may emit sparks shall be provided with a spark arrester of noncombustible
construction. Spark arresters shall have sufficient total clear area to permit
unrestricted passage of flue gases. Openings in spark arresters shall be of
such size as to prevent passage of embers and to minimize clogging by soot.
§ 77-46. Incinerators.
§ 77-47. Incinerator service openings.
§ 77-48. Electrical requirements.
A. Incinerators shall be of adequate capacity for the intended use.
B. Flue-fed incinerators shall be equipped with means for burning
auxiliary fuel in sufficient quantity to assure complete combustion of
refuse.
C. A flue serving an incinerator shall be provided with a substantially
constructed spark arrester.
D. Incinerators shall be connected to a suitable noncombustible chimney,
smokestack or flue.
E. Connections to incinerators shall provide free passage of refuse without
clogging.
A. Service openings for incinerators shall be readily accessible to the
building occupants.
B. No person shall deposit any highly flammable substances or objects
which will clog the flue of an incinerator and durable signs with plainly
legible letters prohibiting disposal of such substance shall be provided
near each service opening.
A. Electrical wiring and equipment shall be installed in conformity with
the Electrical Code in force in the City and be maintained so as not to be
a potential source of a ignition of combustible material or a potential
source of electrical hazard.
B. Electrical wiring and equipment shall be firmly secured to the surface
on which it is mounted.
C. Electrical wiring and equipment installed in damp or wet locations or
where exposed to explosive or flammable gases or to excessive
temperatures shall be of a type approved for the purpose and location.
D. Electrical wiring and equipment shall be protected against excessive
current by properly rated overcurrent devices.
§ 77-45 CHARTER § 77-48
C:273
§ 77-49. Artificial lighting.
§ 77-50. Exit and directional signs.
§ 77-51. General cooking and refrigeration requirements.
E. Electrical wiring and equipment shall be grounded or otherwise
protected by insulation, isolation or guarding so as to minimize the
danger of high voltages from lightning or other causes.
F. Electrical equipment which in ordinary operation produces arcs, sparks
or excessive heat shall be enclosed or separated and isolated from all
combustible material.
G. Service equipment and overcurrent protection devices shall be installed
and maintained in a readily accessible location.
A. Residential buildings and occupancies shall be wired for electricity and
lighting equipment shall be installed throughout to provide adequate
illumination for the intended use of each space. Each electrical wiring
system shall be connected to an adequate source of supply.
B. There shall be a switch or other means for controlling a light in each
dwelling unit near the point of entrance to the unit.
A. Exits in multiple dwellings shall be provided with exit and directional
signs, visible from the approach to the exits, except that such signs
shall not be required in those portions of a building which contain
dwelling units only or in which exit from sleeping rooms is directly to
the outside.
B. Directional signs shall be provided at locations from which the exit
doorway is not readily discernible.
C. Such signs shall be worded in plainly legible block letters with the word
"EXIT" for exit signs and the words "TO EXIT" with a suitable pointer or
arrow indicating the direction of exit, for directional signs. Letters for
signs shall be conspicuous, readily discernible and at least six inches
high except that for internally illuminated signs the height of such
letters shall be at least 4 1/2 inches.
D. Exit and directional signs shall be illuminated either externally or
internally by electric lights and shall be kept illuminated at all times
when the building is occupied.
A. Each dwelling unit shall be provided with appropriate cooking and
refrigeration equipment. Cooking and refrigeration equipment shall be
provided by the owner or by the tenant in accordance with their mutual,
written agreement.
B. Cooking and refrigeration equipment shall be maintained in good
operating condition.
§ 77-48 ONEIDA CODE § 77-51
C:274
§ 77-52. Communal cooking and dining facilities.
Every communal kitchen and dining room located in a rooming house shall
have adequate floor space and facilities and be located as to be accessible to
the occupant of each rooming unit sharing the use of such facilities, without
going through a dwelling unit or rooming unit of another occupant.
§ 77-53. Air conditioning and mechanical ventilation for one- and
two-family dwellings.
§ 77-54. Tampering with safety device prohibited.
No person shall in any manner disconnect, bypass, block or interfere with
any safety device so as to hinder or prevent the normal and effective
operation of said device.
§ 77-55. Fences; appurtenances outside dwellings; open areas.
C. Gas-burning cooking equipment shall be permanently connected in
place. Gas supply connections to such equipment be made with
approved pipe or with an approved flexible tubing connector.
D. The combustion chambers of solid-fuel-burning cooking equipment
shall be appropriately vented.
A. Exhaust air from a dwelling unit shall not be circulated to another
dwelling unit.
B. Ducts shall be securely fastened in place and appropriately firestopped.
C. Equipment shall be secured so as not to present a hazard.
A. Fences and other minor structures shall be maintained in a safe
condition.
B. Steps, walks, driveways, parking spaces and similar areas shall be
maintained so as to afford safe passage under normal use and weather
conditions.
C. Yards, courts and lots shall be kept free and clear of physical hazards
and material or debris which would cause a fire hazard or act for a
breeding place for vermin or insects.
D. Heavy undergrowths and accumulations of plant growth noxious or
detrimental to health shall be eliminated.
E. Exterior property areas shall be free from conditions which might
create a health, accident or fire hazard.
F. Exterior property areas shall be reasonably free from holes and
excavations, sharp protrusions and other objects or conditions which
might cause personal injury. Walks, steps and driveways that contain
§ 77-51 CHARTER § 77-55
C:275
§ 77-56. Drainage of stormwater; surface and subsurface water.
§ 77-57. Disposal of sewage and septage. [Amended 9-17-1991 by
Ord. No. 91-07]
All sewage, wastewater and septage shall be discharged into a public
sewer system pursuant to and except as otherwise provided by ordinance
of the City. Notwithstanding any other provision of local or state law, no
discharge of sewage, wastewater or septage shall be permitted upon the
surface of the ground anywhere within the City or into natural or artificial
surface drainageways. "Septage" is defined as the contents of a septic
tank, cesspool or other individual sewage treatment facility which receives
domestic sewage waste.
§ 77-58. Building, structural requirements.
§ 77-59. Protection against infestation.
holes or tripping hazards shall be filled, repaired or replaced as the
need indicates. Open wells, cesspools or cisterns shall be securely
closed. Trees or limbs of trees that constitute a hazard shall be
removed.
A. Stormwater shall be properly drained to prevent recurrent entrance of
water into any basement or cellar.
B. Surface and subsurface water shall be appropriately drained to protect
buildings and structures and to prevent development of stagnant ponds.
Gutters, culverts, catch basins, drain inlets, stormwater sewers,
approved combined storm and sanitary sewers or other satisfactory
drainage systems shall be utilized where deemed necessary.
A. Exterior wood surfaces of buildings and structures that are not
inherently resistant to deterioration shall be periodically treated with a
protective coating of paint or other suitable preservative.
B. Floors, walls, ceilings, furnishings and fixtures of residential buildings
shall be maintained in clean and sanitary condition.
C. Accessory structures shall be maintained so as to be free of conditions
detrimental to safety or health.
A. Grounds, buildings and structures shall be maintained free of insect,
vermin and rodent harborage and infestation. Methods used for
exterminating insects, vermin and rodents shall conform with generally
accepted practice.
B. Where the potential for rodent infestation exists, windows and other
openings in basements shall be appropriately ratproofed with wire
mesh or other suitable materials.
§ 77-55 ONEIDA CODE § 77-59
C:276
§ 77-60. Garbage, refuse disposal.
§ 77-61. Keeping of animals and pets.
C. From May 1 to November 1, entrance to residential buildings shall be
provided with self-closing-type devices or screens, and windows or
other openings used for ventilation shall be appropriately screened.
Screens shall not be required in rooms located sufficiently high in the
upper stories of multiple dwellings as to be free of mosquitoes, flies and
other flying insects.
D. The exterior of every structure used for human habitation shall be so
maintained as to be vermin and rodent free. Where rodent or vermin
problems exist, all exterior windows, doors and other openings, two feet
above ground level or below, shall be screened or protected with
acceptable wire mesh or other approved materials. Defects, cracks or
holes shall be tightly sealed to prevent the entrance of vermin and
rodents.
A. Exterior property area shall be kept free from organic and inorganic
material that might become a health, accident or fire hazard.
B. Adequate sanitary facilities and methods shall be used for the
collection, storage, handling and disposal of garbage and rubbish. It
shall be prohibited to store or accumulate garbage or rubbish in halls or
stairways. Rubbish and garbage shall be stored in covered containers of
nondestructible material.
A. Domestic animals and pets shall not be kept on any premises in such a
manner as to create insanitary conditions or to constitute a nuisance.
B. Domestic animals and pets shall be maintained in accordance with
applicable regulations of the City of Oneida. Insanitary conditions,
inappropriate types of pets or animals and excessive numbers of them
constitute conditions which may be considered a nuisance under this
section.
§ 77-59 CHARTER § 77-61
C:277

ARTICLE VIII
Air Conditioning and Mechanical Ventilation for Multiple Dwellings
§ 77-62. Scope.
All multiple dwellings shall comply with the provisions of this article.
§ 77-63. Air-conditioning systems.
Air conditioning systems shall meet the following requirements:
§ 77-64. Ventilating systems.
§ 77-65. Air intake and exhaust openings.
A. Refrigerants that are highly flammable shall not be used.
B. Direct systems using refrigerants that are flammable or toxic shall not
be used for air conditioning purposes.
C. Equipment shall be secured so as not to present a hazard.
A. Ventilating systems shall be installed and maintained so that the rapid
spread of heat, flame or smoke through the system will be prevented
and so that under conditions of use the temperature of any combustible
material adjacent thereto or in contact therewith will not exceed a safe
temperature.
B. Stairways, shafts, hoistways or attics shall not be used as plenum
chambers.
C. Ducts shall be securely fastened in place and appropriately firestopped.
D. Filters shall be installed and maintained so as not to constitute a fire or
smoke hazard.
E. Ducts passing through or located within combustible construction shall
be separated from such construction by a clearance of at least 1/2 inch
or by a noncombustible insulating material at least 1/4 inch thick.
F. Air required for ventilation shall be taken from the exterior or shall be
quality controlled.
G. Exhaust air from a dwelling unit or a space the contents of which may
emit odors, fumes or vapors shall not be circulated to other occupied
spaces within the building.
H. Enclosures or spaces where heat, gases, vapors or odors may
accumulate and become a potential source of hazard or nuisance shall
be provided with adequate means of ventilation to remove such excess.
§ 77-62 CHARTER § 77-65
C:279
§ 77-66. Safety controls.
A. Air intake and exhaust openings shall be installed, located and
maintained so as not to constitute a hazard or nuisance, so as to prevent
the possibility of fire, smoke, fumes or foreign matter being drawn into
the system.
B. Ventilating systems shall be provided with adequate openings for
incoming and outgoing air to obtain the required circulation. Intake
openings shall provide air from an uncontaminated source.
C. Where openings for mechanical exhaust are located in spaces that also
contain fuel-burning equipment, there shall be provided fixed intake
openings from the exterior to supply sufficient air so that the fuelburning
equipment is not adversely affected.
D. Exhaust openings shall be located so that the exhaust air will not create
a nuisance.
A. Manually operated controls shall be provided to stop the operation of all
central fan equipment. Such controls shall be conspicuously identified
and in readily accessible location outside the fan room.
B. Every system using recirculated air and serving an assembly space or
more than one fire area or more than one story of a building, shall be
provided with controls arranged so that under abnormal rise in
temperature of the air in the system the fans causing normal circulation
shall stop and require manual restart.
C. Every system for ventilating an assembly space shall be provided with
an emergency switch conveniently located and with a durable sign
giving instructions for shutting down the system in case of fire.
§ 77-65 ONEIDA CODE § 77-66
C:280
ARTICLE IX
Heating
§ 77-67. Generally.
§ 77-68. Smoke control for fuel-burning equipment.
Fuel-burning heat-producing equipment shall be installed and maintained
so as not to violate the Fire Prevention Code in force in the City.
§ 77-69. Warm air ducts.
Ducts and other air-handling equipment used for heating shall conform to
the requirements of such equipment used for ventilating purposes.
§ 77-70. Location of fuel-burning water heaters.
Fuel-burning water heaters shall not be located in sleeping rooms,
bathrooms or toilet rooms.
§ 77-71. Fuel supply connections.
Fuel-burning equipment shall be permanently fastened and connected in
place. Fuel supply connections to such equipment shall be made with
approved pipe or with an approved flexible tubing connector and be
protected against mechanical injury and corrosion.
§ 77-72. Installation of equipment.
Where heat-producing equipment is installed on or adjacent to combustible
materials, the location, insulation, clearance and the control of the
equipment shall be such that the temperature on the surface of the
combustible materials will not exceed a safe temperature.
§ 77-73. Air supply for equipment.
A. Except as otherwise mandated by federal law or regulation, residential
buildings intended for occupancy between the 15th day of September
and the 15th day of June of the following year shall be provided with
heating equipment designed to maintain a temperature of not less than
68º F. at a distance of three feet from exterior walls and at a level of five
feet above the floor, in habitable spaces, kitchenettes, bathrooms and
toilet rooms. The capability of the heating equipment to maintain such
indoor temperatures shall be based on an outside temperature of -10º
F.
B. Except as otherwise mandated by federal law or regulation, in multiple
dwellings, adequate heat shall be provided to maintain the indoor
temperature in habitable spaces, kitchenettes, bathrooms and toilet
rooms at 68º F. from September 1 to June 30 of the following year when
the outside temperature falls below 55º F.
§ 77-67 CHARTER § 77-73
C:281
§ 77-74. Connection of equipment to chimneys or vents.
§ 77-75. Safety devices.
§ 77-76. Heating of garages.
Fuel-burning equipment for garages serving multiple dwellings shall be
located in heater rooms, except that equipment burning gas or liquid fuel
located in the vehicle garage space shall be permitted in stories at or above
A. Direct-fired heat producing equipment and the enclosure in which it is
located shall be provided with a supply of air adequate to replenish that
consumed by complete combustion at the rated gross output of the
equipment and for the ventilation of the enclosure to prevent the
accumulation of heat.
B. Such air shall be supplied by means of one or more openings to the
exterior or by means of fixed openings to interior spaces which open to
the exterior.
A. Equipment for burning solids or liquid fuel shall be connected to
suitable chimneys or flues and shall not be connected to gas vents.
Unvented heaters burning liquid fuel shall be prohibited.
B. Fuel-burning space heaters located in sleeping rooms or rooms
normally kept closed shall be connected to a suitable chimney, flue or
gas vent.
C. Gas-fired equipment shall be connected to a suitable chimney, flue or
gas vent when the discharge of products of combustion into the space
where the equipment is installed would be a hazard.
A. Equipment capable of developing hazardous pressures or temperatures
shall be provided with means to relieve safely such pressures and
temperatures.
B. Controls for the safe operation of automatically operated heatproducing
equipment shall be provided to function as follows:
(1) When failure or interruption of flame or ignition occurs, the fuel
supply shall be cut off.
(2) When a predetermined temperature or pressure is exceeded, the
input of additional heat shall be prevented or reduced to a safe
rate.
(3) When the water level in a steam boiler boils below a predetermined
level, the fuel supply shall be cut off.
(4) When failure or interruption of pilot light or main burner in gas
equipment occurs, the fuel supply to each pilot light and main
burner shall be cut off.
§ 77-73 ONEIDA CODE § 77-76
C:282
grade where the equipment is elevated so as not to be exposed to possible
accumulation of flammable gases.
§ 77-76 CHARTER § 77-76
C:283

ARTICLE X
Plumbing
§ 77-77. Generally.
§ 77-78. Water supply systems.
§ 77-79. Sewage drainage systems.
A. Plumbing systems shall be maintained in sanitary and serviceable
condition and installed and maintained in accordance with the
plumbing standards of the New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and
Building Code.
B. Plumbing systems shall be maintained so as not to weaken structural
members nor cause damage or deterioration to any part of the building
through fixture usage.
A. Potable water from an approved source shall be available at all times in
residential buildings. The domestic water supply system of the building
shall be connected to such approved source and shall not be subject to
contamination. When supplied from a public source, the potable water
supply system shall not be connected to private or unsafe water
supplies.
B. Water supply systems shall be installed and maintained so as to provide
at all times a supply of water to plumbing fixtures, devices and
appurtenances in sufficient volume and at pressures adequate to enable
them to function satisfactorily and without undue noise under all
normal conditions of use.
C. Water supply systems shall be installed and maintained so that water
used for purposes of cooling or heating shall not be reintroduced into
the domestic water supply system or be distributed through such
equipment to plumbing fixtures.
D. Hot water supply systems shall be provided with safety devices
arranged to relieve hazardous pressures and excessive temperatures.
A. Plumbing fixtures shall be drained to a sewage drainage system and
such system shall be connected to a public sewer or to an adequate and
approved system of sewage disposal.
B. Where a public sewer is not available, a system shall be provided to
receive and dispose of sewage without health hazard or nuisance.
C. Sewage or other waste shall not be discharged into the ground or into a
waterway unless it has first been rendered harmless through subjection
to treatment or to natural processes in conformity with generally
accepted standards.
§ 77-77 CHARTER § 77-79
C:285
§ 77-80. Storm drainage systems.
§ 77-81. Minimum fixture requirements.
D. Substances which will clog the pipes, produce explosive mixtures,
destroy the pipes or their joints or interfere unduly with the sewage
disposal process shall not be discharged into the building drainage
system unless it is provided with approved devices suitable for
intercepting such substances.
E. Each fixture directly connected to the sewage drainage system shall be
equipped with a water seal trap.
F. Adequate cleanouts shall be provided and maintained so that the pipes
may be readily cleaned.
G. The drainage system and its attendant vent piping shall be maintained
so as to provide adequate circulation of air in all pipes in order that
siphonage, aspiration or pressure will not cause a loss of trap seal
under ordinary conditions of use.
H. Each vent terminal to the outer air shall be installed and maintained so
as to minimize the possibilities of clogging, frost closure, the return of
foul air to the building or the creation of a nuisance to adjacent
premises.
I. Drains provided for fixtures, devices, appliances or apparatus
containing food, water, sterile goods or similar material shall be
equipped with air breaks, adequate to prevent contamination of such
contents from any possible backup of sewage through the direct or
indirect drainage piping.
A. Roofs and paved areas, including yards and courts, shall be properly
drained. Storm drainage shall be conveyed to an adequate and
approved system of stormwater disposal where available. Storm drains
shall be discharged in such manner that water will not flow onto
sidewalks.
B. Where a drainage system may be subject to backwater, suitable
provision shall be made to prevent its overflow into the building.
C. Leaders and gutters, if used, shall be constructed of noncombustible
material, except that wood leaders and gutters may be used for
buildings not more than three stories high.
A. Buildings shall be provided with plumbing systems designed to dispose
of the sewage from all fixtures and to furnish cold water to every water
closet and urinal and hot and cold water to every sink, lavatory, bathtub
and shower required therein. In multiple dwellings, hot water shall be
furnished at a minimum of 120º F.
§ 77-79 ONEIDA CODE § 77-81
C:286
§ 77-82. Fixtures.
§ 77-83. Swimming pools.
B. There shall be provided within each dwelling unit, plumbing fixtures
consisting of at least:
(1) One kitchen sink;
(2) One water closet;
(3) One bathtub or shower; and
(4) One lavatory.
C. Where multiple dwellings contain sleeping accommodations arranged
as individual rooms or suites, for each multiple of six sleeping rooms or
fraction thereof, there shall be provided plumbing fixtures consisting of
at least:
(1) One water closet;
(2) One bathtub or shower; and
(3) One lavatory.
D. Where multiple dwellings contain sleeping accommodations arranged
as a dormitory, for each multiple of 15 persons or fraction thereof so
accommodated there shall be provided and located adjacent thereto,
plumbing fixtures consisting of at least:
(1) Two water closets;
(2) Two bathtubs or showers; and
(3) Two lavatories.
E. Urinals may be substituted in men's toilet room for not more than 1/3 of
the required number of water closets.
F. Privies, privy vaults and outhouses shall be prohibited on premises
which are included in the scope of this chapter.
A. Plumbing fixtures shall be made of smooth, absorbent material and
shall be free from concealed fouling surfaces.
B. Plumbing fixtures shall be so spaced as to be reasonably accessible for
their intended use.
C. Plumbing fixtures shall be located in spaces that are accessible, lighted
and ventilated.
A. Water supply used for filling or for cleaning of the pool shall be clean.
Water supply shall be protected against potential pollution from all
sources, including cross-connection and backflow.
§ 77-81 CHARTER § 77-83
C:287
§ 77-84. Water supply tanks.
B. Drains shall be provided so that the pool can be safely and adequately
drained. Drains shall be provided in floors surrounding the swimming
pool and arranged so that water from such areas will drain without
entering the pool.
C. Filtering, sterilizing and auxiliary equipment, where required, shall be
adequate to maintain the sanitary quality Of water during each period
the pool is in use. Equipment using gases or disinfectants capable of
giving off irritating, toxic or flammable fumes shall be located in
ventilated rooms.
D. The installation shall be arranged and maintained to prevent dirt, sand
or other foreign matter from entering the bathing area.
A. Water supply tanks shall be installed and maintained so as to be
watertight, verminproof, rodentproof, resistant to corrosion and
capable of withstanding the working pressures under normal operation.
B. Supports for tanks shall be of noncombustible construction.
C. Tanks and their supports shall not be used to support equipment or
structures other than for tank use, except where specially designed for
such other use.
D. Means for emptying water supply tanks shall be provided and
maintained in proper working condition.
E. Potable water supply tanks for domestic supply and standpipe or
automatic sprinkler systems shall be installed and maintained to furnish
water in sufficient quantity and pressure for such systems.
§ 77-83 ONEIDA CODE § 77-84
C:288
ARTICLE XI
Space, Light, Occupancy and Ventilation Requirements
§ 77-85. Compliance required.
Buildings occupied in whole or in part shall comply with the requirements
set forth in this article concerning occupancy, size, light and ventilation in
order to provide a safe and healthful environment.
§ 77-86. Space requirements.
§ 77-87. Prohibited uses.
A. Every dwelling unit shall contain a minimum gross floor area of 150
square feet for the first person, 150 square feet for the second person
and 100 square feet for each occupant thereafter.
B. In every dwelling unit and in every rooming unit, every room occupied
for sleeping purposes by one occupant shall contain at least 70 square
feet of floor area and every room occupied for sleeping purposes by
more than one occupant shall contain at least 50 square feet of floor
area for each occupant 12 years of age and over and at least 35 square
feet of floor area for each occupant under 12 years of age.
C. Floor area shall be calculated on the basis of habitable room area.
However, closet area and hall area within the dwelling unit, where
provided, may count for not more than 10% of the required habitable
floor area. At least 1/2 of the floor area of every habitable room shall
have a ceiling height of at least seven feet; and the floor area of any part
of any room where the ceiling height is less than 4 1/2 feet shall not be
considered as part of the floor area in computing the total floor area of
the room to determine maximum permissible occupancy.
D. In buildings occupied as clubs, dormitories, sorority or fraternity
houses and providing sleeping accommodations for more than five
persons, the maximum number of occupants so accommodated in any
habitable room shall be limited to the number determined on the basis
of the floor area, in square feet, of any 50 square feet per occupant.
E. In lodging units and rooming units the maximum number of occupants
shall be limited to the number determined on the same basis as for
dwelling units.
A. It shall be prohibited to use for sleeping purposes any kitchen,
nonhabitable space or public space.
B. It shall be prohibited, in lodging houses and rooming houses, to use for
dining purposes any communal kitchen containing less than 100 square
feet of floor area or any nonhabitable space or public space other than
dining space.
§ 77-85 CHARTER § 77-87
C:289
§ 77-88. Habitable space; size.
§ 77-89. Basements and cellars.
C. It shall be prohibited to prepare meals in lodging units and rooming
units.
D. It shall be prohibited to use any cellar or basement as habitable space
except as provided in § 77-88.
A. Habitable space shall have a minimum ceiling height of seven feet over
50% of the floor area; and the floor area where the ceiling height is less
than 4 1/2 feet shall not be considered in computing floor area.
B. Every alcove less than 60 square feet in area, except a cooling space or
foyer, shall be deemed to be part of a habitable room. The area of the
opening in the dividing partition between the alcove and the room shall
be at least 80% of the wall area of such partition, measured on the
alcove side, but not less than 40 square feet. The depth of such alcove
shall not exceed half its width. The floor area of the alcove shall be
added to the floor area of the room in determining light and ventilation
requirements for the room. An alcove with an area of 60 square feet or
more, but less than the required area of a habitable room, shall be
separately lighted and ventilated as required for habitable space.
A. Rooms providing facilities for recreation and which may also have
facilities for incidental food preparation may be located in a cellar or a
basement.
B. No basement shall be used as a habitable room or dwelling unit unless:
(1) The floors and walls are substantially watertight.
(2) Windows are provided on at least one wall.
(3) The dimension from the wall having the major window area to the
opposite wall does not exceed four times the clear height of the
basement. If this dimension is exceeded, the portion of the
basement beyond the limiting dimension shall not be used as
habitable space.
C. Except in multiple dwellings, cellars may be used as habitable space
providing the cellar complies with all the following requirements:
(1) Combustion air shall not be taken from habitable space directly or
indirectly.
(2) All habitable space in cellars shall be ventilated by mechanical
means. The ventilating system shall replace the air in the habitable
spaces at the rate of at least five cubic feet per minute per human
occupant. The air supply of said ventilation system shall be from
the exterior or may be drawn from the floor above provided that the
floor above is occupied by the same tenancy as the cellar.
§ 77-87 ONEIDA CODE § 77-89
C:290
§ 77-90. Light and ventilation for habitable space.
§ 77-91. Dwelling, lodging, boarding units; communal kitchens.
§ 77-92. Public space height requirements.
Public space shall have a minimum height of 7 1/2 feet, measured from
finished floor to finished ceiling.
§ 77-93. Public space light and ventilation.
(3) Walls of cellars shall be constructed to prevent condensation
forming thereon when the relative humidity in the habitable area is
35%.
(4) All fuel-burning equipment shall be separated from habitable space
by a partition having a minimum fire rating of 3/4 of an hour.
A. Habitable space shall be provided with natural light through one or
more windows, skylights, transparent or translucent panels, or any
combinations thereof, that face directly on legal open spaces at least six
inches above the adjoining finished grade or are above a roof. The
amount of light required for each room shall be equivalent to that
transmitted through clear glass equal in area to 10% of the floor area of
the habitable space.
B. Habitable space shall be provided with electric light.
C. Habitable space shall be provided with natural ventilation through
openable parts of windows or other openings in exterior walls that face
legal open spaces above the adjoining finished grade or above a roof or
through openable parts of skylights, providing total clear ventilation
area equal to not less than 5% of the total floor area of each habitable
space.
D. Habitable space also may be provided with mechanical ventilation in
addition to natural ventilation.
A. Dwelling units shall be separated from each other and from other
spaces outside the dwelling unit.
B. Sleeping rooms within dwelling units shall be separated from each
other and from other spaces outside the sleeping rooms to provide
privacy.
C. Lodging units and boarding units shall be separated from each other
and from other spaces outside the lodging units.
D. A communal kitchen or dining room in a lodging house shall be
accessible to the occupants sharing such kitchen or dining room
without going through a dwelling unit or lodging unit of another
occupant.
§ 77-89 CHARTER § 77-93
C:291
§ 77-94. Nonhabitable space height requirements.
Nonhabitable space, except crawl spaces and attics, in multiple dwellings
shall have a minimum height of seven feet measured from floor to ceiling.
§ 77-95. Toilet rooms and bathrooms.
A. Public space shall be provided with electric light.
B. In public stairs, stairways and passageways, electric lighting shall be
available at all times so as to afford safe passage for occupants and
users. Such lighting shall conform to the following:
(1) A sufficient number of fixtures shall be provided so that the
distance between fixtures is not more than 30 feet and so that no
wall is more than 15 feet distant from a fixture.
(2) Incandescent lighting shall be based on not less than 1/4 watt per
square foot of floor area, except that each fixture shall have a lamp
or lamps with a total of not less than 25 watts.
(3) Fluorescent lighting shall be based on not less than 1/10 watt per
square foot of floor area, except that each fixture shall have a lamp
or lamps of a total of not less than 15 watts.
(4) Where under these formulas the calculated wattage does not
correspond to that of a standard lamp, the next larger size shall be
used.
C. Public spaces shall be provided with either natural ventilation,
conforming to the requirements for habitable space or with mechanical
ventilation.
A. Toilet rooms and bathrooms shall have provisions for privacy.
B. Toilet rooms and bathrooms for dwelling units in multiple dwellings
shall be located within the dwelling units and shall be accessible from
any sleeping room without passing through any other sleeping room.
C. Unless located within dwelling units or directly connected with sleeping
rooms, toilet rooms and bathrooms in multiple dwellings shall be
provided in each story containing habitable space and shall be
accessible thereto.
D. Toilet rooms for employees in multiple dwellings shall be in separate
rooms for each sex where there are five or more employees, shall be
readily accessible to such employees and shall not open directly into
any public kitchen or other public space used for the cooking or
preparation of food.
E. In one- and two-family dwellings, bathrooms, toilet rooms shall be
provided with floors of moisture-resistant material.
§ 77-93 ONEIDA CODE § 77-95
C:292
§ 77-96. Nonhabitable space light and ventilation.
§ 77-97. Stairways and railings.
§ 77-98. Exits.
F. In multiple dwellings, floors of bathrooms, toilet rooms and similar
spaces shall be waterproof; such waterproofing shall extend six inches
or more above floors except at doors, so that floors can be flushed or
washed without leaking. Walls shall be constructed or covered with a
moisture-resistant material.
G. All shower enclosures shall have waterproof floors and water-resistant
walls.
A. Kitchenettes, bathrooms and toilet room shall be provided with electric
light appropriate for the use of such rooms.
B. Laundry rooms, furnace rooms and similar nonhabitable space shall be
provided with electric light appropriate for the intended use of such
rooms.
C. Stairs shall be provided with electric light to allow safe ascent or
descent.
D. Kitchenettes, bathrooms and toilet rooms shall be provided with
ventilation in accordance with either of the following:
(1) Natural ventilation as required for habitable space, except that
such openable areas shall be not less than 1 1/2 square feet for
bathrooms or toilet rooms and not less than three square feet for
kitchenettes; or
(2) Mechanical ventilation exhausting not less than 20 cubic feet per
minute for kitchenettes.
E. Spaces in multiple dwellings which contain central heat-producing, airconditioning
and other equipment shall be ventilated to the outer air
and air from these spaces shall not be circulated to other parts of the
building.
F. Ventilation shall be provided in unheated attics, spaces below flat roofs
and in crawl spaces. Location and net area of ventilation openings shall
be such as to minimize deterioration of structural members from
condensation or other causes, in conformity with generally accepted
standards.
A. Stairs, both interior and exterior, shall be of sufficient width in
conformity with generally accepted standards so as to serve the
occupants.
B. Railings shall be provided on open portions of stairs, balconies,
landings and stairwells.
§ 77-95 CHARTER § 77-98
C:293
A. Safe, continuous and unobstructed exits provided from the interior of
the building to the exterior at street or grade level.
B. Exits shall be arranged, constructed and proportioned so that
occupants may escape safely from the building in case of an emergency.
C. In one- and two-family dwellings, in addition to a primary exit from the
building, there shall be provided a secondary exit or, in lieu thereof, one
or more openings for emergency use. Openings for emergency uses
shall be as defined in the New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and
Building Code applicable to one- and two-family dwellings.
D. In multiple dwellings, approved exits shall be provided.
§ 77-98 ONEIDA CODE § 77-98
C:294
ARTICLE XII
Structural Requirements
§ 77-99. Maintenance standards.
§ 77-100. Foundation walls.
§ 77-101. Exterior stairs, porches and railings.
§ 77-102. Protection against elements of weather.
A. Buildings and parts thereof shall be maintained so as to be capable of
sustaining safely their own weight and the loads to which they may be
subject.
B. Buildings shall be maintained so that loads are transmitted to the soil
without undue differential settlement, unsafe deformation or movement
of the building or any structural part.
C. Buildings shall be maintained so that protection is provided for all
structural members which may become structurally unsound if left
unprotected. Causes of such deterioration include, among others,
action of freezing and thawing, dampness, corrosion, wetting and
drying and termites or other destructive insects.
D. Buildings built in soil which is water bearing at any season of the year
shall be maintained so that groundwater and surface water will not
penetrate into habitable spaces.
A. The foundation walls of every structure used for human habitation shall
be maintained in good repair and be structurally sound.
B. Foundation walls shall be considered in good repair and structurally
sound if found free from damage or defects and capable of bearing
imposed loads.
A. The stairs, porches and railings affixed to the exterior of every structure
used for human habitation shall be kept in good repair and structurally
sound. Railings shall be provided for stairs and balconies and, where
necessary, for porches and accessible roofs.
B. Stairs and porches shall be considered to be in good repair and
structurally sound when found to be free of holes, cracks and capable of
supporting imposed loads. Properly balustraded railings shall be
provided when there is clear danger of accident or personal injury and
must be capable of bearing normally imposed loads.
A. Every structure used for human habitation shall be so maintained that it
will be weather and water tight.
B. Exterior walls, roofs and all openings around doors, windows, chimneys
and all other parts of the structure shall be so maintained as to keep
§ 77-99 CHARTER § 77-102
C:295
§ 77-103. Wood surfaces; protective coating.
§ 77-104. Overhanging objects.
§ 77-105. Cellars, basements and crawl spaces.
§ 77-106. Supporting structural members.
§ 77-107. Chimneys, flues and vents.
water from entering the structure and to prevent undue heat loss.
Damaged materials shall be repaired or replaced. All parts of the
structure that show evidence of dry rot or other deterioration shall
be repaired or replaced and refinished. Such replacement, wherever
practical, shall be in conformity with the remainder of the structure.
A. All exterior wood surfaces of a structure used for human habitation that
are not of a species inherently resistant to decay shall be treated when
necessary with a protective coating or other preservative to prevent
structural deterioration.
B. Exterior wood surfaces shall be adequately protected against
deterioration through the application of approved protective coatings,
when necessary.
A. Every structure used for human habitation shall be free of loose
overhanging objects.
B. Exterior walls, roofs and all other parts of the structure shall be free
from loose and unsecured objects and materials. Such objects or
materials shall be removed, repaired or replaced.
A. Cellars, basements and crawl spaces, in every structure used for human
habitation, shall be reasonably free from dampness to prevent
conditions conducive to decay or deterioration of the structure.
B. Ventilation shall be provided in every basement, cellar and crawl space
by means of windows, openings or vents or mechanical vents.
A. Supporting structural members of every structure used for human
habitation shall be structurally sound.
B. Supporting structural members shall be considered to be structurally
sound if such members are capable of bearing imposed loads safely and
if there is no evidence of deterioration.
A. Chimneys and all flue and vent attachments thereto and all other flues
and vents of every structure used for human habitation shall be
structurally sound and free from defects to assure the performance of
the function for which they were designed and are used.
§ 77-102 ONEIDA CODE § 77-107
C:296
§ 77-108. Interior stairs and railings.
§ 77-109. Floors, walls and ceilings.
B. Chimneys, flues, gas vents or other draft-producing equipment shall
provide sufficient draft to develop the rated output of the connected
equipment. Chimneys, flue linings, where required, flues, gas vents and
their supports shall be structurally safe, durable, smoke-tight and
capable of withstanding the action of the flue gases.
A. Interior stairs of every structure used for human habitation shall be
structurally sound and free from defects. Railings shall be provided for
stairs, balconies, landings and stairwells.
B. Treads or risers that evidence excessive wear or are broken, warped or
loose shall be repaired. Stairs shall be securely fastened to supporting
structural members and be capable of supporting normally imposed
loads. Properly balustraded railings, capable of bearing normally
imposed loads, shall be placed on the open portions of stairs, balconies,
landings and stairwells.
A. Floors, walls and ceilings of every structure used for human habitation
shall be structurally sound and maintained in a clean and sanitary
condition.
B. Floors shall be considered to be structurally sound where capable of
safely bearing imposed loads. Walls and ceilings shall be considered to
be structurally sound and in good repair when clean, free from breaks,
loose plaster and similar condition.
§ 77-107 CHARTER § 77-109
C:297

ARTICLE XIII
Fire Safety
§ 77-110. Prohibited practices.
It shall be prohibited:
§ 77-111. Walls and ceilings.
Walls and ceilings shall be maintained free from cracks and openings which
would permit flame or excessive heat to enter the concealed space.
§ 77-112. Buildings of mixed occupancy.
In buildings of mixed occupancy, nonresidential space shall be separated
from residential space by approved fire separations which will retard the
spread of fire for 1 1/2 hours.
§ 77-113. Garages in or attached to residential buildings.
Garages in or attached to a residential building shall be separated from
other spaces in the building by approved fire separations which will retard
the spread of fire and prevent flammable or toxic vapors originating within
the garage from being transmitted to other parts of the building.
§ 77-114. Interior finishes, trim and decorative materials.
Interior finish materials for acoustical correction, surface insulation and
decorative treatment on the surfaces of walls and ceilings and interior trim
shall be of materials that will not, in burning, give off excessive amounts of
smoke or toxic gases.
§ 77-115. Fireplaces.
A. To accumulate or store on residential premises, except in approved
locations, any highly flammable or explosive matter, as defined in the
Fire Prevention Code in force in the City, such as paints, volatile oils,
cleaning fluids and similar materials or any combustible refuse such as
wastepaper, boxes, rags or similar materials.
B. To accumulate or store materials on fire escapes or stairs, in stairways
or passageways, at doors or windows or in any other locations where, in
the event of fire, such materials may obstruct egress of occupants or
interfere with fire-fighting operations.
A. Fireplaces and similar construction used or intended to be used for
burning fuel in open fires shall be connected to approved chimneys and
shall be installed so that nearby or adjacent combustible material and
structural members shall not be heated to unsafe temperatures.
§ 77-110 CHARTER § 77-115
C:299
§ 77-116. Fire protection in multiple dwellings.
Multiple dwellings shall comply with the following requirements:
§ 77-117. Smoke and/or heat detectors in rental and multiple
dwelling units. [Added 11-20-1984; amended 2-19-1985]
B. Hearths and linings or other parts of fireplaces exposed directly to
flame shall be of materials that will not melt, disintegrate, spall or
shatter at high temperatures.
C. Wood mantels and trim on fireplaces shall be placed and attached so
that they cannot be heated to unsafe temperatures or ignited by sparks
or embers from the fire.
A. Required fire alarm systems shall be installed, used and maintained as
required by the Fire Prevention Code in force in the City.
B. Required sprinkler equipment shall be installed, used and maintained
as required by the Fire Prevention Code in force in the City.
C. Standpipe systems shall be installed, used and maintained as required
by the Fire Prevention Code in force in the City.
D. Portable extinguishers shall be installed, used and maintained as
required by the Fire Prevention Code in force in the City.
E. Openings in fire walls, fire separations and openings in walls, floors and
ceilings that are required to have a fire-resistance rating shall be
protected by opening protectives having fire-resistance ratings as set
forth in table below:
Fire-Resistance Rating of Wall
in Which Opening Occurs
(in hours)
Fire-Resistance Rating of
Opening Protective
(in hours)
3 or more 3 - Type A
2 1 1/2 - Type B
1 or 3/4 3/4 - Type C
A. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
DWELLING, ONE-FAMILY — A building containing not more than one
dwelling unit occupied exclusively for residential purposes.
DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY — A building containing not more than two
dwelling units occupied exclusively for residential purposes.
HEAT DETECTOR — A device which detects abnormal rise in
temperature and sounds an audible alarm and bears the label of
approval by the "Underwriters" or "Factory Mutual" laboratories.
§ 77-115 ONEIDA CODE § 77-117
C:300
INTERCONNECTED SYSTEM — Two or more interconnected smoke
or heat detectors such that when a detector is activated, all other
detectors in the system are activated.
MULTIPLE DWELLINGS — Include the following groups:
SLEEPING AREA — The area of a unit in which the bedroom or sleeping
rooms are located. Bedrooms or sleeping rooms separated by another
use area such as a kitchen or living room are separate sleeping areas,
but bedrooms or sleeping areas separated by a bathroom are not
separate sleeping areas.
SMOKE BARRIER — A barrier that subdivides building spaces for the
purpose of restricting the movement of smoke.
Group 1. Permanent occupancy:
Buildings containing one or two dwelling units with more than
four lodgers residing with a family in either one of such
dwelling units.
(a)
(b) Buildings containing three or more dwelling units.
(c) Apartment houses and apartment hotels.
(d) Garden apartments.
(e) Community residences.
A building with a commercial occupancy and one or more
dwelling units.
(f)
(1)
Group 2. Transient occupancy:
(a) Hotels.
(b) Lodging houses.
Buildings with sleeping accommodations for more than five
persons used or occupied as a club, dormitory, fraternity or
sorority house or for similar uses.
(c)
(d) Motels.
(2)
Group 3. Senior citizens:
Buildings for senior citizens, intended primarily for persons 62
years old or more, who are in good physical condition and do
not require physical assistance.
(a)
(3)
Group 4. Adult residential care facility:
Buildings for infirm adults who require personal care,
supervision and services.
(a)
(4)
§ 77-117 CHARTER § 77-117
C:301
SMOKE DETECTOR — A device which detects particles or products
of combustion and sounds an audible alarm and bears the label of
approval by "Underwriters" or "Factory Mutual" laboratories.
SMOKE ZONE — That area of a building formed by smoke barriers.
B. Equipping rental and multiple dwellings. Every rental and multiple
dwelling shall be equipped with approved smoke detectors so that:
(1) At least one smoke detector shall be provided adjacent to each
sleeping area; said smoke detector shall be located on or near the
ceiling. Alarms must be clearly audible in adjacent sleeping spaces
with intervening doors closed.
(2) All common passageways shall be equipped with at least one smoke
detector per floor or per smoke zone as approved by the Code
Enforcement Office and the Fire Marshal's Office. Such smoke
detector shall be interconnected with all other detectors in
common passageways.
(3) All smoke detectors shall be directly connected to the lighting
circuit of the dwelling unit or sleeping room, where the device is
located, with no intervening wall switch. Cord-connected
installations shall not be permitted. Battery-operated smoke
detectors or heat detectors are permitted in buildings containing
four dwelling units or less with no commercial occupancy. Batteryoperated
detectors shall have a separate and distinct trouble signal
when battery voltage is low.
C. Exceptions.
(1) In certain areas where conditions may cause false alarms, heat
detectors may be substituted for smoke detectors with the approval
of the Code Enforcement Office and the Fire Marshal's Office.
(2) In certain areas where installation of smoke or heat detectors to
the wiring system is impractical, battery-operated smoke or heat
detectors may be substituted with the approval of the Code
Enforcement Office and the Fire Marshal's Office.
(3) Any deviations from the requirements of this section shall require
approval by the Code Enforcement Office and the Fire Marshal's
Office.
D. Effective date of installation:
(1) Existing buildings, six months from the enactment of this section.
(2) Newly constructed buildings, effective at time of construction.
E. Inspections. The Fire Chief of the City, the Chief of the Fire Marshal's
office or a Fire Inspector, Code Enforcement Officer and/or Housing
Inspector, when he or they deem it necessary, shall inspect any building
§ 77-117 ONEIDA CODE § 77-117
C:302
or premises designated in this section to ensure compliance with this
section. All inspections shall be coordinated with the respective offices.
F. Maintenance. It shall be the responsibility of the owner of each dwelling
unit and structure covered by this section to maintain all smoke
detectors and/or heat detectors in good working order.
G. Certificates of compliance. During August of each year, the owner of
each dwelling unit and structure in which a smoke detector has been
installed shall certify to the Code Enforcement Officer in writing that
the required maintenance has been performed on all such detectors in
the owner's dwelling units and structures and that the devices are in
good working condition as of the date of the certification.
§ 77-117 CHARTER § 77-117
C:303

ARTICLE XIV
Fuel Gas Piping Systems
§ 77-118. Generally.
§ 77-119. Shutoff valves.
§ 77-120. Service equipment for gas supplied from utility mains.
Gas services, gas meters and gas pressure regulators shall be located so
that they are protected from damage.
§ 77-121. Gas appliances.
§ 77-122. High pressure gas.
Any service connection supplying gas at a pressure in excess of one pound
per square inch gage shall be provided with a device to reduce such
pressure to not more than 1/2 pound per square inch gage prior to entering
A. Fuel gas piping systems shall be installed and maintained so as to
remain gastight, safe and operative under conditions of use.
B. Fuel gas piping systems shall provide a supply of gas sufficient to meet
the maximum expected demand of the installed gas-burning appliances
connected thereto.
C. Fuel gas piping and equipment shall not be located in ducts, chimneys,
flues, stairways or exits.
A. Gas piping systems shall have at least one accessible means for
shutting off all gas supply and such means shall be maintained in good
operating condition.
B. An easily accessible shutoff valve or cock shall be provided in the piping
in close proximity to and ahead of every outlet for gas appliance.
A. Gas appliances shall be installed with clearance for ventilation and shall
be maintained in good operating condition.
B. Water-cooled gas refrigerators must be equipped with:
(1) A flue which is resistant to the corrosive action of flue gases.
(2) A fixed, mounted dust-incinerating type of gas burner, gas pressure
regulator, gas supply filter and thermostat.
(3) Proper operating automatic regulating and safety devices.
C. The owner, agent, superintendent or janitor of a residential building in
which there is a gas appliance or a lessee in control of such building
shall keep each appliance in good order and repair at all times.
§ 77-118 CHARTER § 77-122
C:305
the meter, except where such service supplies equipment using gas at high
pressures.
§ 77-123. Liquefied petroleum gas.
A. Undiluted liquefied petroleum gas in liquid form shall not be conveyed
through piping equipment and systems in buildings.
B. Liquefied petroleum gas shall not be vaporized by devices utilizing open
flame or open electrical coil.
C. Where two or more containers are installed, connection shall be
arranged so that containers can be replaced without shutting off the
flow of gas to equipment.
D. Containers shall be designed, stored and located so as not to be a
hazard to the premises served or to the surrounding property.
E. Systems shall be provided with safety devices to relieve excessive
pressures and shall be arranged so that the discharge terminates at a
safe location.
F. Systems shall have at least one accessible means for shutting off the
gas. Such means shall be located outside the building and shall be
maintained in good operating condition.
G. Systems shall be installed, used and maintained as required by the Fire
Prevention Code in force in the City.
§ 77-122 ONEIDA CODE § 77-123
C:306
Chapter 80
INSURANCE
§ 77-123 CHARTER § 77-123
C:307

ARTICLE I
Use of Fire Insurance Proceeds to Satisfy Municipal Liens
[Adopted 10-6-1981 by L.L. No. 3-1981]
§ 80-1. Authorized.
Whenever the City of Oneida has an existing lien for taxes, special ad
valorem taxes, special assessments or municipal charges arising by
operation of law against real property, as defined in § 22 of the General
Municipal Law, which have remained undischarged for a period of one year
or more and there is fire damage to the real property for which a claim for
proceeds of a fire insurance policy insuring the interests of an owner of the
real property may be made, the City Chamberlain of the City of Oneida shall
cause a notice of intention to claim against the proceeds of a fire insurance
policy to be served upon the State Superintendent of Insurance for entry in
the notice of liens maintained by such State Superintendent of Insurance.
§ 80-2. Functions of City Chamberlain.
The City Chamberlain, on behalf of the City of Oneida, is hereby authorized
to execute any document or documents or perform any act as authorized
by the General Municipal Law to perfect the lien of the City of Oneida
against fire insurance proceeds, as therein defined, and to collect such
fire insurance proceeds on behalf of the City of Oneida, and the City
Chamberlain be and he is hereby authorized to deposit the same in an
account to be determined by him.
§ 80-3. Release or return of portion of proceeds.26
Whenever the City of Oneida has filed a claim pursuant to § 22 of the
General Municipal Law and receives insurance proceeds relative to a
specific property, the City Chamberlain is authorized to release or return
to the insured of said property any amounts to which the insured would
otherwise be entitled to claim, provided that the insured agrees with the
City Chamberlain in writing to restore the affected premises to the same or
improved condition that it was in prior to the time that the lien of the city
arose, provided that the insured, no later than 30 days after the city has
been paid the insurance proceeds in question, files a notice to execute said
agreement.
§ 80-4. Interpretation of provisions.
The provisions of this article shall not be deemed or construed to alter
or impair the right of the city to acquire or enforce any lien against such
property, but shall be in addition to any other power provided by law to
acquire or enforce such right.
26.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions).
§ 80-1 CHARTER § 80-4
C:309
Chapter 85
JUNKYARDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Health and sanitation — See Ch. 73.
Secondhand dealers — See Ch. 135.
Solid waste — See Ch. 147.
Zoning — See Ch. 190.
§ 80-4 ONEIDA CODE § 80-4
C:310
ARTICLE I
Regulations
§ 85-1. Definition.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
JUNKYARD — Any land or structure or part thereof, used for the collecting,
storage or sale of wastepaper, rags, scrap metals, used or salvaged building
or other discarded material or for the collecting, dismantling, storage and
salvaging of machinery or vehicles. It shall also mean any place of storage
or deposit, whether in connection with another business or not, where
two or more unlicensed vehicles, no longer in condition for legal use on
public highways are held, whether for the purpose of resale of used parts
or materials therefrom or not. Such term shall also include any place of
storage or deposit for any such purpose of used parts or waste materials
from motor vehicles which, taken together, equal in bulk two or more such
vehicles.
§ 85-2. Manner of operation.
All junkyards shall be so operated and conducted as to not unduly disturb
the peace and quiet of the neighborhood in which the same are situated so
as to not create a nuisance.
§ 85-3. Fencing.
All junkyards shall be surrounded by a wooden fence six feet in height or
by a similar fence of other opaque material. Said fence shall be subject to
the approval of the City Engineer and shall be kept in good repair; and junk
or accumulation stored within such fence shall be so located as not to be
visible above said fence from a point in the middle of the adjoining highway.
All such fences which abut a public street shall be kept back at least 10 feet
from the public sidewalk; if there is no such sidewalk, then such fence shall
be at least 20 feet from the edge of the public street or highway.
§ 85-4. Storage of materials.
All junk, motor vehicles or parts thereof shall be piled in a junkyard neatly
so as to eliminate all fire hazards and cared for in such a way that no
unpleasant odor shall arise therefrom.
§ 85-5. Record of purchases.
The owner or operator of a junkyard shall keep in his place of business in a
proper book an entry of all purchases made by him, written in ink, a daily
record of all articles purchased, the name, residence, age and occupation of
the person from whom each article was purchased, together with the price
paid, and such record shall at all reasonable times be open to the inspection
of any police officer, the Mayor, the Chief of Police, the Commissioner of
§ 85-1 CHARTER § 85-5
C:311
Public Safety or any Judge of the city. No entry in such record shall be
changed, erased, obliterated or defaced.
§ 85-6. Reporting lost or stolen goods.
If any goods, articles or things shall be advertised in any newspaper printed
in the city as having been lost or stolen and shall come into the possession
of the owner or operator of any junkyard, such person shall give information
thereof in writing to the Chief of Police and state from whom any goods,
articles or things, lost or stolen or alleged or supposed to have been lost
or stolen, and were received and shall exhibit the same on demand to any
police officer or to the Mayor or to the Commissioner of Public Safety or to
Chief of Police or to any Judge of the city or to any person duly authorized in
writing by the Chief of Police or Judge, who shall exhibit such authorization
to such person.
§ 85-5 ONEIDA CODE § 85-6
C:312
ARTICLE II
Licensing Provisions
§ 85-7. Required.
No person shall own or operate a junkyard without a license issued by the
City Clerk.
§ 85-8. Application.
Any person desiring a junkyard license shall make written application to
the Mayor through the City Clerk. Such application shall contain his name,
residence of the applicant, if an individual, names of the partner or partners
of a partnership, if any, or names of the corporation and their principal
officers and place of business. Such application shall describe the character
of the business to be licensed. Such application shall also show where the
premises to be licensed is located, giving street and number and exact
area of land showing frontage, rear and depth lines in feet. The application
shall be signed and acknowledged before a notary public or other officer
authorized to administer oaths in the city.
§ 85-9. Fee. [Amended 9-1-1987 by Ord. No. 87-09; 11-20-2012 by
Ord. No. 12-07]
A person desiring a license for a junkyard shall pay to the City Clerk a fee
that shall be established by resolution of the Common Council. Such fee may
thereafter be amended from time to time by like resolution.
§ 85-10. Issuance.
Upon the filing of the application as provided herein and the payment of the
required fee and upon approval of the Mayor, the City Clerk shall issue to
the applicant a junkyard license. No license shall be issued to any person
who shall have been convicted of a felony or of knowingly receiving stolen
goods.
§ 85-11. Expiration.
A junkyard license shall expire on December 31 of each year unless sooner
revoked.
§ 85-12. Form.
Junkyard licenses shall be numbered in the order in which they are issued
and shall state the exact location of the junkyard, the date of issuance and
expiration of the license, and the name and address of the licensee.
§ 85-13. Transfer.
A junkyard license shall not be transferred from one location to another or
from one person to another.
§ 85-7 CHARTER § 85-14
C:313
§ 85-14. Revocation or suspension.
After a hearing affording due process, the Mayor may suspend or revoke
any license issued pursuant to the provisions of this article if its holder
has violated any of the provisions of this chapter. A person whose license
has been suspended or revoked may appeal such decision to the Common
Council by requesting a hearing before the Council. Such requests shall be
made within 10 days after receipt of notice of the action of the Mayor. The
Council shall then hear and decide the matter within a reasonable time.
§ 85-14 ONEIDA CODE § 85-14
C:314
ARTICLE III
Penalties
[Added 12-16-2014 by L.L. No. 10-2014]
§ 85-15. Penalties for offenses.
A violation of this chapter shall constitute a violation punishable by a fine of
not more than $250, imprisonment for not more than 15 days, or both such
fine and imprisonment. Each week that such violation shall continue shall
be deemed a separate offense.
§ 85-15 CHARTER § 85-15
C:315
Chapter 92
MOBILE HOMES AND MOBILE HOME PARKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Animals — see Ch. 17.
Building construction — See Ch. 34.
Housing standards — See Ch. 77.
Solid waste — See Ch. 147.
Zoning — See Ch. 190.
§ 92-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
assigned to them below:
MOBILE HOME or HOUSE TRAILER — A factory-fabricated dwelling
consisting of a single structure transportable on its own chassis and wheels
or removable wheel assembly, whether or not the wheels and towing hitch
are removed when the unit is installed.
MOBILE HOME PARK — A parcel of land which is designed and improved
for the placement of 10 or more mobile homes and which mobile homes are
located on sites rented or leased to the occupants of the mobile homes.
UNIT — That portion of a mobile home park set apart for the use of an
individual mobile home.
§ 92-2. Nonconforming uses of mobile homes.
Any nonconforming use of house trailers or mobile homes in the restricted
areas of the city may be continued subject to the following conditions:
A. Only those house trailers or mobile homes (exclusive of those under
temporary six-month permits) listed as nonconforming uses with the
City Clerk on or before August 19, 1980, shall be covered by this
section. Those house trailers or mobile homes shall be surveyed and an
updated list filed with the City Clerk, giving the following information,
by October 1, 1980:
(1) The name and residence of the current owner.
(2) The make, color and dimensions of the house trailer or mobile
home.
(3) A description of the sewer and water connection with which the
trailer or mobile home is equipped.
B. All said nonconforming uses shall be discontinued:
(1) Upon the removal of the present house trailer or mobile home from
said location or premises.
§ 85-15 ONEIDA CODE § 92-2
C:316
§ 92-3. Location generally.
A mobile home park shall be located on a well-drained site of adequate size,
the land of which shall be free from heavy or dense growth of brush or
weeds. The land shall be properly graded so as to ensure rapid drainage
during and following rain and be free from stagnant pools of water.
§ 92-4. Entrances, exits and driveways.
All entrances and exits from any mobile home park shall be well marked and
so arranged as not to constitute a traffic hazard. All driveways within the
parks shall be hard surfaced, of adequate width, well marked in the daytime
and lighted at night and so located that each unit in the park is readily
accessible to a driveway.
§ 92-5. Manager required.
A mobile home park shall be under the management of the licensee
hereunder who must be of good reputation and character and who shall
manage such park from an office located on or near the premises.
§ 92-6. Records.
There shall be maintained in the office of a mobile home park a bound book
containing a record of the names of any persons accommodated at the park;
their home addresses; the license number and make of their automobile
or other vehicle. Such record shall at all reasonable times be available for
inspection by the City Engineer or police officer.
§ 92-7. General functions of management.
It shall be the duty of the licensee of any mobile home park:
(2) Vacancy or discontinuance of said house trailer or mobile home for
a period of 12 months.
(3) When any such trailer or mobile home is destroyed or damaged by
fire, wind, explosion, structural failure or other natural causes to
the extent of 50% or more of its assessed value at the time of such
damage. Said house trailer or mobile home shall not be repaired or
rebuilt or replaced.
A. To provide for the collection and removal of garbage and other waste
material.
B. To prohibit the placing or storage of unsightly material or vehicles of
any kind.
C. To provide for the cleaning, painting, repairing and disinfecting of all
buildings.
§ 92-2 CHARTER § 92-7
C:317
§ 92-8. Penalties for offenses.
The owner, lessee, licensee, occupant of or person accommodated in any
mobile home park or camp who commits any act in violation of any of the
provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
§ 92-9. Licensing requirements.
D. To take such other measures which shall be deemed necessary by the
Health Department and the City Engineer to preserve the health,
comfort and safety of all persons accommodated in the park and of the
general public.
E. To prevent any animal from running at large within or outside of the
park.
F. To report to the Health Department all cases of communicable diseases
or suspected cases of communicable diseases affecting any inhabitant
of the park.
G. To prevent the committing of any nuisance on the park premises and to
report immediately to the proper authorities all acts of a disorderly
character committed by any person inside of the park, and to that end
to maintain proper policing thereof.
A. Required. It shall be unlawful for any person to establish, maintain,
operate or conduct any mobile home park without a license issued by
the City Clerk.
B. Application. An application for a mobile home park license shall be
made to the City Clerk upon a form furnished by such official. Such
application shall contain:
(1) The name and address of the owner of the premises;
(2) The name and address of the applicant and the nature and extent of
his interest in the business for which a license is desired;
(3) The location and plot plan of the park, and the number of units to
be provided for therein;
(4) Any other information required by the City Clerk.
C. Fee. An application for a mobile home park license shall be
accompanied by a fee that shall be established by resolution of the
Common Council. Such fee may thereafter be amended from time to
time by like resolution. [Amended 11-20-2012 by Ord. No. 12-06]
D. Term. A mobile home park license shall expire at the end of the
calendar year.
E. Display. A mobile home park license shall be displayed in the park's
office.
§ 92-7 ONEIDA CODE § 92-9
C:318
Chapter 98
NOISE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Animals — See Ch. 17.
Firearms and weapons — See Ch. 57.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 113.
Zoning — See Ch. 190.
§ 98-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to protect the health and well-being of
persons by imposing restrictions and regulations relating to the making of
unreasonable noise.
§ 98-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, terms shall have the meanings indicated:
COMMERCIAL OR INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT — Any commercial or industrial
zoning district within the corporate limits of the City of Oneida.
CONSTRUCTION DEVICE — Any powered device or equipment designed
and intended for use in construction. Examples of construction devices are
air compressors, bulldozers, backhoes, trucks, shovels, derricks and cranes.
dB — The abbreviation for decibel.
dBA — The A-weighted sound level in decibels, as measured by a general
purpose sound level meter complying with the provisions of the American
National Standard Institute Specifications for Sound Level Meters (ANSI
Sec. 1.4, 1971), properly calibrated, and operated on the A-weighting
network.
DECIBEL — A unit for measuring the volume of a sound, equal to the
logarithm of the ratio of the sound pressure of the sound to the sound
pressure of a standard sound (0.0002 microbar); abbreviated "dB."
F. Restriction on issuance. No mobile home park license shall be issued
for the construction or operation of a park in violation of the zoning or
other ordinances of the city.
G. Revocation or suspension. After a hearing affording due process, the
Mayor may suspend or revoke a mobile home park license if its holder
has violated any of the provisions of this chapter or any laws,
ordinances or regulations relating to such parks. A person whose
license permit has been suspended or revoked may appeal such
decision to the Common Council by requesting a hearing before the
Council. Such requests shall be made within 10 days after receipt of
notice of the action of the mayor. The Council shall then hear and decide
the matter within a reasonable time.
§ 92-9 CHARTER § 98-2
C:319
FREQUENCY — The number of oscillations per second, expressed in hertz
(abbreviation "Hz").
HOMEOWNERS' LIGHT RESIDENTIAL OUTDOOR EQUIPMENT — All
engine- or motor-powered garden or maintenance tools intended for
repetitive use in residential areas, typically capable of being used by a
homeowner. Examples of homeowners' light residential outdoor equipment
are lawn mowers, garden tools, riding tractors, snowblowers, snowplows,
etc.
Hz — The abbreviation for Hertz, and is equivalent to cycles per second.
PERSON — Any individual, association, firm, syndicate, company, trust,
corporation, department, bureau or agency or other entity recognized by
law as the subject of rights and duties.
PRESUMPTION OF UNREASONABLE NOISE — The following noises are
presumed to be unreasonable:
RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT — All residential zoning districts within the
corporate limits of the City of Oneida.
UNREASONABLE NOISE — A noise of a type or volume that a reasonable
person, under the circumstances, would not tolerate.
§ 98-3. Prohibition.
No person shall make, continue, cause or suffer to be made or continued
any unreasonable noise, as defined herein. The following enumerative acts
are declared to be in violation of this section:
Noise which contains a sufficient acoustic vibration which causes
temporary or permanent hearing loss in a person so exposed to such
noise.
A.
Noise which interferes with another person's use of his property or the
conduct of his business and results from the operation of any radio,
receiving set, musical instrument, phonograph, television set or other
machine or device used for the producing or reproducing of sound
in such a manner as to disturb the peace, quiet and comfort of the
neighboring inhabitants and in such a manner as to be plainly audible
at a distance of 50 feet from the area, building, structure or vehicle in
which it is located.
B.
Any noise which is plainly audible at a distance of 50 feet from the area,
building, structure or vehicle from which the noise originates.
C.
A. Sound reproduction device.
(1) No person shall operate or cause to be operated a sound
reproductive device that produces unreasonable noise.
(2) No person shall operate, use or cause to be operated any sound
reproductive device for commercial or business advertising or for
the purpose of attracting attention to any performance, show or the
§ 98-2 ONEIDA CODE § 98-3
C:320
sale or display of merchandise in connection with any commercial
operation. This subsection includes, but is not limited to, radios,
televisions, phonographs, tape recorders, homograph records or
tapes which are for sale in front of or outside of any building
near a public street, park or place where the sound produced
may be heard upon such public street, park or place. Nothing
in this subsection is intended to prohibit sound emanating from
sporting events, entertainment or other public events where such
devises are used. Any other commercial enterprise using a sound
reproductive device for purposes of attracting business must obtain
a permit. Permit may be granted at the reasonable discretion of the
City Council after opportunity to the applicant to be heard. Permit
hours will be restricted; permit fee to be established by the City
Council.
B. Animals. No person shall keep, permit or maintain any animal under his
control which frequently or for continued duration makes sounds which
create an unreasonable noise.
C. Loading and unloading. No person shall engage in, cause or permit the
loading, unloading, opening, closing or other handling of boxes, crates,
containers, building materials or similar objects between the hours of
7:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. the following day, in such a manner as to cause
unreasonable noise.
D. Squealing tires. No person shall intentionally operate a vehicle in such
a manner as to cause unreasonable noise by the spinning of the tires of
such vehicle.
E. Construction. No person shall operate or permit to be operated any tool
or equipment used in construction, drilling or demolition work between
the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. of the following day, in such a
manner that the resulting sound creates unreasonable noise. This
provision shall not apply to any emergency work.
F. Noisy muffler. No person shall operate a motor vehicle which does not
contain in operating condition a muffler or other such sound
suppressing equipment designed to prevent such vehicle from causing
unnecessary noise.
G. Apartments and multiple dwellings. [Added 6-4-2003 by Ord. No.
03-04]
(1) No person shall make unreasonable noise in an apartment building
or multiple dwelling such that the noise is audible from an
apartment or separate dwelling unit within such building or in
proximity thereto and interferes with the reasonable quiet use and
enjoyment of such residence by the occupant(s) of said apartment
or dwelling unit.
§ 98-3 CHARTER § 98-3
C:321
§ 98-4. Noise standards.
(2) Unreasonable noise shall include but not be limited to noise from
loud music, repeated yelling, fighting, stomping, banging, animal
noise or any other source.
(3) Upon the first complaint regarding a violation of this subsection,
the police shall issue a written warning to the offender. A second
violation of this subsection by the same occupant(s) at the same
premises within one year from the date of any warning issued to
such occupant(s) at such premises shall constitute a violation
punishable as provided in this chapter. A third violation of this
subsection by the same occupant(s) at the same premises within
one year from the date of any prior violation shall constitute a
misdemeanor punishable as provided in this chapter.
A. No person shall create or cause to be emitted any noise which, when
measured at any lot line in a residential district, exceeds the following
standards:
(1) From 7:00 a.m. until 7:00 p.m.:
(a) Airborne sound in excess of 65 dBA's; or
(b) Airborne sound which has an octave band sound pressure level
in decibels which exceeds the values listed below in one or
more octave bands:
Octave Band Center
Frequency
(Hz)
Octave Band Sound
Pressure Level
(dB)
31.5 78
63 73
125 67
250 60
500 55
1,000 51
2,000 46
4,000 43
8,000 40
(2) From 7:00 p.m. until 7:00 a.m.:
(a) Airborne sound which has a sound level in excess of 50 dBA's;
or
§ 98-3 ONEIDA CODE § 98-4
C:322
(b) Airborne sound which has an octave band sound pressure level
which exceeds the values listed below in one or more octave
bands:
Octave Band Center
Frequency
(Hz)
Octave Band Sound
Pressure Level
(dB)
31.5 75
63 70
125 64
250 57
500 52
1,000 49
2,000 43
4,000 40
8,000 37
B. No person shall create or cause to be emitted any noise which when
measured at any lot line in a commercial or industrial district exceeds
the following standards:
(1) From 7:00 a.m. until 7:00 p.m.:
(a) Airborne noise in excess of 70 dBA's; or
(b) Airborne sound which has an octave band sound pressure level
in decibels which exceeds the values listed below in one or
more bands:
Octave Band Center
Frequency
(Hz)
Octave Band Sound
Pressure Level
(dB)
31.5 85
63 80
125 74
250 67
500 62
1,000 58
2,000 53
4,000 50
8,000 47
(2) From 7:00 a.m. until 7:00 p.m.:
§ 98-4 CHARTER § 98-4
C:323
§ 98-5. Exceptions.
(a) Airborne sound which has a sound level in excess of 55 dBA's;
or
(b) Airborne sound which has an octave band sound pressure level
in decibels which exceeds the values listed below in one or
more bands:
Octave Band Center
Frequency
(Hz)
Octave Band Sound
Pressure Level
(dB)
31.5 78
63 73
125 67
250 60
500 55
1,000 51
2,000 46
4,000 43
8,000 40
A. The provisions of the above shall apply except for the following:
(1) The intermittent or occasional use between 8:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m.
of homeowners' light residential outdoor equipment or commercial
service equipment, provided that such equipment and its use
comply with the other provisions of this section.
(2) Construction activities between 8:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. and the
associated use of construction devices or the noise produced
thereby, provided that such activities and such equipment and their
use comply with the other provisions of this section.
(3) Noise from church bells or chimes used in connection with
religious services.
(4) Public celebrations.
(5) Noise of aircraft flight operations.
(6) The lawful operation of properly equipped motor vehicles.
B. This section shall not apply to the following:
(1) Emergency stationary or mobile signal devices.
(2) Audible exterior burglar alarms.
§ 98-4 ONEIDA CODE § 98-6
C:324
§ 98-6. Penalties for offenses.
Chapter 104
OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Code of Ethics — See Ch. 49.
§ 104-1. Attendance at conferences; authorization, reimbursement.
Chapter 110
PARADES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 180.
A. Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall be guilty
of a violation punishable by a fine not exceeding $250.
B. In addition to any other remedy provided by local law, the City may
bring a proceeding to enjoin a violation of this section.
C. Except as provided in § 98-3G, any person who violates any provision of
this chapter for a second time within one year from the date of a prior
conviction for a violation of this chapter shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and shall be sentenced to a fine not exceeding $1,000 or
by imprisonment not to exceed one year, or both such fine and
imprisonment.
A. Pursuant to General Municipal Law § 77-b, the Common Council of the
City of Oneida hereby delegates to the Office of the Mayor the power to
authorize attendance by Council members, any officer or employee of
the City of Oneida or other person who has been elected pursuant to
law to a public office of the city, for which the term of office has not
commenced, at conferences as defined by said § 77-b, and pursuant to
the requirements of said section.
B. No officer or employee of the City of Oneida shall be reimbursed for
expenses related to attendance at conferences as so defined unless
written authorization is received from the Mayor prior to incurring the
expense.
§ 98-6 CHARTER § 110-1
C:325
§ 110-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PARADE — Any parade, march, ceremony, show, exhibition, pageant or
procession of any kind or any similar display in or upon any street, park or
other public place.
§ 110-2. Compliance required.
A person holding a parade permit shall comply with all permit directions
and conditions and with all applicable laws and ordinances.
§ 110-3. Exemptions.
This chapter shall not apply to:
§ 110-4. Permit required.
No person shall engage in, participate in, aid, form or start any parade
without a parade permit issued by the Commissioner of Public Safety.
§ 110-5. Permit application.
A. Funeral processions.
B. Students going to and from school classes or participating in
educational activities, provided that such conduct is under the
immediate direction and supervision of the proper school authorities.
C. A governmental agency acting within the scope of its functions.
A. A person desiring a parade permit shall file an application with the
Commissioner of Public Safety on forms provided by such officer. Such
application shall be filed not less than seven days nor more than 10 days
before the date on which it is proposed to conduct the parade.
B. The application for a parade permit shall set forth the following
information:
(1) The name, address and telephone number of the person seeking to
conduct such parade.
(2) If the parade is proposed to be conducted for, on behalf of or by an
organization, the name, address and telephone number of the
headquarters of the organization and of the authorized and
responsible heads of such organization.
(3) The name, address and telephone number of the person who will be
the parade chairman and who will be responsible for its conduct.
(4) The date when the parade is to be conducted.
§ 110-1 ONEIDA CODE § 110-5
C:326
§ 110-6. Fee.
There shall be paid at the time of filing the application for a parade permit a
fee as established by the Common Council. This fee may be waived in whole
or in part by the Mayor.
§ 110-7. Standards for issuance.
The Commissioner of Public Safety shall issue a parade permit when, from
a consideration of the application and from such other information as may
otherwise be obtained, he finds that:
(5) The route to be traveled, the starting point and the termination
point.
(6) The approximate number of persons who, and animals and vehicles
which, will constitute such parade; the type of animals, and
description of the vehicles.
(7) The hours when such parade will start and terminate.
(8) A statement as to whether the parade will occupy all or only a
portion of the width of the streets proposed to be traversed.
(9) The location by streets of any assembly areas for such parade.
(10) The time at which units of the parade will begin to assemble at any
such assembly area or areas.
(11) The interval of space to be maintained between units of such
parade.
(12) If the parade is designed to be held by and on behalf of or for any
person other than the applicant, the applicant for such permit shall
file with the Chief of Police a communication in writing from the
person proposing to hold the parade, authorizing the applicant to
apply for the permit on his behalf.
(13) Any additional information which the Commissioner of Public
Safety shall find reasonably necessary to a fair determination as to
whether a permit should issue.
C. The Commissioner of Public Safety, where good cause is shown
therefor, shall have the authority to consider any application hereunder
which is filed less than seven days or more than 10 days before the date
such parade is proposed to be conducted.
A. The conduct of the parade will not substantially interrupt the safe and
orderly movement of other traffic contiguous to its route.
B. The conduct of the parade will not require the diversion of so great a
number of police officers of this municipality to properly police the line
§ 110-5 CHARTER § 110-7
C:327
§ 110-8. Notice of denial.
If the Commissioner of Public Safety disapproves the application for a
parade permit, he shall mail to the applicant, within three days after the
date upon which the application was filed, a notice of his action.
§ 110-9. Alternative permit.
The Commissioner of Public Safety, in denying an application for a parade
permit, shall be empowered to authorize the conduct of the parade on a
date, at a time or over a route different from that named by the applicant.
An applicant desiring to accept an alternate permit shall, within five days
after notice of the action of the Commissioner of Public Safety, file a written
notice of acceptance with the Commissioner of Public Safety. An alternate
parade permit shall conform to the requirements of and shall have the effect
of a parade permit under this chapter.
§ 110-10. Contents of permit.
Each parade permit shall state the following information:
of movement and the areas contiguous thereto as to prevent normal
police protection to this city.
C. The conduct of such parade will not require the diversion of so great a
number of ambulances as to prevent normal ambulance service to
portions of this city, other than that to be occupied by the proposed line
of march and areas contiguous thereto.
D. The concentration of persons, animals and vehicles at assembly points
of the parade will not unduly interfere with proper fire and police
protection of or ambulance service to areas contiguous to such
assembly areas.
E. The conduct of such parade will not interfere with the movement of firefighting
equipment en route to a fire.
F. The conduct of the parade is not reasonably likely to cause injury to
persons or property, to provoke disorderly conduct or create a
disturbance.
G. The parade is scheduled to move from its point of origin to its point of
termination expeditiously and without unreasonable delays en route.
H. The parade is not to be held for the sole purpose of advertising any
product, cause, goods or events and is not designed to be held purely
for private profit.
A. Starting time.
B. Minimum speed.
C. Maximum speed.
§ 110-7 ONEIDA CODE § 110-10
C:328
§ 110-11. Carrying permit.
The parade chairman or other person heading or leading such activity shall
carry the parade permit upon his person during the conduct of the parade.
§ 110-12. Revocation.
The Commissioner of Public Safety shall have the authority, after a hearing
affording due process, to revoke a parade permit issued hereunder upon
application of the standards for issuance as set forth in this chapter.
Chapter 112
SPECIAL EVENTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Noise — See Ch. 98.
Parades — See Ch. 110.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 113.
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 116.
§ 112-1. Purpose.
The Mayor and the Common Council of the City of Oneida find that the
streets and other public places in the City of Oneida are from time to
time temporarily closed and used as sites for festivals, art shows and
neighborhood celebrations and other public events which are privately
sponsored but open to the public. Events of this kind serve to improve the
quality of life of the residents of the City of Oneida and often result in
large numbers of people congregating within the confines of the temporarily
closed streets or public places, and the resulting crowd conditions create
concern for police and fire access and control and other concerns relating
to the health, safety and welfare of the public and of persons and property
in the closed area. It is therefore essential that a policy be established
for governing these events which shall facilitate control over them by the
sponsor and by City of Oneida officials from departments involved with the
event to safeguard persons and property.
D. Maximum interval of space to be maintained between the units of the
parade.
E. The portions of the streets to be traversed that may be occupied by the
parade.
F. The maximum length of the parade in miles or fractions thereof.
G. Such other information as the Commissioner of Public Safety shall find
necessary to the enforcement of this chapter.
§ 110-10 CHARTER § 112-2
C:329
§ 112-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BLOCK PARTY — Event held by the residents of a defined section of the City
of Oneida to be attended by the residents of that particular section.
CITY CO-SPONSORED SPECIAL EVENT — A special event, authorized as
such by the Common Council, where the costs are shared between the City
and the applicant or co-sponsor, in such proration as shall be approved by
the Common Council, including but not limited to materials, equipment,
labor, cash donations and contracted services.
CITY-SPONSORED SPECIAL EVENT — A special event for which the
Common Council has appropriated funds into the annual budget, and where
the cost shall be paid entirely by the City, including but not limited to
materials, equipment, labor and contracted services. Such events are
authorized each year by the Common Council.
SPECIAL EVENT — A preplanned single event or series of events that,
because of its/their nature, interest, location, promotion or any combination
of similar influences, is expected, or later found, to draw a large number
of people, sponsored by an individual or entity other than the City of
Oneida, proposed to be held on public property or on private property
but affecting public property or requiring City of Oneida support services,
for the purpose(s) of entertainment, celebration, amusement, cultural
recognition, arts and crafts displays and/or sales, amateur sports
demonstration or competition, or similar activities generically considered
recreational in nature. Examples include, but are not limited to, festivals,
street fairs, street art shows, public celebrations, outdoor concerts,
parades, runs, marathons and walk-a-thons.
SPECIAL EVENT VENDOR — A peddler conducting business during a
special event with the written permission of the event sponsor.
SPONSOR — The individual, group of individuals, corporation or other
entity responsible for organizing the event.
SUPPORT SERVICES — Services which can or must be provided by the City
of Oneida to ensure that a special event is conducted in such a manner
to protect the safety, health, property or general welfare of its citizens.
Examples include fire protection, crowd management and control, and
traffic management and control.
§ 112-3. Permits required.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, corporation, association, group or
organization within the corporate limits of the City of Oneida to conduct a
special event or to act as a special event vendor, as herein defined, without
first having obtained, paid for and having in force and effect a valid, current
permit or license therefor.
§ 112-4. Application for permit and license; cost estimation.
§ 112-2 ONEIDA CODE § 112-4
C:330
§ 112-5. Fees.
An application fee as prescribed by resolution of the City of Oneida Common
Council will be charged. Other costs may be charged based upon estimated
costs to the City of Oneida.
§ 112-6. Approval process.
The Common Council of the City of Oneida will review all special event
applications and shall be authorized to either approve or deny said
applications.
§ 112-7. Requirements.
A. Application for special event permit. The sponsor of the special event
must submit a completed application form to the City of Oneida Clerk.
All applications are to be submitted on the forms provided by the City of
Oneida Clerk. Any application submitted less than 45 days prior to the
event shall not be accepted.
B. City of Oneida costing process. The completed form shall be distributed
to the appropriate City of Oneida departments, which shall estimate the
additional cost that would be incurred as a result of the event. This
information may be used in establishing terms and conditions under
which an event may be conducted when the use of police or other City
of Oneida personnel is appropriate, possible and not in conflict with any
other administrative policies and procedures and/or labor agreements.
C. Application for special event vendor license. The sponsor of a special
event may authorize vendors to operate within the defined area of the
special event. Local businesses located outside the designated confines
of the special event will be required to obtain written authorization
from the event sponsor to operate as a vendor. Businesses located
within the designated confines of the special event area may operate as
a vendor on the sidewalk which immediately abuts their business
during the duration of the special event (and during any time during the
year) by paying to the City of Oneida a fee, as set forth from time to time
by resolution of the Common Council.
D. The application for a special event vendor license must be submitted on
the forms provided by the City of Oneida Clerk. Said application, signed
by the event sponsor, must be submitted by the vendor to the City of
Oneida Clerk, along with the appropriate fees, no less than seven days
prior to the date of an approved event. Upon receipt of a properly
completed application, the City of Oneida Clerk shall issue a special
event vendor license. Said license shall be prominently displayed or
carried by the vendor at all times during participation in the special
event.
A. Permits and licenses. Approval to conduct a special event by this
process does not relieve the sponsor or any participant, including but
§ 112-4 CHARTER § 112-7
C:331
§ 112-8. Event guidelines.
not limited to food stands, vendors, peddlers or exhibitors, from the
responsibility of applying for any other permits or licenses or meeting
any other requirements which may be applicable.
B. Insurance. All events must obtain a liability insurance policy in the
amount of $1,000,000 with the City of Oneida named as an additional
insured, or a larger amount at the discretion of the City of Oneida. This
insurance shall satisfy all insurance requirements for the City of Oneida
for holding this special event. Additional insurance requirements of City
of Oneida departments shall be considered by the Common Council in
formulating the amount of coverage required. The insurance policy,
which must be submitted to the City of Oneida Attorney no later than 30
days prior to the event, shall be subject to review and approval of the
City of Oneida Attorney.
C. Due date. All required permits, licenses, and security deposits must be
obtained no later than seven days prior to the date of event.
A. Daily time restriction. The hours of operation for any special event
taking place on the streets of the City of Oneida shall be between 7:00
a.m. and 10:00 p.m. Sunday through Friday; between 7:00 a.m. and
12:00 a.m. (midnight) on Saturday.
B. Safety lane restriction. The placement of any vehicle, trailer or other
installation associated with the special event shall be directed by the
Fire Chief and the Chief of Police, Commissioner of Public Safety of the
City of Oneida, or their designated representative(s) to ensure that a
safety lane remains open at all time.
C. Site maintenance. All areas used must be left in a clean condition.
Cleanup must be completed by 12:00 p.m. (noon) on the day following
the event. Events which use amusement rides are allowed until 4:00
p.m. on the day following the event.
D. Temporary parking signs. All temporary signs for restricting parking
must be posted 24 hours in advance and maintained by the sponsor.
Requests for the necessary materials should be directed to the City of
Oneida Police Department, which shall have responsibility for the initial
posting of the temporary signs, either through physical placement or
directive as to locations. Any use of temporary signs without the
authorization of the Police Department will be neither recognized nor
enforced. Upon the event's completion, all signs must be taken down by
the sponsor and returned to the Police Department.
E. Barricades. Movable barricades shall be delivered to the site where the
sponsor or its designated representative shall sign for their receipt. The
cost of replacing lost or damaged barricades lies with the sponsor.
F. Public safety. The sponsor of a special event shall provide appropriate
security measures and traffic control so as to ensure the public's safety.
§ 112-7 ONEIDA CODE § 112-8
C:332
Sponsors may retain either individuals appropriately certified by the
New York State Division of Criminal Justice Services or members of
the City of Oneida Police Department. If a sponsor elects to use City of
Oneida Police Officers, a fee for providing such police officers shall be
charged. Said fee is to be determined by the Chief of Police and shall
not be in excess of the actual cost.
G. Restroom facilities. The Madison County Department of Health will
determine reasonable guidelines for portable bathrooms. Financial
responsibility for obtaining the facilities rests with the sponsor.
H. Banners and signage. Any request to hang a banner over the streets of
the City of Oneida in relation to a special event shall be processed by
the City Clerk. All signage placed for the event should follow any and all
requirements for signs allowable under applicable law.
I. Tents and temporary structures. The City of Oneida Fire Department
may set forth conditions for the erection, maintenance and dismantling
of tents and temporary structures for the purpose of protecting the
health, safety and welfare of the public and property in the area of the
event. If the sponsor is permitted to erect a tent or other temporary
structure, the sponsor is responsible for erecting the tent or other
temporary structure and maintaining that tent or other temporary
structure. The sponsor is also responsible for dismantling the tent or
other temporary structure upon conclusion of the event, when the
necessity for the tent or other temporary structure ceases or upon
order of the City of Oneida.
J. Parades, motorcades, runs and marathons. Sponsors requesting to
conduct a parade, motorcade, run or marathon must specify the route
to be used in the application for review by the Police Department.
Escort services will be provided based upon the availability of police
officers on that particular day and the perceived needs of the parade,
motorcade or road race. Such services may be charged.
K. Other restrictions. The following are prohibited within the confines of
any special event:
(1) Overnight camping, except for security personnel.
(2) Unlicensed gambling or illegal games of chance.
(3) Littering and the use of glass containers.
(4) Open fires that are not under the guidelines established by the Fire
Department.
(5) No grease or substance of any kind can be discharged upon the
streets or sidewalks or into the storm drains and sewers.
(6) No penetration of any kind may be made in the asphalt surface of
any City street or public highway.
§ 112-8 CHARTER § 112-9
C:333
§ 112-9. Penalties for offenses.
§ 112-10. Exclusion from policy.
Chapter 113
PEACE AND GOOD ORDER
GENERAL REFERENCES
Animals — See Ch. 17.
Noise — See Ch. 98.
Trees — See Ch. 174.
§ 113-1. Defacing or damaging public property prohibited.
A. Fine. Special events shall not be held without the authorization of the
Common Council, not held in contravention of the terms and conditions
set forth by the Common Council. Violation of this chapter may subject
the sponsor to a fine of $500 in addition to any other penalty provided in
the local laws or in any other law on account of commencement of said
special event without required permits, licenses or authorization.
B. Closing of unauthorized special events. The City of Oneida Police Chief
may close any special event conducted without authorization of the
Common Council, and the sponsors and participants may be subject to
arrest.
C. Closing of events due to public safety hazard. The City of Oneida Police
Chief, Commissioner of Public Safety, the Fire Chief or their designated
representatives may close any special event or any portion of a special
event that is subsequently determined to be an eminent hazard to the
public health, safety or welfare.
A. Block parties. Block parties as herein defined are excluded from the
provisions of this policy. Request for block parties are to be submitted
to the City of Oneida City Clerk.
B. City events. Events initiated by, sponsored and/or co-sponsored by the
City are excluded from the provisions of this policy.
C. Events solely within parks. Events that are held entirely within the
jurisdiction of the City of Oneida Recreation and Youth Services
Department that do not require the intervention of any other City of
Oneida department shall be deemed an event sponsored by the City of
Oneida for the purposes of this chapter.
A. No person shall write, make, draw or paint any writing, printing,
picture, marks or device of any kind on any sidewalk, tree or shrubs,
curb, pavement, street, lamppost, electric light pole, bandstand, bench,
§ 112-9 ONEIDA CODE § 113-1
C:334
§ 113-2. Loitering.
Any person found loitering in any of the streets, alleys, parks or public
places in the corporation tax district, or loitering or concealed in the
stairway or hall of any building without any apparent lawful purpose or
business, and who neglects or refuses to move on at the request of any
policeman or police officer, if in a street, alley, park or other public place, or
to leave at the request of any peace officer, or the owner or occupant of the
building if so found in a stairway or hall, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
§ 113-3. Unprotected holes or excavations.
§ 113-4. Stopping or diverting sewer or drain.
No person shall stop or divert the course of any drain or sewer.
§ 113-5. Indecency and indecent exposure. [Added 3-20-1996 by
L.L. No. 2-1996]
public fixture, structure or building in this city or stick, fasten or post
any placard, bill or paper thereon. Nothing herein contained shall be
construed to forbid the posting or affixing of notices required by law.
B. No person shall injure, deface or tarnish any public building or any
property belonging to the city, in any manner whatever, or shall
wantonly or willfully injure, cut, deface, tarnish or smear any wall,
pump, hydrant, fountain, aqueduct or reservoir, bridge, fence, railing,
house or outhouse, or any part thereof, external or internal, nor any
useful or ornamental structure or any shade tree or shrub within the
city.
A. No person shall maintain or permit to exist upon premises owned or
occupied by such person any unprotected hole or excavation which
does or may constitute a hazard to persons, and particularly young
children, who may come upon such premises, whether legally or as
trespassers.
B. An unprotected hole or excavation is one which is not covered or which
is not adequately fenced and is greater than one foot in depth.
C. This section shall not apply to holes or excavations made during the
course of any work or construction left uncovered or unfenced during
the period reasonably required to perform such work or construction.
A. Any person who knowingly or intentionally, in a public place, engages in
sexual intercourse or deviate sexual intercourse, as defined in the Penal
Law, or appears in a state of nudity or fondles the genitals of himself or
another person thereby commits public indecency, punishable as a
Class A misdemeanor.
B. "Nudity" shall mean the showing of the human male or female genitals,
pubic area or buttocks with less than a fully opaque covering, the
§ 113-1 CHARTER § 113-5
C:335
Chapter 116
PEDDLING AND SOLICITING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Secondhand dealers — See Ch. 135.
showing of a female breast with less than a fully opaque covering
of any part of the areola, or the showing of covered male genitals
in a discernibly turgid state. Excluded from this definition of nudity,
however, shall be the breast-feeding of infants, but the definition shall
apply to any person entertaining or performing in a play, exhibition,
show or entertainment.27
C. A person who, in a place other than a public place, with intent to be
seen by persons other than invitees and occupants of that place,
engages in sexual intercourse or engages in deviate sexual conduct or
fondles the genitals of himself or another person where he or she can be
seen by persons other than invitees and occupants of that place
commits indecent exposure, punishable as a Class A misdemeanor.
27.Editor's Note: Former Section 4-17-16(b)(1) and (2), concerning promotion of exposure
and which immediately followed this subsection, were deleted at time of adoption of Code
(see Ch. 1, General Provisions).
§ 113-5 ONEIDA CODE § 113-5
C:336
ARTICLE I
General Regulations
§ 116-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
respectively ascribed to them in this section:
ESTABLISHED PLACE OF BUSINESS — A building permanently affixed to
a parcel of land within the City of Oneida in which, or from where, a person
or business entity lawfully transacts business involving the retail sale of
goods, including related services, including food and food services, directly
to customers at or from that location.
MOBILE FOOD VENDOR — A peddler who sells or offers for sale, from
a vehicle, pushcart or stand, ready-to-eat food and/or beverage items,
prepackaged, preprepared, or prepared on location.
PEDDLER — Any person, either principal, employee or agent, who does not
have an established place of business, or whose principal or employer does
not have an established place of business, and who sells, barters, or offers
for sale or barter, or who carries or exposes for sale or barter any goods,
wares or merchandise, including related services, and including food and
related food services, on foot or from any vehicle from, or in, any public
street or public place.
PUSHCART — Any wheeled device used by a mobile food vendor, not
otherwise constituting a vehicle, which may be moved or propelled either
by mechanical or human power.
SOLICITOR — Includes any person who goes upon private property from
place to place or house to house without the prior invitation of the owner
or occupant(s) of the premises, taking or offering to take orders for goods,
wares, or merchandise, or for goods to be delivered or services to be
performed in the future.
STAND — A moveable, portable or collapsible structure, framework, device,
container or other contrivance used by a mobile food vendor other than a
pushcart or vehicle.
VEHICLE — A vehicle as defined by the New York State Vehicle and Traffic
Law.
§ 116-2. Applicability; exemptions.
A. Nothing in this chapter shall apply:
(1) To any sales conducted pursuant to statute or by order of any court.
(2) To any person selling personal property at wholesale solely to
dealers in such goods.
(3) To businesses having an established place of business as defined in
this chapter, or to farmers and truck gardeners who, themselves or
§ 116-1 CHARTER § 116-2
C:337
§ 116-3. Licensed required.
It shall be unlawful for any person, within the corporate limits of the City,
to act as a peddler, solicitor or mobile food vendor, as defined in § 116-1,
without first having in force and effect a license or permit therefor issued
by the City Clerk as herein provided.
§ 116-4. Application.
Any person desiring to procure a license required by the provisions of
this chapter shall file with the City Clerk a written application upon a
form prepared and furnished by the City Clerk. Such application form shall
provide not less than the following information:
through their employees, sell products of their own farms and
gardens located within the City.
(4) To any honorably discharged member of the armed forces of the
United States who has procured a license as provided by § 32 of the
General Business Law of the State of New York.
(5) To any public market authorized by the Common Council under
such rules and regulations as it may provide for the operation and
control of said market; or so as to interfere unlawfully with
interstate commerce.
(6) To any activities sponsored by and held for the benefit of any bona
fide nonprofit museum, fraternal, charitable, educational, or
religious organization, including any not-for-profit corporation,
downtown Improvement committee or other bona fide civic
organization, nor shall this chapter apply to any vendors, including
peddlers, assembled or brought together for a scheduled event
sponsored or conducted by such organization, such as a block
party, trade or product show, where part of the proceeds or fees
from such vendors are paid to the benefit of such organization.
B. The burden of proving entitlement to exemption from the requirements
of this chapter shall be upon the person or entity claiming such
exemption.
A. The location(s) from which the applicant desires to operate and the
number and description of all vehicle(s) to be used by the applicant,
including DMV registration information and photographs of all such
vehicles, pushcarts or stands;
B. The kind of goods, wares or merchandise to be sold or the kind of
service he or she desires to perform;
C. The method of delivery or distribution of the goods and services to be
sold;
§ 116-2 ONEIDA CODE § 116-4
C:338
§ 116-5. Issuance and fees.
§ 116-6. Revocation of permits; penalties for offenses.
D. The name, address, age and photographs of the applicant and all
employees, employees and representatives that will engage in the
peddling and/or soliciting;
E. The period of time for which the applicant desires the license;
F. A signed release providing consent for the Oneida City Police
Department to conduct a local background check on the applicant and
all individuals identified as being associated with the peddling and/or
soliciting activities; and
G. Such other information as may be required by the City Clerk.
A. Upon the filing of a complete application and payment of the applicable
application fees, as determined from time to time by resolution of the
Common Council, and upon receipt of an approved local background
check from the City Police Department, the City Clerk shall, upon the
approval of such application, issue to the applicant a license.
B. Upon the approval of a license to peddle or solicit at parades, block
parties or similar events where the public is gathered en masse, an arm
band shall be provided by the City Clerk to each authorized individual
signifying his or her status as a licensed peddler or solicitor. It shall be
unlawful for a vendor not to conspicuously display the arm band on his
or her person during such event.
A. Any permit or license issued under the provisions of this chapter may be
revoked upon determination of any one or more of the following
conditions:
(1) The making of any false or fraudulent statement by the applicant;
(2) The suspension or revocation of an applicant's Health Department
permit or New York State Sales Tax Certificate of Authority;
(3) The City's determination, upon three days' prior notice to the
permit holder or licensee, that the permit holder or licensee is in
violation of any provision of this chapter.
B. In addition to constituting grounds for revocation of a permit or license,
any violation of any provision of this chapter shall be an offense
punishable by a maximum fine of $250 or by imprisonment for not more
than 15 days, or both such fine and imprisonment.
§ 116-4 CHARTER § 116-6
C:339

ARTICLE II
Special Regulations for Mobile Food Vendors
§ 116-7. Additional regulations for mobile food vendor licenses.
All of the provisions of Article I of this chapter shall apply to all mobile
food vendors conducting business within the City, whether on a seasonal,
weekly, or one-time basis, in any public place. The following additional
requirements shall also apply to mobile food vendors:
A. All mobile food vendors must obtain a seasonal, weekly or one-time
mobile food vendor's license. Such licenses will be issued by the City
Clerk in accordance with the provisions of this article and chapter.
B. Each mobile food vendor license shall state the specific location(s) from
which the mobile food vendor shall be authorized to conduct business
pursuant to such license. Each license shall be valid for a single location
only.
C. Locations available to licensed mobile food vendors shall be specifically
designated from time to time by resolution of the Common Council
following review and recommendation by the Chief of Police, the
Director of Parks and Recreation and the City Engineer with respect to
potential risk to public safety. In no event shall any such authorized
location be less than 20 feet from a street intersection.
D. All mobile food vendors shall state, in order of preference, their three
preferred location(s) in their license application. In the event more than
one prospective vendor desires the same location, the City Clerk shall
give preference in the assignment of the permit locations to the
applicant(s) who have held a mobile food vendor's license from the City
for the most consecutive years prior to the year in question.
E. Seasonal licenses shall be renewable annually and shall be valid from
January 1 to December 31 of each calendar year. The City Clerk shall
publish a notice in the City's official newspaper between November 1
and November 15 of the preceding calendar year stating that, for
seasonal mobile food vendor licenses, applications shall be submitted to
the City Clerk by the following 10th day of December, and shall be acted
upon by the City Clerk in accordance with these regulations within
three business days thereafter.
F. Daily or weekly licenses may be issued only for locations not previously
assigned to a seasonal licensee. In the event more than one application
is received for the same location for the same day(s) or week(s), the City
Clerk shall give preference in the assignment of the permit locations to
the applicant(s) who have held a mobile food vendor's license from the
City for the most consecutive years prior to the year in question.
G. All mobile food vendors shall agree to defend and indemnify the City of
Oneida from all claims, losses and liabilities the City may incur as a
consequence of the operations of the mobile food vendor. In addition,
§ 116-7 CHARTER § 116-7
C:341
each mobile food vendor must submit to the City Clerk proof of the
following required insurance coverage: general liability insurance with
personal injury coverage limits per occurrence of not less than
$300,000 naming the City of Oneida as additional insured, as well as
worker's compensation and disability insurance as statutorily required
under New York State Law.
H. Prior to commencement of business activities under a mobile vendor's
license, the applicant shall provide to the City Clerk proof of the
issuance of a valid permit from the Madison County Health Department
for such business operations and a valid New York State sales tax
certificate.
I. Upon the approval of a mobile food vendor's license, the City shall
provide the licensee with a license document signifying his or her status
as a licensed mobile food vendor. It shall be unlawful for a mobile food
vendor to not conspicuously display the license on his or her vehicle,
pushcart or stand during business operations. Preservation of the
integrity of the license document from the elements while displayed
shall be the responsibility of the vendor.
J. Food vendors shall provide suitable disposal receptacles for use by
patrons and shall be responsible for all cleanup and removal of all
debris and trash resulting from the operation of their individual sites.
K. No food vendor shall place his vehicle, pushcart or stand on lawn areas
of parks or other public places, or otherwise operate his or her business
in such manner as to cause damage to any such green areas.
L. Food vendors shall be responsible for the repair of any damage
whatsoever to any public grounds or other public property caused by, or
in association with, their business. The City shall have the right, at any
time and without prior notice to the license holder, to repair any such
damage and invoice the license holder for all such costs. Failure to pay
any such invoice within 10 days shall be grounds for immediate
revocation of the mobile food vendor's license.
M. No alcoholic beverage may be sold or offered for sale by a mobile food
vendor.
N. Hours of operation shall be limited to 1/2 hour after sunrise to one-half
hour before sunset.
O. All mobile food vendor licenses shall be subject to the condition that all
licensees agree to comply with the direction of any police officer, or any
City employee or representative acting within the scope of his or her
employment, directing the licensee to temporarily suspend or alter
operations, or temporarily relocate to another location for such period
of time as may be determined by the City in order to accommodate a
parade, funeral or other activity of a community nature. Failure to obey
any such directive shall be grounds for the immediate revocation of the
license.
§ 116-7 ONEIDA CODE § 116-7
C:342
Chapter 120
POLICE DEPARTMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Officers and employees — See Ch. 104.
§ 120-1. Noncriminal fingerprinting by Police Department; fee.28
The Oneida Police Department is hereby authorized to establish a fee per
card for noncriminal fingerprints taken by said Department, with all such
transactions to be paid for by the applicant, with check or money order
payable to the Oneida Police Department.
§ 120-2. Release of criminal history data to city departments,
hospital. [Added 2-5-1991 by Ord. No. 101991; amended 6-18-1991
by Ord. No. 3-199129]
The City of Oneida Bureau of Police be and hereby is authorized to release
or cause to be released, through the State of New York Division of Criminal
Justice Services ("DCJS"), criminal history reports and data to the City
Bureau of Fire or other requesting city departments, upon written inquiry
therefor and submission to DCJS of fingerprints and the appropriate
processing fee, when directly related to the City of Oneida municipal job
applicants.
Chapter 122
PUBLIC NUISANCE ABATEMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alcoholic beverages — See Ch. 9.
Bingo and games of chance — See Ch. 30.
Firearms and weapons — See Ch. 57.
Noise — See Ch. 98.
Zoning — See Ch. 190.
§ 122-1. Purpose.
It is hereby declared to be the policy of the City of Oneida to provide for
the proper use of real property to prevent illegal, unhealthful, hazardous or
dangerous conditions. By this chapter, the Common Council of the City of
Oneida seeks to establish a procedure for the City of Oneida to effectively
28.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions).
29.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions).
§ 116-7 CHARTER § 122-1
C:343
abate those dangers which constitute a nuisance to public safety, health, life
and property, and to assess the cost of abatement against those individuals
who knowingly conduct, maintain, allow or permit the existence of a public
nuisance and the real properties on which such activity occurs.
§ 122-2. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall
have the meanings ascribed:
CRIMINAL CONVICTION — The entry of a plea of guilty or a verdict of
guilty for one or more counts as set forth in an accusatory instrument.
ILLEGAL DRUG ACTIVITY — The use or possession of a controlled
substance or marijuana, as defined by the State Penal Law.
OWNER — The owner(s) or landlord(s) of a building, structure or real
property, including his or her agent.
PREMISES — Real property or a building or structure, or any part thereof.
PUBLIC NUISANCE —
Includes, but shall not be limited to:
Any building, structure or real property used for the illegal use,
possession or distribution of a controlled substance or marijuana,
as defined by the State Penal Law.
(1)
Any building, structure or real property used for prostitution as
defined by the State Penal Law.
(2)
Any building, structure or real property used for indecent or
obscene performances and/or promotion of obscene material as
defined by the State Penal Law and this Code.
(3)
Any building, structure or real property used for illegal gambling
activity as defined by the State Penal Law.
(4)
Any building, structure or real property used for the commission of
illegal possession, use or sale of firearms or weapons as defined by
the State Penal Law.
(5)
Any building, structure or real property used for the illegal sale,
manufacture or consumption of alcohol beverages as defined by the
State Alcohol Beverage Control Law.
(6)
Any building, structure or real property wherein there exists or has
occurred a criminal nuisance, as defined by the State Penal Law.
(7)
Any building, structure or real property used for loitering, as
defined by the State Penal Law.
(8)
Any building, structure or real property wherein an occupant,
guest or business invitee commits criminal activities involving
(9)
A.
§ 122-1 ONEIDA CODE § 122-2
C:344
TENANT — The lessee or occupant of a building, structure or real property.
For purposes of this chapter, the term "tenant" shall include an occupant
of one or more rooms in a rooming house or a residence, not including a
transient occupant, of one or more rooms in a hotel for 30 consecutive days
or longer.
§ 122-3. Nuisance forbidden.
No owner, operator, manager or tenant of premises shall knowingly
conduct, maintain, permit or allow the existence of a public nuisance at the
premises.
§ 122-4. Presumption of public nuisance.
assault, gang assault, harassment or disorderly conduct as said
criminal activities are defined by the State Penal Law.
Any building, structure or real property wherein there exists or
has occurred any violation of this Code, including, but not limited
to, Chapter 190, Zoning, and the New York State Uniform Fire
Prevention and Building Code,30 including the Property
Maintenance Code of New York State, and any subsequent
amendments or superseding provisions thereto, all of which have
been previously adopted and incorporated into this Code by
reference.
(10)
The above definition of a public nuisance is not intended and shall not
be interpreted to cover or include requests for police, medical, fire or
ambulance services in the face of a threat or a perceived threat to
person or property, or any request for the assistance of the police to
enforce a court order, including, but not limited to, circumstances in
which the request for police, medical, fire or ambulance services or
public service intervention arises from an incident relating to intimate
partner violence, sexual assault, child abuse or stalking against any
person at or near the premises.
B.
A. The following shall constitute a presumption of a public nuisance:
(1) Notice by first-class mail or personal service, from the City of
Oneida, of the activities entailing a public nuisance to the owner,
operator, manager or tenant of premises shall be prima facie
evidence of knowledge of a public nuisance.
(2) The existence of two or more criminal convictions for any of the
activities set forth in the definition of a public nuisance in § 122-2 at
any premises within the two-year period prior to the
commencement of a civil action and/or administrative hearing shall
be prima facie evidence of the existence of a public nuisance.
30.Editor's Note: See Ch. 33, Building Code Administration and Enforcement.
§ 122-2 CHARTER § 122-4
C:345
§ 122-5. Summons and complaint for civil action.
(3) The existence of two or more incidents of the following activities at
any premises within the one-year period prior to the
commencement of a civil action and/or administrative hearing shall
be prima facie evidence of the existence of a public nuisance:
(a) Service of a search warrant on the premises where controlled
substances, marijuana and/or weapons are seized.
(b) Finding of illegal controlled substances or illegal firearms or
weapons on the premises.
(c) Investigative purchases of illegal controlled substances on the
premises by law enforcement agencies or their agents.
B. Once there exists the presumption of a public nuisance, as set forth in
Subsection A above, the City shall serve, by means of first-class mail or
personal service, written notice upon the owner, as set forth in the last
filed tax roll, advising of such presumption. Such notice shall set forth
the alleged facts constituting the public nuisance and shall inform the
owner of the City's intent to pursue action under either § 122-5 or
122-11.
C. Upon notification from the City of Oneida of the presumption of a public
nuisance, as set forth in Subsection B above, good faith efforts,
commenced by the owner in a timely manner to eradicate such public
nuisance, shall preclude further enforcement action by the City of
Oneida, unless and until such good faith efforts cease or activities
constituting a public nuisance resume. In the event an owner's good
faith efforts cease or public nuisance activity resumes, the City of
Oneida shall notify the owner, in the manner set forth in Subsection B
above, of its intent to proceed under either § 122-5 or 122-11.
A. At the direction of the Common Council of the City of Oneida, the City
Attorney may bring and maintain a civil action in the name of the City to
abate a public nuisance and shall commence a civil action by filing a
summons and complaint in the manner required by the New York State
Civil Practice Laws and Rules.
B. The summons and complaint shall name as defendant(s) at least one of
the owners of some portion of or of some interest in the property, as set
forth in the last filed tax roll, and shall describe the owner's premises by
tax map number and/or street address.
C. The summons and complaint may also name as defendant any owner,
operator, manager or tenant of the premises.
D. The complaint shall allege the facts constituting the public nuisance.
§ 122-4 ONEIDA CODE § 122-5
C:346
§ 122-6. Civil penalty.
If, upon the trial of an action for a public nuisance or upon a motion for
summary judgment, a finding is made that defendant(s) have conducted,
maintained, permitted or allowed a public nuisance, a penalty may be
awarded in an amount not to exceed $1,000 for each day it is found that
the defendant(s) conducted, maintained, permitted or allowed the public
nuisance after notice to abate had been given by the City.
§ 122-7. Permanent injunction.
E. The complaint shall be accompanied by an affidavit, to affirm that the
owner or his agent had notice of the public nuisance and an opportunity
to abate the public nuisance.
F. Because the public nuisance is conducted, maintained, permitted or
allowed in the City of Oneida, the venue of such action shall be in
Madison County.
G. In rem jurisdiction over the premises shall be completed by affixing the
summons to the premises and by mailing the summons and complaint
by certified or registered mail, return receipt requested, to the person
in whose name the real property is recorded as determined by the last
filed tax rolls.
H. Defendant(s), other than the record property owner of the premises,
shall be served with the summons and complaint in the manner
required by the New York State Civil Practice Laws and Rules.
I. With respect to any action commenced or to be commenced, the City
Attorney may file a notice of pendency pursuant to the New York State
Civil Practice Laws and Rules.
A. If, upon the trial of a civil action for a public nuisance or upon a motion
for summary judgment, a finding is made that defendant(s) have
conducted, maintained, permitted or allowed a public nuisance, a
permanent injunction may be granted.
B. A permanent injunction may prohibit defendant(s) from conducting,
maintaining, permitting or allowing the public nuisance.
C. A permanent injunction may authorize agents of the City to remove and
correct any condition(s) in violation of this Code. The judgment may
further order that the cost of removing and correcting the violation(s),
plus a charge of 50% as compensation to the City for administration and
supervision expenses, be charged against defendant(s) and awarded to
the City. The judgment may further order that the cost of removing and
correcting the violation(s), plus the charge of 50% as compensation to
the City for administration and supervision expenses, shall constitute a
lien against the real property and shall be collected in the same manner
as provided by law for the collection of real property taxes within the
City.
§ 122-5 CHARTER § 122-7
C:347
§ 122-8. Closing of premises.
§ 122-9. Preliminary injunction.
Upon a motion or order to show cause from the City Attorney and pending
an action for a permanent injunction, a preliminary injunction enjoining
the public nuisance may be granted for any of the relief obtained by a
permanent injunction.
§ 122-10. Temporary restraining order.
Pending a motion or order to show for a preliminary injunction, a temporary
restraining order or temporary closing order may be granted, without
notice to defendant(s), for any of the relief obtainable by a permanent
injunction.
D. A judgment ordering a permanent injunction may direct the closing of
the premises by the Oneida City Police Department, to the extent
necessary to abate the public nuisance.
E. A judgment awarding a permanent injunction shall provide for all costs
and disbursements allowed by the New York State Civil Practice Laws
and Rules and for the actual costs, expenses and disbursements of the
City in investigating, bringing and maintaining the action.
A. If the judgment of a civil action directs the closing of the premises, the
Oneida City Police Department shall serve the judgment upon
defendant(s) in the manner required by New York State Civil Practice
Laws and Rules and shall post a copy of the judgment upon one or more
of the doors at entrances of the premises or in a conspicuous place on
the premises.
B. In addition, the Oneida City Police Department shall affix upon one or
more of the doors at entrances of the premises or in a conspicuous
place on the premises, a printed notice stating "Closed by Court Order"
in block lettering of sufficient size to be observed by anyone intending
to enter the premises.
C. Mutilation or removal of the posted judgment or notice, while it remains
enforced, will be considered a separate violation and shall be
punishable pursuant to § 55.10(3)(a) of the State Penal Law.
D. The Oneida City Police Department may then command all persons
present in the premises to vacate the property. After the premises are
vacated, the Oneida City Police Department may secure the premises.
E. The closing directed by the judgment shall be for a period as the Court
may direct but in no event shall the closing period exceed one year from
the posting of the judgment.
F. A closing by the Oneida City Police Department shall not constitute an
act of possession, ownership or control by the City.
§ 122-7 ONEIDA CODE § 122-11
C:348
§ 122-11. Administrative hearing.
As an alternative or in addition to commencing a civil action, whenever
there exists a presumption of a public nuisance, as set forth in § 122-4
above, at any premises within the City, the City Attorney may, at the
direction of the City of Oneida Common Council, initiate an administrative
hearing in accordance with the following procedure:
§ 122-12. Administrative remedies.
A. A notice of the hearing shall be served on all owners of the premises as
determined by the last filed tax roll and may also be served on any
known operator, manager and/or tenant of the premises. The notice
shall be served in the manner required by the New York State Civil
Practice Laws and Rules.
B. The notice shall allege the facts constituting the public nuisance, shall
contain a time and place for a hearing to be held before a panel, and
shall advise the owner(s), and any known operator, manager and/or
tenant, of their right to appear represented by legal counsel.
C. The hearing panel shall consist of a member to be appointed by the
Code Enforcement Officer, a member to be appointed by the Chief of
Police and a member to be appointed by the Fire Chief. Each appointing
authority shall be authorized to appoint his/herself or any member of
his/her staff to the hearing panel.
D. At the time and place designated in the notice, the City Attorney shall
present all relevant evidence and/or witnesses demonstrating the
existence of a public nuisance at the premises and as to appropriate
remedies. The owner, operator, manager and/or tenant of the premises
shall have the right to examine such evidence and shall cross-examine
any witnesses presented. The owner, operator, manager and/or tenant
of the premises may present any relevant evidence and/or witnesses as
a defense. The City Attorney shall have the right to examine such
evidence and cross-examine any witnesses presented by the owner,
operator, manager and/or tenant of the premises.
E. Within five business days of the hearing, the panel shall provide a
finding of fact to the Mayor. The finding of fact shall state whether there
is prima facie evidence of the existence of a public nuisance at the
premises. The panel shall further provide a written recommendation of
remedies to abate the public nuisance.
A. To abate a public nuisance, the Mayor, upon receipt of a finding of fact
and recommendation from the panel, shall have the power:
(1) To issue a decision and order suspending the certificate of
occupancy for the premises for a period not to exceed one year.
(2) To issue a decision and order directing the closing of the premises
by the Oneida City Police Department, to the extent necessary to
§ 122-11 CHARTER § 122-12
C:349
§ 122-13. Severability.
If any clause, sentence, paragraph, word, section or part of this chapter
shall be adjudged by any court of competent jurisdiction to be
unconstitutional, illegal or invalid, such judgment shall not effect, impair or
invalidate the remainder thereof, but shall be confined to in its operation
to the clause, sentence, paragraph, word, section or part thereof, directly
involved in the controversy in which said judgment shall have been
rendered.
Chapter 124
PUBLIC UTILITY
§ 124-1. Service established.
The City of Oneida Common Council hereby establishes a public utility
service, to be known as the "Oneida Municipal Power Service" (hereinafter
"Service") pursuant to Article 14-A of the General Municipal Law of the
State of New York. The City of Oneida shall operate, manage and otherwise
control in all respects the Service herein established.
abate the public nuisance, pursuant to the procedures set forth in
§ 122-8.
(3) In conjunction with, or in lieu of, the foregoing powers, to issue a
decision and order for various measures to be taken by the owner,
operator, manager and/or tenant of the premises, to the extent
necessary to abate the existing public nuisance and to ensure the
prevention of future public nuisance actions from occurring at or
near the premises, which shall include, but shall not be limited to:
(a) Requiring the owner, operator, manager and/or tenant to
modify and improve the premises to deter further and future
public nuisance activity; and/or
(b) Directing subsequent purchaser(s) to comply with the
provisions of any orders of suspension for the certificate of
occupancy, unless or until the subsequent purchaser appears
before the hearing panel with an appropriate plan to avoid
further incidents of public nuisance for the panel to review and
make recommendations.
B. The decision and order shall be served upon the owner, operator,
manager and/or tenant of the premises in a manner similar to that
described in § 122-11A herein.
C. Nothing within this section shall limit the authority of the Mayor to take
such other and further actions deemed necessary to abate any existing
public nuisances to the extent necessary to ensure the protection of the
health, safety and welfare of the general public.
§ 122-12 ONEIDA CODE § 124-2
C:350
§ 124-2. Powers.
The Service is empowered to exercise any or all of the following powers: to
construct, purchase, lease, own, acquire, use and/or operate any plant or
facilities within or without its territorial limits for the purpose of furnishing
to itself or for compensation to its inhabitants any services similar to that
furnished by any public utility company specified in Article 4 of the Public
Service Law of the State of New York. In furtherance of this purpose, the
Service may purchase electric energy from the state or from any state
agency or other municipal corporation or from any private enterprise or
public corporation.
§ 124-3. Method of operation.
The proposed method of operation of the Service shall be as follows:
§ 124-4. Costs of purchase and use of energy and facilities.
It is estimated that the purchase of energy and the use, lease or acquisition
of the transmission and distribution facilities and/or rights by the Service
will result in no net cost or net profit to the city. The cost and resultant
rates for furnishing energy to the inhabitants of the city by the Service
shall include all costs associated with the purchase and distribution of
energy. Therefore, the maximum and the estimated cost of the service to be
recovered in full is $0.00.
§ 124-5. Purchase and delivery of power; installation of metering
equipment.
The method of furnishing the Service of the public utility service of the City
of Oneida shall consist of:
A. The city on behalf of the Service shall contract for or otherwise
purchase or acquire hydroelectric and/or such other economical forms
of adequate and reliable energy as may be available from the Power
Authority of the State of New York, the State of New York and any state
agency, any other municipal corporation and any private enterprise and
public corporation.
B. The city on behalf of the Service shall use (in accordance with FERC
and PSC regulatory guidelines), lease or acquire the transmission,
substation and distribution facilities and/or rights necessary to furnish
such power to the city and/or for compensation to the inhabitants of the
city and beyond the city. The acquisition of such facilities by
condemnation will not be exercised by the city on behalf of the Service
unless specifically authorized by further local law requiring public
referendum.
A. Purchasing and/or acquiring low cost hydroelectric power and/or such
other economical forms of energy as shall be available from sources,
public or private.
§ 124-2 CHARTER § 124-5
C:351
§ 124-6. Duties of Common Council.
The method of operation and the rates, rentals and charges for such service
and the procedure for their collection shall be fixed by the Common Council,
in accordance with FERC and PSC regulations.
§ 124-7. Referendum required.
In accordance with the provisions of the General Municipal Law, this
chapter shall not become effective until submitted at a special election to be
held and called in the manner provided for in General Municipal Law § 360,
and approved by a majority of the votes cast on the question of the approval
or disapproval of this chapter.31
§ 124-8. Publication.
This chapter and the notice of submission thereof shall be published in the
Oneida Daily Dispatch, the designated official newspaper of the city, once
in each week for six consecutive weeks immediately preceding the special
election stated above.
§ 124-9. When effective.
This chapter shall take effect upon filing with the Secretary of State and is
subject to the above-stated mandatory referendum to be held pursuant to
law.
Chapter 129
RECORDS
B. Delivering said power to the Service for distribution and sale to its
customers in the city over the transmission facilities of the Power
Authority of the State of New York and the transmission, substation and
distribution facilities of Niagara Mohawk Power Corp., or such other
entities as applicable and available.
C. Installing requisite metering equipment as necessary to monitor the
flow of energy.
D. Delivering said power, either directly by the Service or by others under
contract, over the transmission, substation and distribution facilities
leased and/or contracted for, purchased and/or constructed, as above
described for compensation to inhabitants of the city and beyond.
E. The city on behalf of the Service may contract with the local public
utility companies to deliver said power and collect and remit to the city
the charges thereof.
31.Editor's Note: Said local law passed at referendum on November 2, 1999.
§ 124-5 ONEIDA CODE § 124-9
C:352
ARTICLE I
Public Access to Records
§ 129-1. Purpose and scope.
§ 129-2. Designation of records access officers.
A. The people's right to know the process of government decision-making
and the documents and statistics leading to determinations can be
thwarted by shrouding it with the cloak of secrecy or confidentiality.
B. This article provides information concerning the procedures by which
records may be obtained from an agency defined by Subdivision 3 of
§ 86 of the Public Officers Law. No agency regulations shall be more
restrictive than this article.
C. Agency personnel shall furnish to the public the information and
records required by the Freedom of Information Law,32 as well as
records otherwise available by law.
D. Any conflicts among laws governing public access to records shall be
construed in favor of the widest possible availability of public records.
A. The Common Council of the city shall be responsible for ensuring
compliance with the regulations herein and designates the City Clerk as
the principal records access officer who shall have the duty of
coordinating the city response to public requests for access to records.
The designation of the City Clerk shall not be construed to prohibit the
Attorney for the city ("Attorney"), who has in the past been authorized
to make records or information available to the public, from continuing
to do so.
B. The City Clerk is responsible for assuring that city personnel:
(1) Maintain an up-to-date subject matter list.
(2) Assist the requester in identifying requested records, if necessary.
(3) Upon locating the records, take one of the following actions:
(a) Make records available for inspection; or
(b) Deny access to the records in whole or in part and explain, in
writing, the reasons therefor.
(4) Upon request for copies of records:
(a) Make a copy available upon payment or offer to pay
established fees, if any; or
(b) Permit the requester to copy those records.
32.Editor's Note: See Article 6 of the Public Officers Law.
§ 129-1 CHARTER § 129-2
C:353
§ 129-3. Location.
The Common Council hereby designates the office of the City Clerk and the
Attorney as the location where public records shall be available for public
inspection and copying.
§ 129-4. Hours for public inspection.
The City Clerk and Attorney shall accept requests for public access to
records and produce records during all hours during which the Clerk's
office or Attorney's office is regularly open for business.
§ 129-5. Requests for records.
§ 129-6. Subject matter list.
(5) Upon request, certify that a record is a true copy.
(6) Upon failure to locate records, certify that:
(a) The city is not the custodian for such records; or
(b) The records of which the city is a custodian cannot be found
after diligent search.
A. The City Clerk and Attorney may require that a request be made in
writing or may make records available upon oral request.
B. The City Clerk and Attorney shall respond to any request reasonably
describing the record or records sought within five business days of
receipt of the request.
C. A request shall reasonably describe the record or records sought.
Whenever possible a person requesting records should supply
information regarding dates, file designations or other information that
may help to describe the records sought.
D. If the City Clerk and Attorney do not provide or deny access to the
records sought within five business days of receipt of a request, the City
Clerk and Attorney shall furnish a written acknowledgment of receipt of
the request and a statement of the approximate date when the request
will be granted or denied. If access to records is neither granted nor
denied within 10 business days after the date of acknowledgment of
receipt of a request, the request may be construed as a denial of access
that may be appealed.
A. The City Clerk and Attorney shall maintain a reasonably detailed
current list by subject matter of all records in his/her or their
possession, whether or not records are available pursuant to
Subdivision 2 of § 87 of the Public Officers Law.
B. The subject matter list shall be sufficiently detailed to permit
identification of the category of the record sought.
§ 129-2 ONEIDA CODE § 129-6
C:354
§ 129-7. Denial of access to records; appeals.
C. The subject matter list shall be updated not less than twice per year.
The most recent update shall appear on the first page of the subject
matter list.
A. The Common Council shall hear appeals or shall designate a person or
body to hear appeals regarding denial of access to records under the
Freedom of Information Law.
B. Denial of access shall be in writing stating the reason therefor and
advising the person denied access of his or her right to appeal to the
person or body established to hear appeals, and that person or body
shall be identified by name, title, business address and business
telephone number. The Records Access Officer shall not be the Appeals
Officer.
C. If the Common Council fails to respond to a request within five business
days of receipt of a request as required in § 129-5 of this article, such
failure shall be deemed a denial of access by the agency.
D. Any person denied access to records may appeal within 30 days of a
denial.
E. The time for deciding an appeal by the Common Council or the person
or body designated to hear appeals shall commence upon receipt of
written appeal identifying:
(1) The date and location of a request for records;
(2) The records that were denied; and
(3) The name and return address of the appellant.
F. The Common Council shall transmit to the Committee on Open
Government copies of all appeals upon receipt of an appeal. Such
copies shall be addressed to:
Committee on Open Government
Department of State
162 Washington Avenue
Albany, New York 12231
G. The Common Council or the person or body designated to hear appeals
shall inform the appellant and the Committee on Open Government of
its determination, in writing, within seven business days of receipt of an
appeal. The determination shall be transmitted to the Committee on
Open Government in the same manner as set forth in Subsection F of
this section.
§ 129-6 CHARTER § 129-7
C:355
§ 129-8. Fees.
Except when a different fee is otherwise prescribed by law:
H. A final denial of access to a requested record, as provided for in
Subsection G of this section, shall be subject to court review, as
provided for in Article 78 of the Civil Practice Law and Rules.
A. There shall be no fee charged for the following:
(1) Inspection of records;
(2) Search for records; or
(3) Any certification pursuant to this article.
B. The City Clerk or Attorney may provide copies of records without
charging a fee.
C. The City Clerk or Attorney may charge a fee for copies of records,
provided that:
(1) The fee for copying records shall not exceed $0.25 per page for
photocopies not exceeding nine inches by 14 inches.
(2) The fee for copies of records not covered by Subsection C(1) shall
not exceed the actual reproduction cost, which is the average unit
cost for copying a record, excluding fixed costs of the city such as
operator salaries.
§ 129-7 ONEIDA CODE § 129-8
C:356
ARTICLE II
Retention and Disposition
§ 129-9. Adoption of Schedule MU-1.
Records Retention and Disposition Schedule MU-1, issued pursuant to
Article 57-A of the Arts and Cultural Affairs Law and containing legal
minimum retention periods for municipal government records, is hereby
adopted for use by all municipal officers in disposing of municipal
government records listed therein.
§ 129-10. Minimum retention period; criteria for disposal.
In accordance with Article 57-A:
A. Only those records will be disposed of that are described in Records
Retention and Disposition Schedule MU-1 after they have met the
minimum retention period prescribed therein.
B. Only those records will be disposed of that do not have sufficient
administrative, fiscal, legal or historical value to merit retention beyond
established time periods.
§ 129-9 CHARTER § 129-10
C:357
Chapter 132
REVENUE RECOVERY FEES
§ 132-1. Fee schedule.
The City of Oneida hereby adopts the following fee schedule in connection
with duly authorized revenue recovery measures:
Chapter 135
SECONDHAND DEALERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 116.
§ 135-1. Definitions. [Amended 4-7-1992 by Ord. No. 92-02]
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
SECONDHAND DEALER — Any person engaged in the business of
purchasing for the purpose of resale at secondhand any of the following
articles: bicycles; bicycle parts, equipment and accessories; jewelry; unset
jewels; precious stones; gold; silver; coins; tools; power tools; chain saws;
small household appliances; televisions; AM-FM, CB and other radios;
mobile telephones; sound recorders/players of whatever technology
employed, and apparatus associated with and recordings made or used
by same, including but not limited to magnetic tape recorders/players,
tapes, stereos, records, cassettes, compact players/discs, laser players/
discs, digital sound devices and recordings; sterling silverware; clocks;
watches; musical instruments, parts, accessories and equipment; motionpicture
or still cameras, employing film, video or other technology, and
related parts, accessories and equipment; developers, enlargers and other
photographic equipment; video and other electronic recorders, players and
related parts, accessories and equipment; typewriters and other word
A. Rate for first hour or less on scene:
(1) Light-duty rescue: $250.
(2) Heavy-duty rescue: $400.
(3) Industrial/HAZ-MAT: $900.
B. Rate for all additional time at scene: $100 per per hour, or such other
rate as may be fixed by the Common Council by amendment of this
chapter.
§ 129-10 ONEIDA CODE § 135-1
C:358
processing devices; calculators; copying machines; computers, monitors,
printers, program discs and related parts, accessories and equipment.
§ 135-2. License. [Amended 9-1-1987 by Ord. No. 87-8]
§ 135-3. Books and records; examination of premises.
A. Before any person shall engage in the business as a secondhand dealer
in the city, said person shall obtain a license to do so from the City
Clerk's office. Said license shall be valid, unless otherwise revoked, for
the calendar year in which the same is issued, and every said license
shall expire at midnight on December 31 of said year.
B. Application for a license shall be made in writing on a form supplied by
the city. Such form may require the name of the applicant, his place of
residence and business, his date of birth, type of goods, wares and
merchandise to be purchased and sold and such other information and
evidence of good character of the applicant as the city may reasonably
require.
C. The license fee under this chapter shall be established by resolution of
the Common Council. Such fee may thereafter be amended from time to
time by like resolution. [Amended 11-20-2012 by Ord. No. 12-05]
D. Where a secondhand dealer is engaged in business at more than one
location, an amendment to the original license shall be made.
E. A secondhand dealer's license shall not include, nor permit the
engaging in, the business of being a pawnbroker.
A. Every secondhand dealer shall keep permanent records, made at the
time of purchase, of any of the listed articles, including description
thereof and the name, address, age and, if not known to the dealer, a
general description of the person from whom and the day and hour
when such purchase was made. Said records shall be available for
inspection by any member of the Police Department. Said records shall
be entered in a substantially bound book from which pages cannot be
removed, of a suitable size. The entries therein shall be legibly written
in ink and in the English language and shall show the amount paid for
each article and the identifying number attached to each article in
accordance with the provision next following. No entry in said book
shall be altered, erased, obliterated or defaced.
B. Every secondhand dealer shall, at the time of making any purchase,
attach a properly numbered tag to or otherwise legibly number each
article bought.
C. Every secondhand dealer shall make out every weekday before 10:00
a.m., on forms provided by the city, a legible and correct copy of the
records required to be kept by Subsection A containing particulars of
all purchases of such articles made the preceding business day and
§ 135-1 CHARTER § 135-3
C:359
§ 135-4. Restriction on sale of secondhand goods.
No secondhand dealer shall sell or permit to be sold any article purchased
or received by him until seven days have elapsed after purchasing or
receiving said article and completion of the daily report required in
Subsection C of § 135-3 of this chapter.
§ 135-5. Display of chapter.
Every secondhand dealer shall display, in a conspicuous place within his
place of business, a copy of this chapter furnished by the Police Department.
§ 135-6. Penalties for offenses.
Any person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall be
punished as provided in § 1-14 of this Code. In addition to the penalties
imposed, the license of such person shall be canceled and revoked and
forfeited.
Chapter 139
SEWERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building code administration and
enforcement — See Ch. 33.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 64.
Mobile homes and mobile home parks — See
Ch. 92.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 155.
Zoning — See Ch. 190.
shall upon request make available a copy of such record to any member
of the Police Department.
D. Every secondhand dealer shall allow his place of business and articles
as listed herein of secondhand merchandise therein to be examined by
any member of the Police Department during normal business hours.
§ 135-3 ONEIDA CODE § 135-6
C:360
Part 1
[Adopted 12-21K-1e9n8w2o oAds SAartn.i ItIaIr yO Sf eCwhe. r3 D-1i6st Orifc tThe 1982 Code]
ARTICLE I
Sewer Rents
§ 139-1. Sewer rent charges generally; use of same.33
There is hereby established a scale of charges to be called "sewer rents"
which are hereby levied and assessed against every lot, parcel of land,
building or premises now or hereafter having a connection with that portion
of the sanitary sewer system of the Kenwood Sanitary Sewer District of
the City of Oneida, which conducts sewage waste to the City of Sherrill
municipal sewage treatment plant. Such rents shall be used for the payment
of principal and interest on the obligations issued or to be issued by the City
to finance the construction of the sanitary sewer system and any subsequent
additions to and improvements therein, for its share of the cost of operation
and maintenance of the City of Sherill sewage treatment plant, and the
cost of oversizing the City of Sherrill plant to accommodate the Kenwood
Sanitary Sewer District.
§ 139-2. Sewer rents to be based on water bills; sewer rents
constitute lien against property. [Amended 3-16-1982 by L.L. No.
2-1982; 6-17-2014 by Ord. No. 14-02]
Except as otherwise provided herein, such sewer rents shall be at a rate
to be fixed from time to time by the Common Council based or computed
on water consumed on the premises as determined by the water bill issued
bimonthly by the Sherrill-Kenwood Water District or quarterly by the
Oneida Water District. Where water rents are charged by said water district
to the occupant or occupants of any such premises other than the owner
thereof, such sewer rents shall be charged and billed initially to such
occupant or occupants and shall also be a lien against such premises to
secure the payment thereof to the City.
§ 139-2.1. Sewer rents established. [Amended last by L.L. No.
3-1996]
The sewer rents for the Kenwood Sanitary Sewer District are fixed at the
rate of $5.50 per 100 cubic feet of water consumption of customers in said
district.
§ 139-3. Power of Council to adjust rates in cases of inequities.
In the case of metered water consumers who contribute to the sewage
treatment system an amount of sewage substantially less than or
33.Editor's Note: Former Sec. 3-16-41, Sewer rents fixed, which immediately preceded this
section, was repealed 12-19-2000 by L.L. No. 6-2000. As last amended by L.L. No. 3-1996,
the sewer rents for the Kenwood Sanitary Sewer District are fixed at the rate of $5.50 per
100 cubic feet of water consumption of customers in said district.
§ 139-1 CHARTER § 139-3
C:361
substantially greater than the amount of water supplied to such consumer
by the Sherrill-Kenwood Water District, or in the case of owners or
occupants of property within the or to be issued by the City to finance
the construction of the Kenwood Sanitary Sewer District who are not
consumers of the Sherrill-Kenwood Water District but who are connected to
the sewage treatment system, the Common Council shall fix and determine
the sewer rents applicable to such real property upon such equitable bases
as may be determined by the Common Council.
§ 139-4. Special provisions for meters for property served by City of
Sherrill sewage treatment system.
At the option of the owner or occupant of real property being served by the
City of Sherrill sewage treatment system, such occupant or owner may, at
his own expense and subject to the approval of a City Engineer, install a
sewage meter measuring the amount of sewage contributed to the sewage
system. In such cases, the sewage rent applicable thereto shall be computed
on the basis of the sewage meter reading rather than the water meter
reading. The City Engineer shall investigate any situation where it appears
that the amount of discharge into the sewage treatment system exceeds the
amount of water supplied to the premises by the Sherrill-Kenwood Water
District. In making such investigation, the City Engineer may cause to be
installed at the City's expense a sewage measuring device. He may make
such other investigation as he shall deem necessary. If he shall report to
the Common Council that there is an excessive discharge into the sewage
treatment system, the owner or occupant of such property shall be charged
on the basis of such actual use of the sewage treatment system instead of
the water bill.
§ 139-5. Due date for bills; billing periods.
Sewer rents shall be due and payable at the City of Sherrill offices
bimonthly within 15 days after the end of each billing period. Such
bimonthly billing periods shall end on the last Monday of January, March,
May, July, September and November of each year.
§ 139-6. Interest on unpaid sewer rents; collection.
Sewer rents unpaid within such thirty-day period shall bear interest at the
rate of 10% from the end of the billing period. All sewer rents, plus accrued
interest, due and unpaid, as of December 1 of each year shall be added to,
assessed and levied as part of the real property tax of the City against the
premises served by such sewer connection, and shall be collected in the
same manner and at the same time as the general property tax assessed
against such premises.
§ 139-7. Right of City of Sherrill to make inspections.
Every person discharging sewage wastes into the sewage treatment system
shall permit the City Engineer of the City of Sherrill or his agents to
§ 139-3 ONEIDA CODE § 139-7
C:362
enter upon the premises at all reasonable times to determine the amount
of discharge into the system. If such permission be denied, the City may
discontinue sewage service to the property.
§ 139-7 CHARTER § 139-7
C:363

Part 2
[Adopted 12-21-1982 RAas tAerst A. InId O Cf hCahr.g 3e-s16 Of The 1982 Code]
ARTICLE II
Collection
§ 139-8. Sewage disposal charges; collection. [Amended last
12-20-1983 by L.L. No. 5-1983]
Except as herein otherwise provided in this section, the initial rates, fees
and other charges (herein sometimes called the "sewage disposal charges"
or "sewer rents") for use of and for the services and facilities furnished or to
be furnished by the sewage disposal system, to be paid by the owner, tenant,
or occupant of each lot or parcel of land which may be connected with or
may use the sewage disposal system, by or through any part of the sewer
system of the City, shall be based or computed upon the quantity of water
used on or about such lots or parcels of land as determined by gauging or
metering, and shall be as follows:
A. Sewage disposal charges.
(1) The sewage disposal charges, for other than significant industrial
users, to be paid by the owner, tenant or occupant of each lot or
parcel which may be connected with or may use the sewage
disposal system and to whom a bill shall be rendered for water
furnished by the Water Department of the City of Oneida or whose
sewage is otherwise metered or measured shall be as follows:
$5.50 plus $2.50 per one hundred cubic feet (rounded to the
nearest hundred cubic feet) of sewage discharged to the sewer
system for each quarter based upon the amount of water consumed
or as measured by a sewage meter. A sewage meter shall be
installed at the request of either the consumer or the City
Engineer's office, the expense thereof to be borne by the consumer.
[Amended 4-16-2002 by L.L. No. 1-200234]
(2) Significant industrial user charges shall be according to the
charges in Part 3 of this chapter.
B. Water furnished by any other water plant and entering the sewer
system.
(1) In the event that metered water shall be furnished by any plant or
system other than the waterworks system of the City of Oneida for
use on any such lot or parcel, bills for sewage disposal charges
shall be computed on the basis of what the water bill would be if the
same quantity of water had been furnished by the Water
Department of the City.
34.Editor's Note: This local law provided that it take effect 6-1-2002.
§ 139-8 CHARTER § 139-8
C:365
(2) In the event that unmetered water shall be furnished by any plant
or system (including any privately owned plant) other than the
waterworks system of the City for use on any such lot or parcel, the
owner, tenant or occupant of such lot or parcel shall install at his
own expense a meter acceptable to the Superintendent of the
Department of Water for measuring the quantity of water so used,
and bills for sewage disposal charges shall be rendered quarterly
and such bills shall be computed on the basis of what the quarterly
water bill would be if the same quantity of water should be
furnished by the waterworks system of the City. Pending the
installation of such meter, the Superintendent of the Department of
Water shall estimate the quantity of water used on such lot or
parcel and render bills to the owner, tenant or occupant for sewage
disposal charges computed on the basis of what the quarterly water
bill would be if such estimated quantity of water should be
furnished by the waterworks system of the City.
(3) Charges paid by City and other public bodies or agencies. There
shall be no free services rendered by the sewage disposal system to
any other political subdivision or any department, agency or
instrumentality thereof, and if the state or federal government shall
avail itself of the services and facilities of the sewage disposal
system, it shall pay for the use of such services and facilities at the
established rates.
C. Industrial use of water:
(1) In cases where the character of sewage from any manufacturing or
industrial plant, building or premises shall be such as to impose a
burden upon the sewage disposal system in addition to the burden
imposed by the average sewage entering the sewer system of the
City, such additional sewage disposal charges shall be made
therefor as the Common Council shall deem to be fair and equitable
to meet the additional cost of collection, treatment and disposal of
such sewage; or the Common Council may, if it deems it advisable,
compel the owner, tenant or occupant of such manufacturing or
industrial plant, building or premises to treat such sewage in such
manner as shall be specified by the Common Council before
discharging such sewage into the sewer system of the City.
(2) In the case of an industry where a substantial amount of the water
purchased is consumed and not discharged into the municipal
sewer system, the customer, with the consent of the Common
Council, may elect to install a sewage flow meter at the expense of
said customer. Said meter shall be of a type acceptable to the City
and said customer shall be billed separately for a sewage disposal
charge computed upon the flow through such meter and based
upon the same volumetric rates as hereinbefore set forth.
D. Collection of sewage disposal charges:
§ 139-8 ONEIDA CODE § 139-8
C:366
§ 139-9. Nonapplicability to Kenwood Sanitary Sewer District.
The sewage disposal charges herein referred to have no application to the
Kenwood Sanitary Sewer District of the City of Oneida, which conducts
sewage wastes to the City of Sherrill municipal sewage treatment plant.
§ 139-10. Use of charges and rents.
Such sewage disposal charges and rents shall be used for the payment
of principal and interest on the obligations issued or to be issued by the
City to finance the construction of the sewage treatment plant and any
subsequent improvements therein and its share of the cost of operation and
maintenance of said sewage treatment plant.
(1) The sewage disposal charges shall apply to each lot or parcel of
land which may be connected with or may use the sewer system of
the City. In all cases where water is furnished by the waterworks
system of the City, the amount of sewage disposal charges shall be
included in the bills for water rendered by the City; provided,
however, that each such bill shall show separately the amount of
the sewage disposal charges and the amount of the bill for water. In
all cases where water is furnished by any plant or system (including
any privately owned plant) other than the waterworks system of the
City, bills shall be rendered for the amount of such sewage disposal
charges in the same manner as bills are rendered for water
furnished by the waterworks system of the City.
(2) If any bill for such sewage disposal charges with respect to any
premises connected with the waterworks system of the City or any
other plant or system shall not be paid within 30 days from the
rendition of such bill, the City or the person furnishing water for
use on such premises shall discontinue furnishing water for use on
such premises and shall disconnect the same from the waterworks
system of the City or from such other plant or system and the City
shall proceed forthwith to recover the amount of such sewage
disposal charges with a penalty at the rate of 10% in such lawful
manner as it may deem advisable.35
(3) All sewer rents plus accrued penalties due and unpaid as of
December 1 of each year shall be added to, assessed and levied as
part of the real property tax of the City against the premises served
by such sewer connection, and it shall be collected in the same
manner and at the same time as the general property tax assessed
against such property.
35.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions).
§ 139-8 CHARTER § 139-10
C:367

Part 3
[Adopted 7-2-1S9e9w6e rB Uy sOerd. No. 96-05]
ARTICLE III
In General
§ 139-11. Title.
For brevity and ease of communication, this Part 3 may be cited as the "City
of Oneida Sewer Use Law."
§ 139-12. General purpose.
The general purpose of this Part 3 is the following: to provide for efficient,
economic, environmentally safe, and legal operation of the City of Oneida
publicly owned treatment works (POTW).
§ 139-13. Specific purposes.
The specific purposes of this Part 3 are the following:
A. To prevent the introduction of substances into the POTW that will:
(1) Interfere with the POTW in any way;
(2) Pass through the POTW to the state's waters and cause
contravention of standards for those waters or cause violation of
the POTW's SPDES permit;
(3) Increase the cost or otherwise hamper the disposal of POTW sludge
and/or residuals;
(4) Endanger municipal employees;
(5) Cause air pollution, or groundwater pollution, directly or indirectly;
(6) Cause, directly or indirectly, any public nuisance condition.
B. To prevent new sources of infiltration and inflow and, as much as
possible, eliminate existing sources of infiltration and inflow.
C. To assure that new sewers and connections are properly constructed.
D. To provide for equitable distribution to all users of the POTW of all
costs, associated with sewage transmission, treatment, and residuals
disposal, and to provide for the collection of such costs.
§ 139-11 CHARTER § 139-13
C:369

ARTICLE IV
Definitions
§ 139-14. Defined terms. [Amended 1-7-1997 by Ord. No. 97-01]
Unless otherwise stated in the section where the term is used in this Part
3, the meaning of terms used in this Part 3 shall be as stated below.
When not inconsistent with the context, the present tense shall include the
future, and words used in the plural shall include the singular and vice
versa. Furthermore, a masculine pronoun shall include the feminine. Shall
is mandatory; may is permissive.
ABNORMAL SEWAGE — Sewage whose concentration of one or more
characteristics of normal sewage exceeds the maximum concentrations of
the characteristics of normal sewage. See "normal sewage."
ACT or THE ACT — The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known
as the Clean Water Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq., as may be
amended.
ADMINISTRATOR — The regional administrator of the United States
Environmental Protection Agency (USEPA), Region 2.
AMMONIA — The result obtained, using an approved laboratory procedure,
to determine the quantity of ammonia in a sample, expressed as milligrams
of nitrogen per liter.
APPLICANT — That person who makes application for any permit. The
applicant may be an owner, new or old, or his agent.
APPROVAL AUTHORITY — The USEPA, or the New York State Department
of Environmental Conservation (NYSDEC), in the event the NYSDEC is
delegated approval authority responsibility by the USEPA.
APPROVED LABORATORY PROCEDURE — The procedures defined as
"standard methods" in this article, or other procedures approved by the City
Engineer, for flow measurement or determination of the concentration of
pollutants or their surrogates in waters, wastewaters, and/or sludges.
ASTM DENOTING AMERICAN SOCIETY FOR TESTING AND MATERIALS
— The latest edition of any ASTM specification, when stipulated in this Part
3.
AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE OF THE INDUSTRIAL USER — An
authorized representative of the industrial user may be:
A principal executive officer of at least the level of vice president, if the
industrial user is a corporation;
A.
A general partner or proprietor, if the industrial user is a partnership or
proprietorship, respectively;
B.
A duly authorized representative of the individual designated above,
if such representative is responsible for the overall operation of the
facilities from which the indirect discharge originates.
C.
§ 139-14 CHARTER § 139-14
C:371
BOD (denoting "biochemical oxygen demand") — The result obtained when
using an approved laboratory procedure to determine the quantity of
oxygen utilized in the aerobic biochemical oxidation of organic matter or in
a sample, expressed in milligrams per liter.
BUILDER — Any person who undertakes to construct a building or any part
of a building, either under contract or for resale.
BUILDING DRAIN — That part of the lowest horizontal piping of a building
drainage system which receives the discharge from soil, waste, and other
drainage pipes inside the building walls, and conveys it to the building
lateral, which begins five feet outside the inner face of the building wall.
CATEGORICAL INDUSTRIAL USER — See "user, categorical industrial."
CHLORINE DEMAND — The result obtained when using an approved
laboratory procedure to determine the difference between the amount of
chlorine added to a sample and the amount of chlorine remaining in the
sample at the end of a specified contact time at room temperature,
expressed in milligrams per liter.
CITY — The City of Oneida, incorporated on March 28, 1901.
CITY ENGINEER — The Engineer for the City or his authorized agent or
representative.
COD (denoting "chemical oxygen demand") — The result obtained when
using an approved laboratory procedure to measure the oxygen
requirement of that portion of matter, in a sample, that is susceptible to
oxidation, by a specific chemical oxidant, expressed in milligrams per liter.
COLOR — The optical density at the visual wave length of maximum
absorption, relative to distilled water. One hundred percent transmittance
is equivalent to zero (0.0) optical density.
COMBINED SEWER — See "sewer, combined."
COMBINED WASTE — A wastewater containing surface water or
stormwater.
COMPOSITE SAMPLE — The sample resulting from the combination of
individual samples of wastewater taken at selected intervals, for a specified
time period. The individual samples may have equal volumes or the
individual volumes may be proportioned to the flow at the time of sampling.
CONNECTION — Attachment of one user to a sewer. See "extension."
CONNECTION CHARGE (TAP FEE) — The one-time application fee to offset
City of Oneida expenses to process an application for a connection of a
building/street lateral to the public sewer. The fee also covers plan review,
permit issuance, street repair cost, and inspection costs. The fee may be
scaled to the amount of work involved, or to the size of the public sewer
involved.
CONTRIBUTORY AREA — The legally defined bounds of real property from
which wastewater may be discharged into the POTW. The bounds shall be
§ 139-14 ONEIDA CODE § 139-14
C:372
established, altered, changed, modified, reduced, enlarged, combined, or
consolidated by action of the City of Oneida Common Council.
CONTROL AUTHORITY — The term shall refer to "approval authority", or
to the City Engineer when the City has an approved pretreatment program
under the provisions of 40 CFR 403.11.
CONTROL MANHOLE — A manhole accessible to the control authority in or
upstream of the street lateral, such that samples collected from the manhole
represent the discharge to the POTW.
CONVENTIONAL POLLUTANT — A pollutant that the POTW treatment
plant was designed to treat, defined in accordance with the Act.
COOLING WATER — The water discharged from any system of
condensation, air conditioning, refrigeration, or other sources. It shall
contain no polluting substances which would produce COD or suspended
solids in excess of five milligrams per liter, or toxic substances, as limited
elsewhere in this Part 3.
COUNTY — Madison County, the county in which the City of Oneida is
located.
DEVELOPER — Any person who subdivides land for the purpose of
constructing, or causing to be constructed, buildings for which wastewater
disposal facilities are required.
DIRECT DISCHARGE — The discharge of treated or untreated wastewater
directly to the waters of the State of New York. (For reference, see "indirect
discharge.")
DOMESTIC WASTES — See "sewage, domestic."
DRY SEWERS — The sanitary sewer installed in anticipation of future
connection to a POTW but which is not used, in the meantime, for transport
of storm or sanitary sewage.
EASEMENT — An acquired legal right for the specific use of land owned by
others.
EFFLUENT — Wastewater after some degree of treatment, flowing out of
any treatment device or facilities.
END OF PIPE — For the purpose of determining compliance with limitations
prescribed by Article XIII, end of pipe shall mean the control manhole,
provided the samples collected from the control manhole are representative
of the discharge to the POTW.
END OF PIPE CONCENTRATION — The concentration of a substance in a
sample of wastewater at end of pipe.
END OF PROCESS CONCENTRATION — See "National Categorical
Pretreatment Standard."
EPA, USEPA or UNITED STATES ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION
AGENCY — The agency of the federal government charged with the
administration and enforcement of federal environmental laws, rules, and
§ 139-14 CHARTER § 139-14
C:373
regulations. Also may be used as a designation for the administrator or
other duly authorized official of this agency.
EXTENSION — Attachment of a sewer line, with more than one user, to an
existing sewer line.
FACILITY — All buildings, other structures, grounds and contiguous
property at any locations related to or connected with a user at the user's
location.
FLOATABLE OIL — Oil, grease, or fat in a physical state such that it
will separate by gravity from wastewater by treatment in a wastewater
treatment facility.
FLOW RATE — The quantity of liquid or waste that flows in a certain period
of time.
FORCE MAIN — A pipeline carrying flow under pressure.
GARBAGE — The solid wastes from the preparation, cooking, and
dispensing of food, from the handling, storage, and sale of produce, and
from the packaging and canning of food.
GRAB SAMPLE — A single sample of wastewater representing the physical,
chemical, and biological characteristics of the wastewater at one point and
time. Sample duration must not exceed 15 minutes.
GREASE or FATS — Any material which is measured by analytical methods
as defined and regulated by the New York State Department of Health
Environmental Laboratory Approval Program.
ICS FORM — The form used by the NYSDEC to survey industries to perform
and update the Industrial Chemical Survey.
INDIRECT DISCHARGE — The introduction of wastewater into a POTW
for treatment and ultimate discharge of the treated effluent to the state's
waters. (For reference, see "direct discharge.")
INDUSTRIAL — Pertaining to industry, manufacturing, commerce, trade,
business, or institution, and is distinguished from domestic or residential.
INDUSTRIAL CHEMICAL SURVEY (ICS) — The survey of industries in New
York State, initiated by the NYSDEC, to determine chemical usage and
storage by those industries.
INDUSTRIAL USER — See "user, industrial."
INDUSTRIAL WASTES — The liquid or liquid-carried solid, liquid and/or
gaseous waste from industrial manufacturing processes, trade, service,
utility, or business, as distinct from sanitary sewage.
INFILTRATION — Water, other than wastewater, that enters a sewer system
(including building drains) from the ground through such means as
defective pipes, pipe joints, connections, or manholes. Infiltration does not
include, and is distinguished from, inflow. Infiltration is inadvertent, that is,
not purposely designed or built into the sewer or drain.
§ 139-14 ONEIDA CODE § 139-14
C:374
INFLOW — Water, other than wastewater, that enters a sewer system
(including building drains) from sources, such as but not limited to roof
leaders, cellar drains, area drains, drains from springs and swampy areas,
manhole covers, cross connections between storm sewers and sanitary
sewers, catch basins, cooling towers, stormwaters, foundation drains,
swimming pools, surface runoff, street wash waters, or drainage. Inflow
does not include, and is distinguished from, infiltration.
INFLUENT — Wastewater, raw or partly treated, flowing into any sewage
treatment device or facilities.
INTERCEPTING SEWER — A sewer which receives dry weather flow
sanitary sewers and/or additional predetermined quantities of combined
waste and conducts such flow to a plant for treatment or disposal.
INTERFERENCE — A discharge which, alone or in conjunction with
discharges from other sources:
LATERAL, BUILDING — The sewer extension from the building drain to the
street lateral or other place of wastewater disposal.
LATERAL, STREET — The sewer extension from the public sewer to the
property line.
LICENSED HAULER — A septage waste hauler licensed by the NYSDEC in
accordance with 6 NYCRR Part 364 to transport septage and other wastes
to POTW's for disposal.
NATIONAL CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARD or
CATEGORICAL STANDARD — Any regulation containing pollutant
discharge limits promulgated by the EPA in accordance with Section 307(B)
Inhibits or disrupts the POTW, its treatment processes or operations, or
its sludge processes, use or disposal; and
A.
Therefore is a cause of a violation of any requirement of the City of
Oneida POTW's SPDES permit (including an increase in the magnitude
or duration of a violation) or of the prevention of sewage sludge use
or disposal by the POTW in accordance with the following statutory
provisions and regulations or permits issued thereunder (or more
stringent state or local regulations):
(1) Section 405 of the Clean Water Act;
The Solid Waste Disposal Act (SWDA) (including Title II, more
commonly referred to as the "Resource Conservation and Recovery
Act," RCRA), and including state regulations contained in any state
sludge management plan prepared pursuant to Subtitle D or the
SWDA);
(2)
B.
C. Clean Air Act;
D. Toxic Substance Control Act; and
E. Marine Protection Research and Sanctuaries Act.
§ 139-14 CHARTER § 139-14
C:375
and (C) of the Act (22 U.S.C. § 1347), which applies to a specific category of
industrial users. These standards apply at the end of the categorical process
("end of process").
NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (NPDES)
PERMIT — A permit issued pursuant to Section 402 of the Act (33 U.S.C.
§ 1342).
NATIONAL PROHIBITIVE DISCHARGE STANDARD or PROHIBITIVE
DISCHARGE STANDARD — Any regulation developed under the authority
of Section 307(B) of the Act, and 40 CFR, Section 403.5.
NATURAL OUTLET — Any outlet, including storm sewers and combined
sewer overflows, to state's waters.
NEW OWNER — That individual or entity who purchased property within
the service area of the City after the effective date of this Part 3.
NEW SOURCE — Any source, the construction of which is commenced after
the publication of the proposed regulation prescribing a Section 307(C) (33
U.S.C. § 1317) categorical pretreatment standard which will be applicable
to such source, if such standard is thereafter promulgated.
NEW USER — A discharger to the POTW who commences discharge after
the effective date of this Part 3.
NORMAL SEWAGE — See "sewage, normal."
NUISANCE — The use or lack of use of the POTW in such a manner so as to
endanger life or health, give offense to the senses, or obstruct or otherwise
interfere with the reasonable use or maintenance of the POTW.
OLD OWNER — That individual or entity who owns or owned a property,
within the service area of the POTW, purchased prior to the effective date of
this Part 3, or who inherited the property at any time and intends to sell the
property, or has sold the property to a new owner, also the agent of the old
owner.
OTHER WASTES — Garbage (shredded or unshredded), refuse, wood, egg
shells, coffee grounds, sawdust, shavings, bark, sand, lime, ashes, and all
other discarded matter not normally present in sewage or industrial wastes.
Also, the discarded matter not normally present in sewage or industrial
waste.
PASS THROUGH — The discharge which exits the City of Oneida POTW
into waters of the state in quantities, which, alone or in conjunction with
discharges from other sources, is a cause of a violation of any requirement
of the POTW'S SPDES permit (including an increase in the magnitude or
duration of a violation).
PERMIT — A temporary revocable written document allowing use of the
POTW for specified wastes over a limited period of time containing sampling
locations and reporting frequencies, and requiring other actions as
authorized by this Part 3.
§ 139-14 ONEIDA CODE § 139-14
C:376
PERSON — Any individual, public or private corporation, political
subdivision, federal, state, or local agency or entity, association, trust,
estate or any other legal entity whatsoever.
pH — The logarithm (base 10) of the reciprocal of the weight of hydrogen
ions, in gram moles per liter of solution. A pH value of 7.0, the pH scale
midpoint, represents neutrality. Values above 7.0 represent alkaline
conditions. Values below 7.0 represent acid conditions.
PHOSPHORUS, TOTAL — See "total phosphorus."
POLLUTANT — Any material placed into or onto the state's waters, lands
and/or airs, which interferes with the beneficial use of that water, land and/
or air by any living thing at any time.
POLLUTION — The manmade or man-induced alteration of the chemical,
physical, biological, and/or radiological integrity of the state's waters, lands
and/or airs resulting from the introduction of a pollutant into these media.
PREMISES — Any parcel of real property including land, improvements or
appurtenances, as buildings, grounds, etc.
PRETREATMENT (TREATMENT) — The reduction of the amount of
pollutants, the elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of
pollutant properties in wastewater to a less harmful state prior to or in lieu
of discharging or otherwise introducing such pollutants into a POTW. The
reduction or alteration can be achieved by physical, chemical, or biological
process, process changes, or by other means, except as prohibited by 40
CFR, Section 403.6(D).
PRETREATMENT REQUIREMENTS — Any substantive or procedural
requirement related to pretreatment, other than a national pretreatment
standard imposed on an industrial user.
PRETREATMENT STANDARD or NATIONAL PRETREATMENT STANDARD
— Any categorical standard or prohibitive discharge standard.
PRIORITY POLLUTANTS — The most recently revised or updated list,
developed by the EPA, in accordance with the Act.
PROHIBITIVE DISCHARGE STANDARD — See "national prohibitive
discharge standard."
PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE — The wastes from the preparation,
cooking, and dispensing of food that have been shredded to such a degree
that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally
prevailing in public sewers, and with no particle having a dimension greater
than 1/2 inch in any dimension.
POTW TREATMENT PLANT — That portion of the POTW designed to
provide treatment to wastewater, and to treat sludge and residuals derived
from such treatment.
PUBLICLY OWNED TREATMENT WORKS (POTW) — A treatment works,
as defined by Section 212 of the Act (33 U.S.C § 1292), which is owned, in
this instance, by the City of Oneida. This definition includes any sewers and
§ 139-14 CHARTER § 139-14
C:377
appurtenances that transport wastewater to the POTW treatment plant, but
does not include pipes, sewers, or other conveyances not connected directly
or indirectly to a facility providing treatment.
PUBLIC SEWER — See "sewer, private."
RECEIVING WATERS — A natural watercourse or body of water (usually
waters of the state) into which treated or untreated sewage is discharged.
RECORDS — Includes, but is not limited to, any printed, typewritten,
handwritten or otherwise recorded matter of whatever character (including
paper or electronic media), including but not limited to, letters, files,
memorandum, directives, notes and notebooks, correspondence,
descriptions, telephone call slips, photographs, permits, applications,
reports, compilations, films, graphs and inspection reports. For the
purposes of this Part 3, "records" shall mean records of and relating to
waste generation, reuse and disposal, and shall include records of usage of
raw materials.
ROOF DRAIN — A drain installed to receive water collecting on the surface
of a roof for disposal.
SEPTAGE — All liquids and solids in and removed from septic tanks, holding
tanks, cesspools, or approved type of chemical toilets, including but not
limited to those serving private residences, commercial establishments,
institutions, and industries. Also sludge from small sewage treatment
plants. Septage shall not have been contaminated with substances of
concern or priority pollutants.
SEPTIC TANK — A private domestic sewage treatment system consisting
of an underground tank (with suitable baffling), constructed in accordance
with any and/or all local and state requirements.
SEWAGE — A combination of the water-carried wastes from residences,
business buildings, institutions, and industrial establishments, and such
ground, surface, and stormwater as may be inadvertently present. The
admixture of sewage, as defined above, with industrial wastes and other
wastes shall also be considered sewage, within the meaning of this
definition.
SEWAGE, DOMESTIC (DOMESTIC WASTE) — Liquid wastes from the
noncommercial preparation, cooking, and handling of food, liquid wastes
containing human excrement and similar matter from the sanitary
conveniences in dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial buildings, and
institutions, or liquid wastes from clothes washing and/or floor/wall
washing. Therefore, domestic sewage includes both black water (e.g.,
toilets) and gray water (e.g., sinks and showers). (See "sewage, sanitary.")
SEWAGE, NORMAL —
Sewage, industrial wastes, or other wastes, which show, by analysis, the
following characteristics:
B.O.D. (five-day): 2,090 pounds per million gallons (250 milligrams
per liter), or less.
(1)
A.
§ 139-14 ONEIDA CODE § 139-14
C:378
SEWAGE, SANITARY — Liquid wastes from the sanitary conveniences of
dwellings (including apartment houses and hotels), office buildings,
factories, or institutions, and free from stormwater, surface water,
industrial, and other wastes. See "domestic wastes."
SEWAGE TREATMENT PLANT (WATER POLLUTION CONTROL PLANT) —
See "POTW treatment plant."
SEWAGE, UNUSUAL STRENGTH OR CHARACTER — Sewage which has
characteristics greater than those of normal sewage and /or which contains
substances of concern.
SEWER — A pipe or conduit for carrying or transporting sewage.
SEWER, COMBINED — A sewer designed to receive and transport both
surface runoff and sewage.
SEWER, PRIVATE — A sewer either on private property or in a public street
which has not been constructed by nor is controlled by a public agency.
SEWER, PUBLIC — A sewer in which all abutting property owners have
equal rights, and the use of which is controlled by the City.
SEWER, SANITARY — A sewer which carries sewage, and to which
stormwater, surface water, and groundwaters are not intentionally
admitted.
SEWER, STORM (STORM DRAIN) — A sewer which carries stormwater
and surface waters and drainage, but excludes sewage and industrial
wastewaters, other than cooling waters and other unpolluted waters.
Suspended solids: 2,500 pounds per million gallons, (300
milligrams per liter), or less.
(2)
Phosphorus: 42 pounds per million gallons (five milligrams per
liter), or less.
(3)
Ammonia: 83 pounds per million gallons (10 milligrams per liter),
or less.
(4)
Total Kjeldahl nitrogen: 83 pounds per million (10 milligrams per
liter), or less.
(5)
Chlorine demand: 209 pounds per million gallons (25 milligrams
per liter), or less.
(6)
Chemical oxygen demand: 2,920 pounds per million gallons (350
milligrams per liter), or less.
(7)
Oil and grease: 830 pounds per million gallons (100 milligrams per
liter), or less.
(8)
In spite of satisfying one or more of these characteristics, if the sewage
also contains substances of concern, it may not be considered normal
sewage.
B.
§ 139-14 CHARTER § 139-14
C:379
SEWERAGE SYSTEM (ALSO POTW) — All facilities for collecting,
regulating, pumping, and transporting wastewater to and away from the
POTW treatment plant.
SEWERAGE SURCHARGE — The demand payment for the use of a public
sewer and/or sewage treatment plant for the handling of any sewage,
industrial wastes, or other wastes accepted for admission thereto in which
the characteristics thereof exceed the maximum values of such
characteristics in normal sewage. (See "volume charge.")
SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER — See "user, significant industrial."
SIGNIFICANT NONCOMPLIANCE (SNC) — A user is in significant
noncompliance if its violation(s) meet(s) one or more of the following
criteria:
Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined here as
those, in which 66% or more of all of the measurements taken during
a six-month period exceed (by any magnitude) the daily maximum limit
or average limit for the same pollutant parameter;
A.
Technical review criteria (TRC) violations, defined here as those, in
which 33% or more of all of the measurements for each pollutant
parameter taken during a six-month period equal or exceed the product
of the daily maximum limits multiplied by the applicable TRC (TRC
= 1.4 for BOD, TSS, fats, oil and grease; TRC = 1.2 for all other
pollutants);
B.
Any other violation of a pretreatment effluent limit (daily maximum
or long-term average) that the Superintendent determines has caused,
alone or in combination with other discharges, interference or passthrough
(including endangering the health of POTW personnel or the
general public);
C.
Any discharge of a pollutant that has caused imminent endangerment
to human health, welfare or to the environment or has resulted in the
City Engineer's exercise of his/her emergency authority under Article
XIII of this Part 3;
D.
Failure to meet, within 90 days after the schedule date, a compliance
schedule milestone contained in a local control mechanism or
enforcement order for starting construction, completing construction,
or attaining final compliance;
E.
Failure to provide, within 30 days after the due date, required reports
such as baseline monitoring reports, ninety-day compliance reports,
periodic self-monitoring reports, and reports on compliance with
compliance schedules;
F.
G. Failure to report accurately any noncompliance; and
§ 139-14 ONEIDA CODE § 139-14
C:380
SLUG — A substantial deviation from normal rates of discharge or
constituent concentration (See "normal sewage.") sufficient to cause
interference. In any event, a discharge which, in concentration of any
constituent or in quantity of flow, exceeds, for any period of duration
longer than 15 minutes, more than five times the average twenty-four-hour
concentration or flow during normal user operations, shall constitute a slug.
STANDARD INDUSTRIAL CLASSIFICATION (SIC) — A classification
pursuant to the Standard Industrial Classification Manual issued by the
Executive Office of the President, Office of Management and Budget, 1972,
and subsequent revisions.
STANDARD METHODS — Procedures contained in the latest edition of
Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater, published
by the American Public Health Association, procedures established by the
Administrator, pursuant to Section 304(G) of the Act and contained in 40
CFR, Part 136, and amendments thereto, (If 40 CFR, Part 136, does not
include a sampling or analytical technique for the pollutant in question,
then procedures set forth in EPA publication, Sampling and Analysis
Procedures for Screening of Industrial Effluents for Priority Pollutants,
April 1977, and amendments thereto, shall be used.), any other procedure
approved by the Administrator, or any other procedure approved by the City
Engineer, whichever is the most conservative.
STATE — State of New York.
STATE'S WATERS — See "waters of the state."
STORMWATER — Any flow occurring during or following any form of
natural precipitation; also the flow resulting therefrom.
SUBSTANCES OF CONCERN — Those compounds which the New York
State Department of Environmental Conservation has determined may be
harmful to man or the environment.
SUMP PUMP — A mechanism used for removing water from a sump or wet
well.
SUSPENDED SOLIDS — The result obtained, using approved laboratory
procedures to determine the dry weight of solids, in a sample, that either
float on the surface of, or are in suspension, or are settleable, and can be
removed from the sample by filtration, expressed in milligrams per liter.
TOTAL KJELDAHL NITROGEN (TKN) — The result obtained, using an
approved laboratory procedure, to determine the quantity of ammonia in
a sample and released during the acid digestion of organic nitrogen
compounds, expressed as milligrams of nitrogen per liter.
TOTAL PHOSPHORUS — The result obtained, using an approved laboratory
procedure, to determine the total quantity of orthophosphate, in a sample of
Any other violation which the Superintendent determines will adversely
affect the implementation or operation of the local pretreatment
program.
H.
§ 139-14 CHARTER § 139-14
C:381
wastewater, following the hydrolysis of phosphorus compounds, expressed
as milligrams of phosphorus per liter of sample.
TOXIC SUBSTANCES — Any substance, whether gaseous, liquid, or solid,
that when discharged to a public sewer in sufficient quantities may be
hazardous to POTW operation and maintenance personnel, tend to interfere
with any biological sewage treatment process, or to constitute a hazard
to recreation in the receiving waters, due to the effluent from a sewage
treatment plant or overflow point. Any pollutant or combination of
pollutants listed as toxic in regulations promulgated by the EPA under
provisions of CWA 307(A), or other Acts.
USER — Any person who contributes, causes, or permits the contribution of
wastewater into the POTW.
USER, CATEGORICAL INDUSTRIAL (CIU) — An industrial user of the
POTW that is subject to Categorical Pretreatment standards under 40 CFR
403.6 and 40 CFR Chapter I, Subchapter N.
USER, EXISTING — A discharger to the POTW who is discharging on or
before the effective date of this Part 3.
USER, INDUSTRIAL — A discharger to the POTW who discharges
nondomestic wastewaters.
USER, NEW — A discharger to the POTW who initiates discharge after the
effective date of this Part 3.
USER, SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL (SIU) — An industrial user of the City of
Oneida POTW who is:
VOLUME CHARGE (USER CHARGE) — The demand sewer use charge
which is based, in part or wholly, on the volume of normal sewage
discharged into the POTW (there may be surcharges, as provided for in
Article XII). The volume charge shall be based on a specific cost per 100
cubic feet or per 1,000 gallons. The specific charge shall be subject to
approval by the City of Oneida Common Council. The moneys so obtained
shall be used for current operation and maintenance, for retirement of
bonded indebtedness, and for finding of capital projects of the POTW. The
A. CIU;
Except as provided in 40 CFR 403.3(t)(2), any other industrial user that
discharges an average of 25,000 gallons per day or more of process
wastewater (excluding sanitary, noncontact cooling and boiler
blowdown wastewater) to the POTW;
B.
Except as provided in 40 CPR 403.3(t)(2), any other industrial user
that contributes a process waste stream which makes up 5% or more
average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the POTW
treatment plant;
C.
Any other industrial user that the permittee designates as having a
reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW's operation or for
violating a pretreatment standard or requirement.
D.
§ 139-14 ONEIDA CODE § 139-14
C:382
basis of volume charge calculations shall be made available to the public, on
demand, as provided in Article XIV. The volume charge shall be recalculated
annually, as well as the surcharge rates.
WASTEWATER — The liquid and water-carried industrial or domestic
wastewaters from dwellings, commercial establishments industrial
facilities, and institutions, together with any groundwater, surface water,
and stormwater that may be present, whether treated or untreated, which
is contributed into or permitted to enter the POTW.
WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT — A permit as set forth in Article XII
of this Part 3.
WASTEWATER, UNUSUAL STRENGTH OR CHARACTER — See "sewage,
unusual strength or character."
WATERS OF THE STATE (STATE'S WATERS) — All streams, lakes, ponds,
marshes, watercourses, waterways, wells, springs, reservoirs, aquifers,
irrigation systems, drainage systems, and all other bodies or accumulations
of water, surface or underground, natural or artificial, public or private,
which are contained within, flow through, or border upon the state or any
portion thereof.
§ 139-15. Abbreviations.
The following abbreviations shall have the designated meanings:
ANSI American National Standards Institute
ASTM American Society for Testing and Materials
AWWA American Water Works Association
BOD Biochemical oxygen demand
CFR Code of Federal Regulations
CPLR Code of Public Law and Rules
COD Chemical oxygen demand
CWA Clean Water Act
EPA Environmental Protection Agency
ELAP Environmental Laboratory Approval Program
L Liter
mg Milligram
mg/l Milligrams per liter
NCPI National Clay Pipe Institute
NPDES National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System
NYSDEC New York State Department of Environmental Conservation
NYSDOH New York State Department of Health
NYSDOT New York State Department of Transportation
p Total Phosphorous
§ 139-14 CHARTER § 139-15
C:383
PSI Pounds per square inch
POTW Publicly owned treatment works
PPM Parts per million, weight basis
SIC Standard Industrial Classification
SPDES State Pollutant Discharge Elimination System
SWDA Solid Waste Disposal Act, 42 U.S.C. § 690 L et seq.
TSS Total suspended solids
U.S.C. United State Code of Laws
USEPA United State Environmental Protection Agency
§ 139-16. Undefined terms.
Terms not defined in this article, or terms found to be ambiguous or
improperly defined in this article, shall be defined by the Act, or regulations
pursuant thereto.
§ 139-15 ONEIDA CODE § 139-16
C:384
ARTICLE V
Use of Public Sewers Required
§ 139-17. Deposit of objectionable waste prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit, or permit to be
deposited, in any unsanitary manner, on public or private property, within
the City or in any area under the jurisdiction of said municipality, any human
or animal excrement, garbage, or objectionable waste. Also, no person shall
discharge domestic sewage onto the surface of the ground or discharge it
in a way that permits it to come to the surface of the ground.
§ 139-18. Connection of private sewage system to storm sewer
prohibited.
No person shall connect a private sewage system so that sewage flows
into a storm sewer or into a drain intended exclusively for stormwater. No
connection shall be made to an intercepting sewer system in a location as to
cause flow to the receiving stream rather than the sewage treatment plant.
§ 139-19. Discharge of sewage into well prohibited.
No person shall discharge sewage into a well.
§ 139-20. Discharge of polluted water prohibited.
It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet, within incorporated
City boundaries, or in any area under the jurisdiction of the said
municipality, any wastewater or other polluted waters, except where
suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with subsequent
provisions of this Part 3.
§ 139-21. Restrictions on issuance of building permit.
No property owner, builder, or developer shall be issued a building permit
for a new dwelling or structure requiring sanitary facilities unless a suitable
and approved method of wastewater disposal, conforming to this Part 3,
is available. All housing construction or building development which takes
place after this Part 3 is enacted shall provide for an approved system of
sanitary sewers.
§ 139-22. Private wastewater disposal facilities prohibited.
Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful to construct or maintain
any privy, privy vault, cesspool, septic tank, or other facility intended or
used for disposal of wastewater.
§ 139-23. Connection to public sewer required.
The owner(s) of all houses, buildings, or properties used for human
occupancy, employment, recreation, or other purposes, situated within the
§ 139-17 CHARTER § 139-23
C:385
City, and abutting on any street, alley, or right-of-way in which there is now
located or may, in the future, be located a public sewer, is hereby required,
at the owner's expense to install suitable sanitary facilities therein, and to
connect such facilities directly with the proper public sewer, in accordance
with the provisions of this Part 3 within 360 days after official notice to do
so, provided that said public sewer is within 100 feet (30.5 meters) of the
property line.
§ 139-24. Limitation on use of public sewers.
The use of the City public sewers shall be strictly limited and restricted,
except as provided in § 139-23, to receive and accept the discharge of
sewage and other wastes, including industrial wastes generated on or
discharged from real property within the bounds of the service area of the
POTW.
§ 139-25. Intermunicipal agreements.
The City Common Council, on the recommendation of the City Engineer,
shall have the authority to enter into agreements to accept sewage and
other wastes, including industrial wastes, generated by or discharged from
persons outside the service area of the POTW.
§ 139-26. Moratorium.
A. If the person is a municipality, that municipality shall have enacted a
sewer use law as restrictive on the discharge of sewage and other
wastes as the restrictions contained in this Part 3.
B. If the person is not a municipality the acceptance shall be made only
with the expressed written consent of the City Engineer (the issuance of
a permit) setting forth the terms and conditions of such an acceptance.
A. At the recommendation of the City Engineer, who determines that:
(1) One or more segments of the POTW is exceeding its hydraulic
capacity at any time.
(2) Any specific purpose of this Part 3 is being violated.
B. The City Engineer shall have the authority to limit or deny new
connections to the POTW until the conditions leading to the moratorium
are corrected. Such correction may be by:
(1) Construction of new facilities.
(2) Enlarging existing facilities.
(3) Correction of inflow and infiltration.
(4) Cleaning and repairing of existing facilities.
§ 139-23 ONEIDA CODE § 139-27
C:386
§ 139-27. Basis of sewer use requirement.
All requirements, directives, and orders calling for mandatory use of the
sewers, within the service area of the POTW, for the proper discharge of
sewage and other wastes, including industrial wastes, shall be established
and given by the Common Council, NYSDEC, USEPA, and/or other such
state or federal agencies, which have enforcement powers.
§ 139-27 CHARTER § 139-27
C:387

ARTICLE VI
Private Wastewater Disposal
§ 139-28. Public sewer unavailable; private wastewater disposal
required.
Where a public sewer is not available, under the provisions of § 139-20, the
building lateral shall be connected to a private wastewater disposal system
complying with the provisions of the Rules and Regulations of the NYSDOH,
to be enforced by the City Engineer, and/or the Madison County Health
Department.
§ 139-29. Connection of two buildings to same septic tank
prohibited.
No two separate permanent buildings, where the intended use for either is
for a distinct and separate business or a dwelling place for a private family
or families, shall be connected to the same individual septic tank and tile
absorption field.
§ 139-30. Construction permit application.36
A completed application form, containing results of percolation tests,
computations, and a plot plan, including the design and cross section of
the wastewater disposal system, in relation to lot lines, adjacent and on-site
well or water supply, and buildings, shall be submitted to the City Engineer.
The wastewater disposal system shall be designed by a professional
engineer, licensed surveyor, or architect and shall be in accordance with
the NYSDOH Standards for Waste Treatment Works or NYSDEC Standards
for Commercial and Institutional Facilities, as appropriate. A permit and
inspection fee of $50 shall be paid to the City at the time the application is
filed.
§ 139-31. Construction permit.
A. A written construction permit shall be obtained from the City Engineer
before construction commencement. The City Engineer or his
designated representatives shall be permitted to inspect the
construction work at any stage, without prior notice. A permit for a
private wastewater disposal system shall not become effective until the
installation is completed to the satisfaction of the City Engineer. The
applicant for the permit shall notify the City Engineer when the work is
ready for final inspection and before any underground portions are
covered. The inspection shall be made within 48 hours of the receipt of
notice by the City Engineer.
B. The type, capacities, location, and layout of a private wastewater
disposal system shall comply with all recommendations of the NYSDOH.
No permit shall be issued for any private wastewater disposal system
36.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions).
§ 139-28 CHARTER § 139-31
C:389
§ 139-32. Notice to eliminate objectionable waste; time limit.
When the liquid or liquid-borne effluent from a private wastewater disposal
system enters any watercourse, ditch, storm sewer, or water supply system,
located in the City, in such a manner, volume, and concentration so as to
create a hazardous, offensive, or objectionable condition, in the opinion of
the City Engineer, the Madison County Health Department, or the NYSDOH,
the owner of the premises upon which such wastewater disposal system
is located, upon receiving written notice from the City Engineer, to do
so, shall, within 90 days after receipt of such notice, repair, rebuild, or
relocate such wastewater disposal system for the purpose of eliminating
such hazardous, offensive, or objectionable conditions. The repair,
rebuilding, or relocation of the system shall be accomplished in accordance
with the rules and regulations of the NYSDOH and the Madison County
Health Department, at the owner's expense.
§ 139-33. Sanitary operation required.
The owner shall operate and maintain the private wastewater disposal
system in a satisfactory manner at all times, at the owner's expense.
§ 139-34. Septage removal. [Amended 1-7-1997 by Ord. No. 97-01]
§ 139-35. Direct connection to new public sewers required.
[Amended 1-7-1997 by Ord. No. 97-01]
At such time that a public sewer becomes available to a property, a direct
connection shall be made to the public sewer, in compliance with § 139-23
of this Part 3, and any cesspool, septic tank, and similar wastewater disposal
employing less than 4,000 square feet. No septic tank or cesspool shall
be permitted to discharge to any natural outlet.
C. No statement contained in this article shall be construed to interfere
with any additional requirements that may be imposed.
A. All sewage, wastewater and septage shall be discharged into a public
sewer system pursuant to, and except as otherwise provided by,
ordinance of the City. Notwithstanding any other provision of local or
state laws, no discharge of sewage, wastewater or septage shall be
permitted upon the surface of the ground anywhere within the City, or
into natural or artificial surface drainways. Septage is defined as the
contents of a septic tank, cesspool, or other individual sewage
treatment facility which receives domestic sewage.
B. Where a private wastewater disposal system utilizes a cesspool or a
septic tank, septage shall be removed from the cesspool or septic tank,
by a licensed hauler of trucked and hauled wastes, at three-year
intervals or more frequently. All trucked waste discharged at the POTW
must be in conformance with Article X of this Part 3 and NYSDEC
regulations as promulgated in 6 NYCRR Part 364.
§ 139-31 ONEIDA CODE § 139-35
C:390
facilities shall be cleaned of septage by a licensed septage hauler, and
finally either filled with clean sand, bank-run gravel, or dirt or removed and
properly disposed. When the connection is made to the public sewer, the
connection to the private wastewater disposal facility shall be broken, and
both ends of the break shall be plugged, as appropriate. Alternatively, the
septic tank effluent may be piped or pumped to the sewer; the owner shall
provide an easement to the septic tank for septage removal.
§ 139-36. Additional requirements.
No statement in this article shall be construed to prevent or interfere with
any additional requirements that may be deemed necessary by the City
Engineer to protect public health and public welfare.
§ 139-35 CHARTER § 139-36
C:391

ARTICLE VII
New Sewers or Sewer Extensions
§ 139-37. Proper design.
§ 139-38. New sewers subject to approval, fees, inspections testing,
and reporting.
When a property owner, builder, or developer proposes to construct sanitary
sewers or extensions to sanitary sewers in an area proposed for subdivision,
the plans, specifications and method of installation shall be subject to the
approval of the City Engineer, and the Madison County Health Department,
in accordance with § 139-37. Said property owner, builder, or developer
shall pay for the entire installation, including a proportionate share of
the treatment plant, intercepting or trunk sewers, pumping stations, force
mains, and all other City expenses incidental thereto. Each street lateral
shall be installed and inspected pursuant to Article VIII, and inspection
fees shall be paid by the applicant prior to initiating construction. Design
and installation of sewers shall be as specified in §§ 139-40 through 139-43
and in conformance with Paragraphs 3 through 6 of ASTM Specification
C-12. The installation of the sewer shall be subject to periodic inspection by
the City Engineer, without prior notice. The City Engineer shall determine
whether the work is proceeding in accordance with the approved plans
and specifications, and whether the completed work will conform with the
approved plans and specifications. The sewer, as constructed, must pass
the infiltration test (or the exfiltration test, with prior approval), required
in § 139-45, before any building lateral is connected thereto. The City
Engineer shall be notified 30 days in advance of the start of any
construction actions so that such inspection frequencies and procedures as
may be necessary or required may be established. No new sanitary sewers
A. New sanitary sewers and all extensions to sanitary sewers owned and
operated by the City shall be designed by a professional licensed to
practice sewer design in the state, in accordance with the
recommended standards for sewage works, as adopted by the Great
Lakes-Upper Mississippi River Board of State Sanitary Engineers ("Ten
State Standards"), and in strict conformance with all requirements of
the NYSDEC. Plans and specifications shall be submitted to and written
approval shall be obtained from the City Engineer, the Madison County
Health Department, and the NYSDEC, before initiating any
construction. The design shall anticipate and allow for flows from all
possible future extensions or developments within the immediate
drainage area.
B. If, however, there is inadequate capacity in any sewer which would
convey the wastewater or if there is insufficient capacity in the POTW
treatment plant to treat the wastewater properly, the application shall
be denied. Sewer line and POTW treatment plant current use shall be
defined as the present use and the unutilized use which has been
committed, by resolution, to other users by the Common Council.
§ 139-37 CHARTER § 139-38
C:393
will be accepted by the Common Council until such construction inspections
have been made so as to assure the Common Council of compliance with
this Part 3 and any amendments or additions thereto. The City Engineer
has the authority to require such excavation as necessary to inspect any
installed facilities if the facilities were covered or otherwise backfilled
before they were inspected so as to permit inspection of the construction.
The City Engineer shall report all findings of inspections and tests to the
Common Council.
§ 139-39. Plans, specification and pipe test results required.
Plans, specifications, and methods of installation shall conform to the
requirements of this article. Components and materials of wastewater
facilities not covered in this Part 3, such as pumping stations, lift stations,
or force mains, shall be designed in accordance with § 139-37, and shall
be clearly shown and detailed on the plans and specifications submitted
for approval. Force main details are covered in §§ 139-46 and 139-47.
When requested, the applicant shall submit, to the City Engineer and to
the Madison County Health Department, all design calculations and other
pertinent data to supplement review of the plans and specifications. Results
of manufacturer's tests on each lot of pipe delivered to the job site shall also
be furnished, upon request.
§ 139-40. Sewer pipe.
A. Sewer pipe material shall be:
(1) Reinforced concrete pipe. (Note that nonreinforced concrete pipe
shall not be used.) Portland cement shall conform to ASTM C-150
Type II. The pipe and specials shall conform to ASTM Specification
C-76. The reinforcing wire cage shall conform to ASTM
Specification A 15, A 82, or A 185, as appropriate. Entrained air
shall be 5.0% to 9.0% by ASTM C-890 water absorption, and threeedge
bearing tests shall conform to ASTM Specification C-497.
Gaskets shall conform to Sections 3.3 and 3.4 of AWWA
Specification C-302.
(2) Cast-iron pipe - extra heavy. Pipe, fittings, and specials shall
conform to the requirements of ASTM Specification A-74 or ANSI
A-21.11. Gaskets shall conform to ASTM Specification C-564.
(3) Polyvinyl chloride (PVC) pipe - heavy wall. Pipe shall be made from
Class 12454-B materials or better in accordance with ANSI/ASTM
Specification D-1784. Pipe and accessories shall conform to the
requirements of the following, with a minimum pipe stiffness of 46
psi at a maximum deflection of 5%.
ANSI/ASTM D 3034 (4" - 15")
ASTM F 679 TYPE I (18"- 27")
§ 139-38 ONEIDA CODE § 139-40
C:394
§ 139-41. Safety and load factors.
(4) Ductile iron pipe. Pipe, fittings, and specials shall be manufactured
in accordance with ASTM Specification A-746. Pipe shall have a
minimum thickness of Class 50. Fittings shall conform to ANSI
Specification A-21.11 and have a minimum pressure class rating of
150 psi. All pipe and fittings shall be cement mortar lined in
accordance with ANSI Specification A-21.4 at twice the specified
thickness, and have an internal and external bituminous seal
boating. Closure pieces shall be jointed by means of a mechanical
coupling of the cast sleeve type.
(5) Vitrified clay pipe - extra strength. Pipe shall conform to the
current requirements of NCPI Specification ER 3300-67 and meet
the requirements of ASTM Specification C 700. (Note that standard
strength vitrified clay pipe shall not be used.)
(6) Acrylonitrile/butadiene/styrene (ABS) pipe. Pipe and fittings shall
conform to the requirements of ASTM Specification D 2661.
(7) Other pipe materials require prior written approval of the City
Engineer before being installed.
B. The minimum internal pipe diameter shall be eight inches for gravity
sewers and three inches for low-pressure sewers.
C. Joints for the selected pipe shall be designed and manufactured such
that O-ring gaskets of the snap-on type are used.
D. Gaskets shall be continuous, solid, natural or synthetic rubber and shall
provide a positive compression seal in the assembled joint, such that
the requirements of § 139-45 are met.
E. Joint preparation and assembly shall be in accordance with the
manufacturer's recommendations.
F. Wye branch fittings, as approved by the City Engineer, shall be
installed, for connection of street laterals, in accordance with §§ 139-59
through 139-61.
A. Selection of pipe class shall be predicated on the following criteria:
(1) Safety factor: 1.5.
(2) Load factor: 1.7.
(3) Weight of soil: 120 pounds per cubic foot.
(4) Wheel loading: 16,000 pounds.
B. Utilizing the foregoing information, design shall be made as outlined in
Chapter IX of the Water Pollution Control Federation Manual of Practice
No. 9, latest edition, Design and Construction of Sanitary and Storm
Sewers, and the pipe shall have sufficient structural strength to support
§ 139-40 CHARTER § 139-41
C:395
§ 139-42. Sewer pipe installation.
all loads to be placed on the pipe, with a safety factor as specified
above.
C. PVC pipe shall not be encased in concrete due to their different
coefficients of linear thermal expansion.
A. Local utilities shall be contacted to verify construction plans and to
make arrangements to disconnect all utility services, where required to
undertake the construction work. The utility services shall later be
reconnected. The work shall be scheduled so that there is minimum
inconvenience to local residents. Residents shall be provided proper
and timely notice regarding disconnection of utilities.
B. The construction right-of-way shall be cleared only to the extent needed
for construction. Clearing consists of removal of trees which interfere
with construction, removal of underbrush, logs, and stumps, and other
organic matter, removal of refuse, garbage, and trash, removal of ice
and snow, and removal of telephone and power poles, and posts. Any
tree which will not hinder construction shall not be removed, and shall
be protected from damage by any construction equipment. Debris shall
not be burned, but hauled for disposal in an approved manner.
C. The public shall be protected from personal and property damage as a
result of the construction work.
D. Traffic shall be maintained at all times in accordance with applicable
highway permits. Where no highway permits are required, at least 1/2
of a street shall be kept open for traffic flow.
E. Erosion control shall be performed throughout the project to minimize
the erosion of soils onto lands or into waters adjacent to or affected by
the work. Erosion control can be effected by limiting the amount of
clearing and grubbing prior to trenching, proper scheduling of the pipe
installation work, minimizing time of open trench, prompt grading and
seeding, and filtration of drainage.
F. The trench shall be excavated only wide enough for proper installation
of the sewer pipe, manhole, and appurtenances. Allowances may be
made for sheeting, de-watering, and other similar actions to complete
the work. Roads, sidewalks, and curbs shall be cut, by sawing or by
other methods as approved by the City Engineer, before trench
excavation is initiated.
G. Under ordinary conditions, excavation shall be by open cut from the
ground surface. However, tunneling or boring under structures other
than buildings may be permitted. Such structures include crosswalks,
curbs, gutters, pavements, trees, driveways, and railroad tracks.
H. Open trenches shall be protected at all hours of the day with
barricades, as required.
§ 139-41 ONEIDA CODE § 139-42
C:396
I. Trenches shall not be open for more than 30 feet in advance of pipe
installation nor left unfilled for more than 30 feet in the rear of the
installed pipe, when the work is in progress, without permission of the
City Engineer. When work is not in progress, including over night,
weekends, and holidays, the trench shall be backfilled to ground
surface.
J. The trench shall be excavated approximately six inches deeper than the
final pipe grade. When unsuitable soils are encountered, these shall be
excavated to a maximum depth of 2 1/2 feet below the final pipe invert
grade and replaced with select materials.
K. Ledge rock, boulders, and large stones shall be removed from the
trench sides and bottom. The trench shall be over-excavated at least 12
inches for five feet, at the transition from rock bottom to earth bottom,
centered on the transition.
L. Maintenance of grade, elevation, and alignment shall be done by some
suitable method or combination of methods.
M. No structure shall be undercut unless specifically approved by the City
Engineer.
N. Proper devices shall be provided, and maintained operational at all
times, to remove all water from the trench as it enters. At no time shall
the sewer be used for removal of water from the trench.
O. To protect workers and to prevent caving, shoring and sheeting shall be
used, as needed. Caving shall not be used to backfill the trench.
Sheeting shall not be removed but cut off no lower than one foot above
the pipe crown nor higher than one foot below final grade, and left in
the trench, during backfill operations.
P. The pipe barrel shall be supported, along its entire length, on a
minimum of six inches of crusher run maximum 1/2 inch stone free of
organic material. This foundation shall be firmly tamped in the
excavation.
Q. Bell holes shall be hand excavated, as appropriate.
R. Pipe shall be laid from low elevation to high elevation. The pipe bell
shall be up-gradient; the pipe spigot shall be down gradient.
S. The joints shall be made and the grade and alignment checked and
made correct.
T. The pipe shall be in straight alignment.
U. When a smaller sewer joins a larger one the invert of the larger sewer
shall be lowered sufficiently to maintain the same hydraulic gradient.
An approximate method which may be used for securing this result is to
place the 0.8 depth of both sewers at the same elevation.
§ 139-42 CHARTER § 139-42
C:397
§ 139-43. Cleanout installation.
§ 139-44. Manholes and manhole installation.
V. Crushed stone shall be placed over the laid pipe to a depth of at least six
inches. The embodiment of thermoplastic pipe shall be in accordance
with ASTM D2321 using Class 1A or 1B backfill materials. Care shall be
exercised so that stone is packed under the pipe haunches. Care shall
be exercised so that the pipe is not moved during placement of the
crushed stone.
W. The migration of fines from surrounding backfill or native soils shall be
restricted by gradation of embedment materials or by use of suitable
filter fabric.
X. The remaining portion of the trench above the pipe embedment shall be
backfilled in foot lifts which shall be firmly compacted. Compaction
near/under roadways, driveways, sidewalks, and other structures shall
be to 95% of the maximum moisture-density relationship, as
determined by ASTM Specification D 698, Method D. Ice, snow, or
frozen material shall not be used for backfill.
A. Cleanouts for low pressure sewers shall be placed at intervals of
approximately 400 to 500 feet, at major changes of direction, where one
collection main joins another main and at the upstream end of each
main branch.
B. The design of the cleanouts shall be as approved by the City Engineer.
A. Design of all manholes shall be submitted to the City Engineer and shall
receive approval prior to placement.
B. Manholes shall be placed where there is a change in slope or alignment,
and at intervals not exceeding 400 linear feet except as authorized by
the City Engineer.
C. Manhole bases shall be constructed or placed on a minimum of six
inches of crusher run maximum 1/2 inch stone free of organic materials.
D. Manhole bases shall be constructed of 4,000 psi (twenty-eight-day)
concrete eight inches thick, or shall be precast bases properly bedded
in the excavation. Field constructed bases shall be monolithic, properly
reinforced, and extend at least six inches beyond the outside walls of
lower manhole sections. Precast manhole bases shall extend at least six
inches beyond the outside walls of lower manhole sections.
E. Materials.
(1) Manholes shall be constructed using precast minimum four foot
diameter concrete manhole barrel sections, and an eccentric top
section, conforming to ASTM Specification C-478, with the
following exceptions on wall thickness:
§ 139-42 ONEIDA CODE § 139-44
C:398
Manhole Diameter
(feet)
Wall Thickness
(inches)
4 5
5 6
6 7
6 1/2 7 1/2
7 8
8 9
(2) All sections shall be cast solid, without lifting holes. Flat top slabs
shall be a minimum of eight inches thick and shall be capable of
supporting a H-20 loading.
F. All joints between sections shall be sealed with an O-ring rubber
gasket, meeting the same specifications as pipe joint gaskets, or butyl
joint sealant completely filling the joint.
G. All joints shall be sealed against infiltration. All metal parts shall be
thickly coated with bitumastic or elastomeric compound to prevent
corrosion.
H. No steps or ladder rungs shall be installed in the inside or outside
manhole walls at any time.
I. No holes shall be cut into the manhole sections closer than six inches
from joint surfaces.
J. Manholes which extend above grade shall not have an eccentric top
section. The top plate shall be large enough to accommodate the cover
lifting device and the cover.
K. The elevation of the top section shall be such that the cover frame top
elevation is 0.5 foot above the one-hundred-year flood elevation (in a
field), 0.5 foot above a lawn elevation, or at finished road or sidewalk
grade.
L. When located in a traveled area (road or sidewalk), the manhole frame
and cover shall be heavy-duty cast iron. When located in a lawn or in a
field, the manhole frame and cover may be light duty cast iron. The
cover shall be 36 inches, minimum, in diameter. The minimum
combined weight of the heavy duty frame and 36 inch cover shall be
735 ± 5% pounds. The minimum combined weight of the light-duty
frame and thirty-six-inch cover shall be 420 ± 5% pounds. The mating
surfaces shall be machined, and painted with tar pitch varnish. The
cover shall not rock in the frame. Infiltration between the cover and
frame shall be prevented by proper design and painting. Covers shall
have "Sanitary Sewer" cast into them. Covers shall have lifting holes
suitable for any lifting/jacking device. The lifting holes shall be
designed so that infiltration is prevented.
§ 139-44 CHARTER § 139-44
C:399
§ 139-45. Testing of sanitary sewers or extensions.
M. A drop of at least 0.1 foot shall be provided between incoming and
outgoing sewers on all junction manholes and on manholes with bends
greater than 45º.
N. Inverts and shelves/benches shall be placed after testing the manholes
and sewers.
O. Benches shall be level and slope to the flow channel at about one inch
per foot.
P. The minimum depth of the flow channel shall be the nominal diameter
of the smaller pipe. The channel shall have a steel trowel finish. The
flow channel shall have a smooth curvature from inlet to outlet.
Q. Manhole frames, installed at grade, shall be set in a full bed of mortar
with no less than two nor more than four courses of brick underneath to
allow for later elevation adjustment. In lieu of brick, grade rings may be
used for elevation adjustment. Grade rings shall not exceed six inches
in depth. The total number of grade rings shall not exceed 12 inches in
height; however, in no event shall more than three grade rings be used.
R. Manholes which extend above grade shall have the frames cast into the
manhole top plate. The top plate shall be securely anchored to the
manhole barrel, by a minimum of six one-half-inch corrosion-resistant
anchor bolts, to prevent overturning when the cover is removed. The
anchor bolts shall be electrically isolated from the manhole frame and
cover.
S. Internal drop pipes and fittings shall be PVC plastic sewer pipe in
compliance with ASTM D2241. Corrosion-resistant anchors shall be
used to attach the drop pipe to the inside surface of the manhole barrel.
A. Infiltration/exfiltration testing. All sanitary sewers or extensions to
sanitary sewers, including manholes, shall satisfy requirements of a
final infiltration test before they will be approved and wastewater flow
permitted by the City. The infiltration rate shall not exceed 25 gallons
per 24 hours per mile per nominal diameter in inches. An exfiltration
test may be substituted for the infiltration test; the same rate shall not
be exceeded. The exfiltration test shall be performed by the applicant,
under the supervision of the City Engineer, who shall have the
responsibility for making proper and accurate measurements required.
The exfiltration test consists of filling the pipe with water to provide a
head of at least five feet above the top of the pipe or five feet above
groundwater, whichever is higher, at the highest point under test, and
then measuring the loss of water, from the pipe section under test, by
the amount of water which must be added to maintain the original level.
However, under no circumstances shall the head at the downstream
manhole exceed 10 feet or fill to within six inches of the top of the
downstream manhole. Should this condition prevail, the testing
§ 139-44 ONEIDA CODE § 139-45
C:400
methods in Subsection F or G of this section shall be utilized. In this
test, the test section must remain filled with water for at least 24 hours
prior to taking any measurements. Exfiltration shall be measured by
the drop of water level in a standpipe with a closed bottom end, or in
one of the sewer manholes serving the test section. When a standpipe
and plug arrangement is used in the upper manhole in the test section,
there shall be some positive method for releasing entrapped air prior to
taking any measurements.
B. Test section. The test section shall be as ordered or as approved, but in
no event longer than 1,000 feet. In the case of sewers laid on steep
grades, the test length may be limited by the maximum allowable
internal pressure on the pipe and joints at the lower end of the test
section. For purposes of determining the leakage rate of the test
section, manholes shall be considered as sections of forty-eight-inch
diameter pipe, five feet long. The maximum allowable leakage rate for
such a section is 1.1 gallons per 24 hours. If leakage exceeds the
allowable rate, then necessary repairs or replacements shall be made,
and the section retested.
C. Test period. The test period, during which the test measurements are
taken, shall not be less than two hours.
D. Pipe lamping. Prior to testing, the section shall be lamped. Any length
of pipe out of straight alignment shall be realigned.
E. Deflection testing. Also prior to testing, all plastic pipe, in the test
section, shall be tested for deflection. Deflection testing shall involve
the pulling of a rigid ball or mandrel, whose diameter is 95% of the pipe
inside diameter, through the pipe. Any length of pipe with a deflection
greater than 5% shall be replaced. The test section shall be flushed just
prior to deflection testing. The test shall not be performed with a
mechanical pulling device.
F. Low-pressure air testing alternative.
(1) In lieu of hydrostatic testing (exfiltration or infiltration), lowpressure
air testing may be employed. Low-pressure air tests shall
conform to ASTM Specification C 828. All sections to be tested shall
be cleaned and flushed, and shall have been backfilled, prior to
testing. Air shall be added until the internal pressure of the test
section is raised to approximately 4.0 psig. The air pressure test
shall be based on the time, measured in seconds, for the air
pressure to drop from 3.5 psig to 2.5 psig.
(2) Acceptance is based on limits tabulated in the Specification Time
Required for a 1.0 PSIG Pressure Drop in the Uni-Bell PVC Pipe
Association Recommended Practice For Low-Pressure Air Testing
of Installed Sewer Pipe.
§ 139-45 CHARTER § 139-45
C:401
§ 139-46. Force mains.
(3) Before pressure is applied to the line all connections shall be firmly
plugged. Before the test period starts, the air shall be given
sufficient time to cool to ambient temperature in the test section.
(4) If the test section is below groundwater, the test pressure shall be
increased by an amount sufficient to compensate for groundwater
hydrostatic pressure; however, the test pressure shall not exceed
10 psi, or a lower pressure as required by the City Engineer.
(5) The pressure test gauge shall have been recently calibrated, and a
copy of the calibration results shall be made available to the City
Engineer prior to testing.
G. Vacuum testing alternative.
(1) In lieu of hydrostatic testing (exfiltration or infiltration), vacuum
testing may be employed for testing of sewer lines and manholes.
Sewer lines and manholes shall be tested separately. All sewer lines
to be tested shall be cleaned and flushed, and shall have been
backfilled, prior to testing. The vacuum test shall be based on the
time, measured in seconds, for the vacuum to decrease from 10
inches of mercury to nine inches of mercury for manholes, and from
seven inches of mercury to six inches of mercury for sewers.
Acceptance of manholes is based on the following:37
Manhole Depth
feet
Manhole
Diameter
feet
Time to Drop 1" HG
(10" to 9")
seconds
Less than 10 4 120
10 to 15 4 150
Over 15 to 25 4 180
(2) For five-foot diameter manholes, add 30 seconds to the times
above. For six-foot diameter manholes, add 60 seconds to the times
above. If the test on the manhole fails (the time is less than that
tabulated above) necessary repairs shall be made and the vacuum
test repeated, until the manhole passes the test.
(3) Acceptance of sewers (seven inches Hg to six inches Hg) is based
on the time tabulated in the Specification Time Required for a 0.5
PSIG Pressure Drop in the Uni-Bell PVC Pipe Association
Recommended Practice For Low-Pressure Air Testing of Installed
Sewer Pipe. The vacuum test gauge shall have been recently
calibrated, and a copy of the calibration results shall be made
available to the City Engineer prior to testing.
37.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions).
§ 139-45 ONEIDA CODE § 139-46
C:402
A. Force mains serving sewage lifting devices, such as grinder pumps and
pump stations, shall be designed in accordance with § 139-37.
Additional design requirements are:
(1) Force main pipe material shall be:
(a) Ductile iron pipe shall conform to ANSI A21.51. The minimum
wall thickness shall be Class 52 (ANSI A21.50) The pipe shall
be clearly marked with either "D" or "DUCTILE." Fittings shall
conform to ANSI A21.10. Pipe and fittings shall be furnished
with push-on joints conforming to ANSI A21.11. Pipe and
fittings shall be cement mortar lined and have an internal and
external bituminous seal coating.
(b) Polyvinyl chloride (PVC) plastic pipe shall conform to ASTM
D2241. Materials used in the manufacture of PVC pipe shall
meet ASTM C1784. The minimum wall thickness shall be
SDR-21. Fittings shall conform to ASTM D2241. Joints and
gaskets shall conform to ASTM D2241, D1869, and F477.
(c) Other pipe materials require prior written approval of the City
Engineer before being installed.
(2) Trenching, bedding, and backfilling shall be in accordance with
§ 139-42.
(3) Joint preparation and assembly shall be in accordance with the
manufacturer's written instructions.
(4) Anchorages, concrete blocking, and/or mechanical restraint shall
be provided when there is a change of direction of 7 1/2º or greater.
(5) Drain valves shall be placed at low points.
(6) Automatic air relief valves shall be placed at high points and at
intervals of 400 feet, on level force main runs.
(7) Air relief and drain valves shall be suitably protected from freezing.
(8) When the daily average design detention time, in the force main,
exceeds 20 minutes, the manhole and sewer line receiving the force
main discharge or the sewage shall be treated so that corrosion of
the manhole and the exiting line are prevented. The corrosion is
caused by sulfuric acid biochemically produced from hydrogen
sulfide anaerobically produced in the force main.
(9) The force main shall terminate, in the deceiving manhole, at a PVC
plastic sewer pipe "T". The vertical arms of the "T" shall be twice
the diameter of the force main. The upper arm shall be at least four
feet long; the lower arm shall terminate in a PVC plastic sewer pipe
90º elbow in a flow channel directed to the manhole exit pipe. The
"T" and its arms shall be securely fastened to the inside surface of
the manhole wall using corrosion resistant anchors.
§ 139-46 CHARTER § 139-47
C:403
§ 139-47. Force main testing.
All force mains shall be subjected to hydrostatic pressure of 150% of the
normal operating pressure. The duration of the test, at pressure, shall be
at least two hours. Before conducting the test, the pipe shall be filled with
water and all air shall be expelled. During the test, water shall be added,
as needed, to maintain the test pressure. The amount of water added shall
be recorded so as to calculate leakage. Leakage shall not exceed 25 gallons
per day per mile per inch nominal pipe diameter. During the test, the owner
and the City Engineer shall walk the route of the force main and examine
the exposed pipe and the ground covering any backfilled pipe to discover
leaks. Leakage in excess of that specified above shall be corrected with new
material at the owner's expense and the test repeated. Any observed leaks
shall be repaired at the owner's expense. Each test section length shall be
as approved by the City Engineer, but in no event longer than 1,000 feet.
§ 139-48. Final acceptance and warranty/surety.
All sanitary sewers and extensions to sanitary sewers constructed at the
applicant's expense, after final approval and acceptance by the City
Engineer, and concurrence by the Common Council, shall become the
property of the City of Oneida, and shall thereafter be operated and
maintained by the City. No sanitary sewer shall be accepted by the City until
four copies of as-built drawings have been so filed with the City Engineer
and the City Engineer has approved the submitted drawings. Said sewers,
after their acceptance by the City, shall be guaranteed against defects in
materials or workmanship for one year, by the applicant. The guaranty shall
be in such form and contain such provision as deemed necessary by the
Common Council, secured by a surety bond or such other security as the
Common Council may approve.
§ 139-49. Liability insurance coverage during construction period.
A. All contractors engaged in connecting house laterals with sanitary
sewers, who perform any work within the right-of-way of any highway,
shall file a bond in the amount of $5,000 with the City Clerk to
indemnify the City against loss, cost, damage or expense sustained or
recovered on account of any negligence, omission or act of the
applicant for such a permit, or any of his, or their agents arising or
resulting directly or indirectly by reason of such permit or consent, or
of any act, construction or excavation done, made or permitted under
authority of such permit or consent. All bonds shall contain a clause
that permits given by the City Engineer be revoked at any time for just
cause.
B. Before commencing work, the above contractor shall file insurance
certificates with the City Clerk for the following:
(1) Workers' compensation and employer's liability insurance as
required by the laws of the state covering the contractor;
§ 139-47 ONEIDA CODE § 139-49
C:404
(2) Personal injury liability having limits of not less than $500,000 each
occurrence and $500,000 aggregate (completed operations/
products, personal injury);
(3) Property damage liability having limits of not less than $500,000
for all damages arising during the life of the contract; and shall
include, but not be limited to, the following designated hazards:
(a) Premises and operations;
(b) Independent contractors;
(c) Completed operations and products;
(d) Property damage; and
(e) Explosions, collapse and underground;
(4) Comprehensive automobile liability (including non-owned and
hired automobiles) having limits of not less than:
(a) Bodily injury: each person $300,000; each occurrence
$500,000.
(b) Property damage: each occurrence $500,000.
(5) Business excess liability insurance in the amount of $2,000,000.
(6) All insurance policies must provide for five business days notice to
the City of Oneida before cancellation and must cover all liabilities
of the City and be in a form approved by the Common Council.
(7) The minimum insurance limits stated above shall be subject to
periodic review by the Common Council and adjustments made, by
resolution, as appropriate.
C. Where it is necessary to enter upon or excavate any highway or cut any
pavement, sidewalk or curbing, permission must be obtained from the
City Engineer if a City highway is involved, from the County
Department of Public Works if a county highway is involved, and/or the
New York State Department of Transportation if a state highway is
involved.
D. The minimum insurance limits above shall be as established by the
Common Council and shall be subject to periodic review and
adjustment, as appropriate, by the Common Council.
§ 139-49 CHARTER § 139-49
C:405

ARTICLE VIII
Building Laterals, Street Laterals, Connections and Fees
§ 139-50. Permit required for sewer connections.
No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connection with or
opening into, use, alter, or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof
without first obtaining a written permit from the City Engineer.
§ 139-51. Inflow/infiltration prohibited.
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any storm cooling
water or unpolluted industrial waters to any sanitary sewer. Swimming pool
drains shall not be connected to any sanitary sewer.
§ 139-52. Sewer lateral permits.
§ 139-53. New building laterals.
A. There shall be two classes of sewer lateral permits:
(1) For residential, commercial, and institutional service.
(2) For service to establishments producing industrial wastes.
B. In either case, a permit application shall be submitted to the City
Engineer. The permit application shall be supplemented by any plans,
specifications, or other information considered pertinent, in the
judgment of the City Engineer. A fee, for residential, commercial,
institutional and industrial users, as established by the Common
Council, shall accompany the application.
C. Connections to existing manholes shall be made as directed by the City
Engineer.
A. A separate and independent building lateral shall be provided for every
building requiring sanitary facilities. When, however, there is a building
behind a front building, the second building may use the front
building's building lateral, if there is no other way to provide sanitary
service to the back building. Be advised, the City shall not assume any
obligation or responsibility for damage caused by or resulting from any
such single connection aforementioned.
B. New street laterals and/or building laterals shall not go under building
basements in like fashion, a building shall not be constructed over an
existing lateral; the lateral shall be relocated after the City Engineer
has approved plans showing the relocation. If relocation is not
physically possible then the lateral shall be:
(1) Exposed and totally encapsulated in not less than three inches of
concrete; or
§ 139-50 CHARTER § 139-53
C:407
§ 139-54. Laterals serving several buildings.
When building laterals are to serve multiple dwelling structures, the
building lateral shall be sized in accordance with the metered water use and
with sound professional engineering judgment.
§ 139-55. Laterals serving complexes.
Where a lateral sewer is to serve a complex of industrial, commercial,
institutional, or dwelling structures, special design of the building lateral
system shall be required. Such lateral sewer shall be connected to the
public sewer through a manhole. The City Engineer shall determine if and
where this connection to the public sewer is required. If required, a new
manhole shall be installed in the public sewer pursuant to §§ 139-44 and
139-108 and the lateral connection made and tested as directed by the
City Engineer. The City Engineer may also accept plans which provide for
a complex to be served by a single sewer (six inches or larger), provided
that each building in the complex is served by a separate lateral discharging
to that sewer. Plans and specifications shall be prepared and submitted for
approval pursuant to this Part 3.
§ 139-56. Dry sewers.
Dry sewers shall be designed and installed in accordance to this Part 3.
§ 139-57. Using existing building laterals.
Existing building laterals may be used in connection with new buildings
only when they are found, on examination by the City Engineer, to meet all
requirements of this Part 3.
§ 139-58. Lateral pipe materials.
(2) Exposed and walled and the building rooms above positively
ventilated outdoors.
C. All existing manholes in or under the basement shall be sealed airtight
in a manner acceptable to the City Engineer. No new manholes shall be
constructed on the portion of the lateral under the building.
A. Building and street lateral pipe materials shall be one of the following:
(1) Tar-coated, service grade, cast-iron soil pipe conforming to ASTM
Specification A-74, Cast Iron Pipe and Fittings. All dimensions,
weight and markings of the pipe shall conform to the requirements
of ANSI Designation A112.5.1, except spigot ends shall be plain
end, if gasket-joints are used.
(2) Polyvinyl chloride (PVC) pipe and fittings conforming to ASTM
Specification D-3034-73, SDR-35 Polyvinyl Chloride (PVC) Sewer
Pipe and Fittings. All pipe shall be suitable for gravity sewer
service. Provisions shall be made for contraction and expansion at
§ 139-53 ONEIDA CODE § 139-58
C:408
§ 139-59. Street lateral to public sewer connection.
§ 139-60. Future connection locations; as-built drawings.
The street lateral, including the wye and eighth bend fittings, shall be
connected to the main sewer at the time of constructing the main sewer,
for each proposed lot for either immediate or future development. Laterals
installed for future development shall be fitted with a standard plug
approved for use by the City Engineer. All sewer connections shall be via a
properly installed saddle on the main sewer pipe. No portion of the lateral
pipe shall protrude into the main sewer pipe. The location of all lateral
connections shall be field marked with a corrosion- and rot-resistant board
two inches by six inches. The marker board shall extend from the depth of
the lateral to a minimum of two feet above grade. The location of all lateral
connections shall be indicated on a drawing with a minimum of three tie
lines indicated. Four copies of this drawing, showing the as-built location
each joint with a rubber ring. The bell shall consist of an integral
wall section stiffened with two PVC retainer rings which securely
lock the solid cross-section ring into position. Minimum pipe
stiffness (F/Y) at 5% deflection shall be 46 psi when tested in
accordance with ASTM Specification D-2412.
B. Any part of the building or street lateral that is located within five feet
of a water main or water service shall be constructed of cast-iron soil
pipe. Cast-iron soil pipe may be required by the City Engineer where
the building or street lateral is likely to be damaged by tree roots. If
installed on fill or unstable ground, the building or street lateral shall be
of cast-iron soil pipe, although other pipe material may be permitted if
such pipe is uniformly supported on a poured concrete cradle approved
by the City Engineer. The distance between consecutive joints, as
measured along the center line of the installed pipe, shall not be less
than 10 feet, except under abnormal circumstances, in which case this
dimension may be diminished, if approved by the City Engineer. The
size and slope of building and street laterals shall be subject to approval
by the City Engineer, but in no event shall the internal pipe diameter be
less than four inches, nor shall the pipe slope be less than 1/4 inch per
foot.
C. The street lateral shall include a full port curb stop with flow-through
diameter equal to that of the lateral. A curb box shall be installed.
A. At the point of connection of a street lateral to a main sewer, a standard
wye fitting and sufficient one-eighth (45º) bend fittings shall be used.
The wye fittings shall be installed so that flow in the arm shall transition
smoothly into the flow in the public sewer. No lateral connection shall
be made to the public sewer which permits the flow into the public
sewer from the lateral to enter at right angles.
B. The inside diameter of the fittings shall be same diameter as the street
lateral inside diameter.
§ 139-58 CHARTER § 139-60
C:409
of these connections, shall be furnished to the City Engineer. A refundable
deposit shall be placed with City to assure receipt of these as-builts. The
deposit shall be placed when application is made; the amount of the deposit
shall be $100 per sheet of plans showing locations of lateral connections. No
sanitary sewer shall be accepted by the City until four copies of this record
drawing have been so filed with the City Engineer and the City Engineer
has approved the submitted drawings.
§ 139-61. Special manhole requirements.
When any street lateral is to serve a school, hospital, or similar institution,
or public housing, or is to serve a complex of industrial or commercial
buildings, or which, in the opinion of the City Engineer, will receive
wastewater or industrial wastes of such volume or character that frequent
maintenance of said building or street lateral is anticipated, then such
street lateral shall be connected to the public sewer through a manhole.
The City Engineer shall determine if and where this type of connection to
the public sewer is required. Connections to existing manholes shall be
made as directed by the City Engineer. If required, a new manhole shall be
installed in the public sewer pursuant to §§ 139-44 and 139-108, and the
lateral connection made thereto as directed by the City Engineer.
§ 139-62. Laterals at and near buildings.
§ 139-63. Sewage lifting.
In all buildings in which any building drain is too low to permit gravity
flow to the public sewer, wastewater carried by such drain shall be lifted by
mechanical means and discharged to the building lateral, on approval of the
City Engineer.
A. Building laterals laid parallel to a bearing wall shall not be installed
closer than three feet to such wall. The building lateral shall enter the
basement through the basement wall no less than 12 inches above the
basement floor. In no event shall any building lateral be placed below
the basement floor, except with the expressed written approval of the
City Engineer.
B. The building lateral shall be laid at uniform grade and in straight
alignment insofar as possible. Changes in direction shall be made only
with properly curved pipe and fittings. Changes of direction of 90º or
greater shall be made with a cleanout which extends to grade,
terminating in a terminal box set in concrete in building laterals, said
cleanouts shall be provided such that the maximum distance between
cleanouts is 75 feet. The ends of all building or street laterals, which are
not connected to the interior plumbing of the building, for any reason,
shall be sealed against infiltration by a suitable stopper, plug, or by
other approved means.
§ 139-60 ONEIDA CODE § 139-64
C:410
§ 139-64. Lateral pipe installation.
All excavations required for the installation of a building or street lateral
shall be open trench work unless otherwise approved by the City Engineer.
Pipe laying and backfilling, regardless of pipe material used, shall be
performed in general accordance with Paragraphs 3 through 6 of ASTM
Specification C-12, except that trench width, measured at the top of the
installed pipe, shall not exceed the outside pipe diameter plus 14 inches
and, except that no backfill shall be placed until the work has been
inspected. The depth of cover over the pipe shall be sufficient to afford
protection from frost, but in no case shall such depth be less than four feet.
Where it is physically impossible to provide cover of four feet, the depth
may be reduced to a minimum of two feet and the pipe shall be insulated,
as approved by the City Engineer.
§ 139-65. Joints.
A. Watertight and gastight joints. All joints and connections shall be made
watertight and gastight.
B. Cast-iron pipe poured joints. Poured joints for cast-iron pipe shall be
firmly packed with oakum or hemp, and the annulus filled with an
approved compound not less than one inch deep. The said compound
shall be run in with a single pouring, and caulked tight, if appropriate
for the compound used. No paint, varnish, or other coatings shall be
permitted on the jointing material until after the joint has been tested
and approved. The transition joint between cast-iron pipe and other
pipe materials shall be made with special adapters and jointing
materials approved by the City Engineer. If such joints are hot-poured,
the material shall not soften sufficiently to destroy the effectiveness of
the joint when subjected to a temperature of 160º F., nor be soluble in
any of the wastes carried by the lateral.
C. Cast-iron push joints. Premolded gaskets may be used for hub and plain
end cast-iron pipe joints and joints with fitting, if approved by the City
Engineer. The gasket shall be a neoprene compression-type unit which
provides a positive seal in the assembled joint. The gasket shall be
premolded, one-piece unit, designed for joining the cast-iron hub and
plain end soil pipe and fittings. The assembled joint shall be sealed by
compression of the gasket between the exterior surface of the spigot
and the interior surface of the hub. The joint shall be assembled
following the manufacturer's recommendations using acceptable
lubricant and special pipe-coupling tools designed for that purpose. The
plain spigot end shall be forced into the hub end of the pipe for the full
depth of the hub itself. Lubricant shall be a bland, flax-base, nontoxic
material, and shall not chemically attack the gasket material.
D. PVC push joints. Joints for PVC sewer pipe shall follow the
manufacturer's recommendations, using properly designed couplings
and rubber gaskets pursuant to the published information relating
§ 139-64 CHARTER § 139-65
C:411
§ 139-66. Building and street laterals.
thereto, and conforming to the applicable ASTM Specification identified
in § 139-58.
A. Building lateral/street lateral connection.
(1) The connection of the building lateral to an existing street lateral
shall be made at the property line. Except as provided under
§§ 139-38 and 139-39, if a street lateral has not previously been
provided, the street lateral will be constructed from the existing
public sewer to the property line, by the City of Oneida, at the
owner's expense. The street lateral shall be installed with a
properly sealed and covered cleanout to grade located at the
property line. The cleanout shall terminate in a metal box
imbedded in concrete. [Amended 8-2-2016 by Ord. No. 16-04]
(2) The cost of constructing the street lateral from the existing public
sewer to the property line shall be at the property owner's expense;
all subsequent costs and expense incidental to the installation and
connection of the building lateral shall also be borne by the owner.
(3) The property owner shall indemnify the City from any loss or
damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by the
installation of the building lateral.
(4) It shall be the responsibility of the property owner to maintain,
repair, or replace the building lateral, as needed.
(5) The method of connection of the building lateral to the street
lateral will be dependent upon the type of sewer pipe material, and,
in all cases, shall be approved by the City Engineer. After
installation of the street lateral has been approved by the City
Engineer, the new street lateral shall become the property of the
City. Any subsequent repairs to the new street laterals shall be
made by the City at the City's expense.
B. Cleanout repair/replacement. If, in the judgment of the City Engineer, it
is determined that a building lateral, without a property line cleanout,
needs repair or replacement, the City may install a cleanout at the
property line, at the property owner's expense, such that the street
lateral can be maintained independently of the building lateral.
C. Street lateral replacement; ownership. Any existing street lateral
which, upon examination by the City Engineer, is determined to be in
need of replacement will be replaced with a new street lateral with a
property line cleanout. The replacement street lateral shall be
constructed by a licensed plumber. The cost of constructing the
replacement street lateral and cleanout shall be at the property owner's
expense. Once the replacement street lateral and cleanout have been
constructed and approved by the City Engineer, the new street lateral
§ 139-65 ONEIDA CODE § 139-66
C:412
§ 139-67. Testing.
The street lateral, building lateral, or the combined lateral shall be tested
for infiltration/exfiltration by:
§ 139-68. Connection inspection.
§ 139-69. Excavation and trench inspections.
When trenches are excavated for the laying of building lateral pipes or for
laying of street lateral pipes, such trenches shall be inspected by the City
Engineer. Before the trenches are backfilled, the person performing such
work shall notify the City Engineer when the laying of the building lateral
is completed, and no backfilling of trenches shall begin until approval is
obtained the City Engineer.
§ 139-70. Protection of excavations; restoration of disturbed areas.
All excavations for constructing building laterals shall be adequately
protected with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard.
Streets, sidewalks, parkways, and other public property disturbed, in the
course of the work, shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the City
Engineer. When installation requires disturbance of paved public roads
and shoulders, restoration shall involve backfilling to road grade. Shortly
thereafter the City of Oneida Department of Public Works (DPW) shall
complete road and shoulder restoration to the City standards. The cost for
such final road and shoulder restoration by the DPW shall be included with
the fees paid with the application for the permit required in § 139-52.
shall become the property of the City. Any repairs to new street laterals
shall be made by the City at the City's expense.
D. Property owner responsibility. It shall be the responsibility of the owner
of a served property to construct and maintain the house sewer to the
point of connection to the City sewer system.
A. Any full pipe method described in § 139-45; or
B. By a suitable joint method, with the prior written approval of the City
Engineer.
A. The applicant for the building lateral permit shall notify the City
Engineer when the building lateral is ready for inspection and
connection is to be made to the street lateral. The connection shall be
made under the supervision of the City Engineer. [Amended 8-2-2016
by Ord. No. 16-04]
B. The applicant for the street lateral permit shall notify the City Engineer
when the street lateral is ready for inspection and connection is to be
made to the main sewer. The connection shall be made under the
supervision of the City Engineer.
§ 139-66 CHARTER § 139-71
C:413
§ 139-71. Interior cleanout.
§ 139-72. Costs borne by owner.
All costs associated with the provisions of this article shall be borne by
the property owner unless specifically stated or agreed to be a cost borne
by the City. The property owner shall indemnify the City from any loss or
damage that may be directly or indirectly occasioned by the installation of
the building and street laterals, and connections and appurtenances.
A. An interior cleanout fitting shall be provided for each building lateral at
a readily accessible location, preferably just inside the basement wall.
The fitting shall contain a branch of 45º with removable plug or test tee,
and so positioned that sewer cleaning equipment can be inserted
therein to clean the building lateral.
B. The cleanout diameter shall be no less than the building lateral
diameter.
§ 139-71 ONEIDA CODE § 139-72
C:414
ARTICLE IX
Inflow
§ 139-73. New inflow sources prohibited.
No connections shall be made to a sanitary or to a combined sewer which
connections are intended to discharge inflow. Such prohibited connections
include, but are not limited to, footing drains, roof leaders, roof drains,
cellar drains, sump pumps, catch basins, uncontaminated cooling water
discharges, or other sources of inflow.
§ 139-74. Existing inflow sources disconnected.
For properties where separate storm sewers are available within 100 feet of
the property line or where, in the judgment of the City Engineer, sufficient
natural drainage is available, connections which contribute inflow to the
sanitary sewers must be disconnected in a fashion approved by the City
Engineer, prior to the sale of the property.
§ 139-75. Existing inflow sources disconnected when property sold.
Upon notice from the Tax Assessor, the City Engineer shall inspect any
newly sold property for the purpose of determining if storm sewers or
natural drainage is available, and, if so, if all connections which contribute
inflow have been disconnected.
§ 139-76. Reconnection of inflow source prohibited.
It shall be a willful violation of this Part 3 for any person to reconnect any
inflow source which has been disconnected pursuant to this article.
§ 139-77. Charges for inflow.
The City Engineer is enabled to take whatever action is necessary to
determine the amount of inflow including the requirement for installation
of a control manhole. The property from which the inflow originated shall
be billed for inflow according to Article XIV; however, the Common Council
may cause a surcharge at a rate not to exceed five times that for normal
sewage volume charge.
§ 139-73 CHARTER § 139-77
C:415

ARTICLE X
Trucked or Hauled Waste
§ 139-78. Licenses and application.
§ 139-79. License restrictions.
The applicant for a license to truck or haul wastes shall be the owner of the
vehicle or vehicles to be used for such discharge. Any false or misleading
statement in any license application shall be grounds for invalidating the
license. All licenses issued by the City Engineer for this purpose shall be for
one year. The licensee shall also be duly permitted by the NYSDEC under
6 NYCRR Part 364 ("364 permit"). If, for any reason, the 364 permit is
revoked, the 364 permit lapses or becomes invalid, then the license issued
under this article shall become invalid immediately. All acts performed
in connection with the license shall be subject to the inspection and
regulations, as established by the City Engineer, the terms and conditions
of the license and all local and general laws, ordinances, and regulations
which are now or may come into effect, and such license may be suspended
or revoked, at any time, by the City Engineer for willful, continued, or
persistent violation thereof.
§ 139-80. Discharge location and timing.
The City Engineer may require discharging at only certain locations within
the POTW, and only at certain times, and on only certain days of the week or
seasons of the year as shall be stated on said license or as may be relocated
by the City Engineer, after appropriate notice. The time and conditions for
permissible discharge shall be as set forth on the license, or as may be
revised after appropriate notice from the City Engineer.
§ 139-81. Notification of discharge; extra costs.
Each discharge of trucked or hauled wastes shall be made only with the
approval of the City Engineer. The City Engineer may require inspection,
A. The discharge of trucked or hauled wastes into the City sanitary sewer
system and public sewers tributary thereto will be permitted only with
the written approval of the City Engineer. Applicants for such permit
shall apply on a form provided by the City Engineer. These forms may
require information such as vehicle specifications, vehicle license
number, vehicle color, NYSDEC permits issued under 6 NYCRR Part
364, approximate annual septage volume expected, service area, and
any other information that the City Engineer may require, to determine
whether the trucked or hauled wastes could adversely impact the
POTW. The application shall be accompanied by a fee of $100.38
B. The licensee of trucked or hauled wastes will also be charged a fee for
each discharge, in accordance with Article XIV.
38.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions).
§ 139-78 CHARTER § 139-81
C:417
sampling, and analysis of each load prior to the discharge of a load. Any
extra costs associated with such inspection, sampling, and analysis shall be
paid by the licensee.
§ 139-82. Area served. [Amended 7-22-1998 by Ord. No. 98-02]
A. Effective July 1, 2002, any and all septage, as herein defined, received
at the City of Oneida wastewater treatment plant must be generated in
the following municipalities: City of Oneida, Village of Wampsville,
Town of Vernon, Town of Verona, Oneida Castle, Town of Lincoln, Town
of Stockbridge, Town of Sullivan and Town of Lenox. [Amended
6-18-2002]
B. The treatment plant personnel must obtain written certification from
the waste hauler that the septage was in fact generated within the
specified municipal boundaries. In the event that septage not generated
in one of the specified locations is knowingly discharged at the City of
Oneida Treatment Plant, the offending waste hauler shall lose
discharge privileges according to the following schedule:
(1) First offense: suspension for 30 days.
(2) Second offense: suspension for 180 days.
(3) Third offense: permanent suspension.
§ 139-81 ONEIDA CODE § 139-82
C:418
ARTICLE XI
Discharge Restrictions
§ 139-83. Pretreatment standards.
All users of the City of Oneida POTW will comply with all standards and
requirements of the Act and standards and requirements promulgated
pursuant to the Act, including but not limited to 40 CFR Parts 405 - 471.
§ 139-84. General prohibitions.
A. No user shall contribute or cause to be contributed, in any manner or
fashion, directly or indirectly, any pollutant or wastewater which will
interfere with the operation or performance of the POTW. These general
prohibitions apply to all such users of a POTW whether or not the user
is subject to National Categorical Pretreatment Standards, or any other
national, state, or local pretreatment standards or requirements.
B. Without limiting the generality of the foregoing, a user may not
contribute the following substances to the POTW:
(1) Any solids, liquids, or gases which, by reason of their nature or
quantity, are or may be sufficient, either alone or by interaction
with other substances, to cause a fire or an explosion or be
injurious, in any way, to the POTW, or to the operation of the POTW.
At no time shall both of two successive readings on a flame-type
explosion hazard meter, at the point of discharge into the system
(or at any other point in the system), be more than 25% nor any
single reading be more than 40% of the lower explosive limit (LEL)
of the meter. Unless explicitly allowable by a written permit,
prohibited materials include, but are not limited to, gasoline,
kerosene, naphtha, benzene, toluene, xylene, ethers, alcohols,
carbides, hydrides, and sulfides, and any other substance which the
City, the state, or the EPA has determined to be a fire hazard or
hazard to the POTW.
(2) Solid or viscous substances which may cause obstruction to the
flow in a sewer or otherwise interfere with the operation of the
wastewater treatment facilities. Unless explicitly allowable by a
written permit, such substances include, but are not limited to,
grease, garbage with particles greater than 1/2 inch in any
dimension, animal guts or tissues, paunch manure, bones, hair,
hides or fleshings, entrails, whole blood, feathers, ashes, cinders,
sand, spent lime, stone or marble dust, metal, glass, straw,
shavings, grass clippings, rags, spent grains, spent hops,
wastepaper, wood, plastics, gas, tar asphalt residues, residues from
refining or processing fuel or lubricating oil, mud, or glass or stone
grinding or polishing wastes.
(3) Any wastewater having a pH less than 5.5 or greater than 10.0,
unless the POTW was specifically designed to manage such
§ 139-83 CHARTER § 139-84
C:419
wastewater, or wastewater having any other corrosive property
capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment,
and/or POTW personnel. The City Engineer can authorize by
special permit the discharge of wastewater having a pH outside
this range.
(4) Any wastewater containing toxic pollutants in sufficient quantity,
either singly or by interaction with other pollutants (including
heat), to injure or interfere with any wastewater treatment process,
constitute a hazard to humans or animals, create a toxic effect in
the receiving waters of the POTW, or to exceed the limitation set
forth in a categorical pretreatment standard. A toxic pollutant shall
include, but not be limited to, any pollutant identified pursuant to
Section 307(A) of the Act.
(5) Any noxious or malodorous solids, liquids, or gases which either
singly or by interaction with other wastes are sufficient to create a
public nuisance or a hazard to life or are sufficient to prevent entry
into the sewers for their maintenance or repair.
(6) Oils and grease. Any commercial, institutional, or industrial wastes
containing fats, waxes, grease, or oils which become visible solids
when the wastes are cooled to 10º C. (50º F.); any petroleum oil,
nonbiodegradable cutting oil, or products of mineral oil origin, in
excess of 100 mg/l or in amounts that will cause interference or
pass-through. All analytical procedures utilized to determine
quantities of, and/or determine the origin of, oil and grease in
wastewater must conform to all NYSDOH ELAP requirements.
(7) Any wastewater which will cause interference or pass-through.
(8) Any wastewater with objectionable color which is not removed in
the treatment process, such as, but not limited to, dye wastes, and
vegetable tanning solutions.
(9) Any solid, liquid, vapor, or gas having a temperature higher than
65º C. (150º F.); however, such materials shall not cause the POTW
treatment plant influent temperature to be greater than 40º C.
(104º F.). The City Engineer reserves the right, in certain instances,
to prohibit or limit the discharge of wastes whose maximum
temperatures are lower than 65º C.
(10) Unusual flow rate or concentration of wastes, constituting slugs,
except by industrial wastewater permit.
(11) Any wastewater containing any radioactive wastes except as
approved by the City Engineer, and in compliance with applicable
state and federal regulations.
(12) Any wastewater which causes a hazard to human life or which
creates a public nuisance, either by itself or in combination, in any
way, with other wastes.
§ 139-84 ONEIDA CODE § 139-84
C:420
§ 139-85. Concentration-based limitations.
(13) Any wastewater with a closed cup flashpoint of less than 140º F. or
60º C. using the test methods specified in 40 CFR Part 261.21.
(14) Any pollutants which result in the presence of toxic gases, vapors
or fumes within the POTW in a quantity that may cause acute
worker health and safety problems.
A. No person shall discharge, directly or indirectly into the POTW,
wastewater containing any of the following substances in
concentrations exceeding those specified below on either a daily or an
instantaneous basis, except by permit or as provided for in § 139-86.
Concentration limits are applicable to wastewater effluents at the point
just prior to discharge into the POTW (end-of-pipe concentrations).
Parameter
Local Limits Effluent
Concentration
(mg/l)
Arsenic 0.1
Cadmium 0.2
Chromium (hexavalent) 0.1
Chromium (total) 2.0
Copper 0.4
Cyanide (complex) 0.8
Cyanide (free) 0.2
Lead 0.1
Mercury 0.1
Nickel 2.0
Phenol 2.0
Selenium 0.1
Silver 0.1
Zinc 0.6
(1) Except for chromium (hex), all concentrations listed for metallic
substances shall be as total metal, which shall be defined as the
value measured in a sample acidified to a pH value of two or less,
without prior filtration.
(2) As determined on a composite sample taken from the user's daily
discharge over a typical operational and/or production day.
(3) As determined on a grab sample taken from the user's discharge at
any time during the daily operation and/or production period.
B. Other substances which may be limited are:
§ 139-84 CHARTER § 139-85
C:421
§ 139-86. Mass-discharge-based limitations.
(1) Alkanes, alkenes and alkynes;
(2) Aliphatic and aromatic alcohols and acids;
(3) Aliphatic and aromatic aldehydes and ketones;
(4) Aliphatic and aromatic esters;
(5) Aliphatic and aromatic halogenated compounds;
(6) Aliphatic and aromatic nitro, cyano and amino compounds;
(7) Antibiotics;
(8) Benzene derivatives;
(9) Chemical compounds which, upon acidification, alkalinization,
oxidation or reduction, in the discharge or after admixture with
wastewater and its components in the POTW, produce toxic,
flammable, or explosive compounds;
(10) Pesticides, including algicides, fungicides, herbicides, insecticides,
rodenticides, phthalates;
(11) Polyaromatic and polynuclear hydrocarbons;
(12) Total toxic organics, TTO as defined in 40 CFR 433.11;
(13) Toxic organic compounds, regulated by federal pretreatment
standards;
(14) Unsaturated aliphatics, including those with an aldehyde, ketone
or nitrile functional group; and/or
(15) Viable pathogenic organisms from industrial processes or hospital
procedures.
A. At no time shall the influent to the POTW contain quantities in excess of
those specified below:
(1) Allowable POTW influent loading. The City Engineer shall
determine the total allowable influent load of each substance from
significant industrial users. In determining the total load of each
substance that significant industrial users shall be allowed to
discharge, the superintendent shall consider:
(a) The quantities of each substance that are uncontrollable
because they occur naturally in wastewater;
(b) The quantities of each substance that are anthropogenic but
are nonetheless uncontrollable;
(c) Historical discharge trends;
§ 139-85 ONEIDA CODE § 139-86
C:422
§ 139-87. Modification of limitations.
§ 139-88. Access to user's records.
The City Engineer shall have the authority to copy any record related to
wastewater discharges to the POTW.
(d) Past pollution control efforts of each significant industrial user
as compared to other significant industrial dischargers of the
same substance;
(e) Potential for growth in the POTW service area;
(f) Potential for more restrictive regulatory requirements to be
placed on the POTW discharge or sludge disposal or sludge
reuse method; and
(g) Treatability of the substance.
(2) The Superintendent shall apply a minimum 16% safety factor to be
protective of the POTW.
B. To assure that the total loads so calculated, for each substance, are not
violated, the City Engineer shall issue permits to significant industrial
users limiting discharge loads.
C. Permits issued in accordance with this section may allow for discharges
in excess of limitations set forth under § 139-85.
A. Limitations on wastewater strength or mass discharge contained in this
Part 3 may be supplemented with more stringent limitations when, in
the opinion of the City Engineer:
(1) The limitations in this Part 3 are not sufficient to protect the POTW;
(2) The limitations in this Part 3 are not sufficient to enable the POTW
treatment plant to comply with applicable water quality standards
or the effluent limitations specified in the POTW's SPDES permit;
(3) The POTW sludge will be rendered unacceptable for disposal or
reuse as the City desires, as a result of discharge of wastewaters at
the above prescribed concentration limitations;
(4) Municipal employees or the public will be endangered; or
(5) Air pollution and/or groundwater pollution will be caused.
B. The limitations on wastewater strength or mass discharge shall be
recalculated not less frequently than once every five years. The results
of these calculations shall be reported to the Common Council. This
Part 3 shall then be amended appropriately. Any issued industrial
wastewater discharge permits, which have limitations, based directly
on any limitations, which are changed, shall be revised and amended,
as appropriate.
§ 139-86 CHARTER § 139-89
C:423
§ 139-89. Dilution.
§ 139-90. Grease, oil, and sand interceptors.
Grease, oil, and sand interceptors shall be provided, when, in the opinion of
the City Engineer, they are necessary for the proper handling of wastewater
containing excessive amounts of grease, flammable substances, sand, or
other harmful substances, except that such interceptors shall not be
required for private living quarters or living units. All interceptors shall be
of type and capacity approved by the City Engineer and shall be so located
to be easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. Such interceptors shall
be inspected, cleaned, and repaired regularly, as needed, by the owner, at
his expense.
§ 139-91. Solid waste grinders.
Solid waste grinders at or serving commercial establishments, institutions
or industries shall not discharge into the City if there is a combined sewer
overflow (CSO) on the sewer lines conveying the waste to the POTW
treatment plant.
§ 139-92. Rejection of wastewater.
The City Common Council may reject a user's wastewater, on
recommendation of the City Engineer, when it has been determined that the
wastewater contains substances or possesses characteristics which have a
deleterious effect on the POTW and its processes, or on the receiving water,
or which constitute a public nuisance or hazard. See § 139-119.
A. Except where expressly authorized to do so by an applicable
pretreatment standard, no user shall ever increase the use of process
water or, in any other way, attempt to dilute a discharge as a partial or
complete substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with
a treatment standard.
B. Dilution flow shall be considered to be inflow.
§ 139-89 ONEIDA CODE § 139-92
C:424
ARTICLE XII
Discharge Permits and Pretreatment Requirements
§ 139-93. Wastewater discharge reports.
As a means of determining compliance with this Part 3, with applicable
SPDES permit conditions, and with applicable state and federal law, each
industrial user shall be required to notify the City Engineer of any new
existing discharges to the POTW by submitting a completed industrial
chemical survey (ICS) form and a completed industrial wastewater survey
(IWS) form to the City Engineer. The City Engineer may require any user
discharging wastewater into the POTW to file wastewater discharge reports
and to supplement such reports as the City Engineer deems necessary. All
information shall be furnished by the user in complete cooperation with the
City Engineer.
§ 139-94. Notification to industrial users.
The City Engineer shall, from time to time, notify each industrial user of
applicable pretreatment standards, and of other applicable requirements
under Section 204(B) and Section 405 of the Clean Water Act, and Subtitles
C and D of RCRA.
§ 139-95. Compliance with wastewater discharge permit required.
No significant industrial user shall discharge wastewater to the POTW
without having a valid wastewater discharge permit issued by the City
Engineer. Significant industrial users shall comply fully with the terms and
conditions of their permits in addition to the provisions of this Part 3.
Violation of a permit term or condition is deemed a violation of this Part 3.
§ 139-96. Wastewater discharge permits required for significant
industrial users; existing users.
All significant industrial users proposing to connect to or to discharge to
the POTW shall obtain a wastewater discharge permit before connecting
to or discharging to the POTW. Existing significant industrial users shall
make application for a wastewater discharge permit within 30 days after
the effective date of this Part 3, and shall obtain such a permit within 90
days after making application.
§ 139-97. Other industrial users.
The City Engineer may issue wastewater discharge permits to other
industrial users of the POTW.
§ 139-98. Authority to issue permits to discharge to storm sewers.
The City of Oneida does not have the authority to issue permits for the
discharge of any wastewater to a storm sewers. This authority rests with
the NYSDEC.
§ 139-93 CHARTER § 139-99
C:425
§ 139-99. Application for wastewater discharge permits.
A. Industrial users required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit shall
complete and file with the City Engineer an application in the form
prescribed by the City, the application shall be accompanied by a fee of
$125. In support of any application, the industrial user shall submit, in
units and terms appropriate for evaluation, the following information:
(1) Name, address, and location (if different from the address).
(2) SIC code of both the industry and any categorical processes.
(3) Wastewater constituents and characteristics including but not
limited to those mentioned in Article XI of this Part 3 and which are
limited in the appropriate categorical standard, as determined by a
reliable analytical laboratory approved by the NYSDOH. Sampling
and analysis shall be performed in accordance with standard
methods.
(4) Time and duration of the discharge.
(5) Average daily peak wastewater flow rates, including daily, monthly,
and seasonal variations, if any.
(6) Site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans, and details
to show all sewers, sewer connections, and appurtenances.
(7) Description of activities, facilities, and plant processes on the
premises, including all materials which are or could be discharged
to the POTW.
(8) Each product produced by type, amount, process or processes, and
rate of production.
(9) Type and amount of raw materials processed (average and
maximum per day).
(10) Number and type of employees, and hours of operation, and
proposed or actual hours of operation of the pretreatment system.
(11) The nature and concentration of any pollutants in the discharge
which are limited by any county, state, or federal standards, and a
statement whether or not the standards are being met on
consistent basis and if not whether additional operation and
maintenance (O&M) and/or additional pretreatment is required for
the user to meet all applicable standards.
(12) If additional pretreatment and/or O&M will be required to meet the
standards, then the industrial user shall provide the shortest
schedule to accomplish such additional treatment and/or O&M. The
completion date in this schedule shall not be longer than the
compliance date established for the applicable pretreatment
standard. The following conditions shall apply to this schedule:
§ 139-99 ONEIDA CODE § 139-99
C:426
§ 139-100. Permit modifications.
(a) The schedule shall contain progress increments in the form of
dates for the commencement and completion of major events
leading to the construction and operation of additional
pretreatment required for the user to meet the applicable
pretreatment standards (such events include hiring an
engineer, completing preliminary plans, completing final plans,
executing contracts for major components, commencing
construction, completing construction, beginning operations
and beginning routine operation).
(b) No increment referred to in Subsection A(12)(a) above shall
exceed nine months, nor shall the total compliance period
exceed 18 months.
(c) No later than 14 calendar days following each date in the
schedule and the final date for compliance, the user shall
submit a progress report to the City Engineer including, as a
minimum, whether or not it complied with the increment of
progress to be met on such date and, if not, the date on which it
expects to comply with this increment of progress, the reason
for delay, and the steps being taken by the user to return to the
established schedule.
(d) In no event shall more than nine months elapse between such
progress reports to the City Engineer.
(13) Any other information as deemed necessary by the City Engineer to
evaluate the permit application.
B. The City Engineer will evaluate the data furnished by the industrial
user and may require additional information. After evaluation and
acceptance of the data furnished, the City may issue a wastewater
discharge permit subject to terms and conditions provided herein. A
permit application fee of $125 shall be paid to the City at the time the
original application is filed and upon each renewal.
A. Wastewater discharge permits may be modified by the City Engineer,
upon 30 days' notice to the permittee, for just cause. Just cause shall
include but not be limited to:
(1) Promulgation of an applicable National Categorical Pretreatment
standard;
(2) Revision of or a grant of a variance from such categorical standards
pursuant to 40 CFR 403.13;
(3) Changes in general discharge prohibitions and local limits as per
Article XI of this Part 3;
§ 139-99 CHARTER § 139-100
C:427
§ 139-101. Permit conditions.
(4) Changes in processes used by the permittee, or changes in
discharge volume or character;
(5) Changes in design or capability of any part of the POTW;
(6) Discovery that the permitted discharge causes or contributes to
pass-through or interference; and
(7) Changes in the nature and character of the sewage in the POTW as
a result of other permitted discharges.
B. Any changes or new conditions in the permit shall include a reasonable
time schedule for compliance as set forth in § 139-99A(12)(a).
A. Wastewater discharge permits shall be expressly subject to all the
provisions of this Part 3, and all other applicable regulations, user
charges and fees established by the City of Oneida. Permits may contain
the following:
(1) Limits on the average and maximum rate and time of discharge, or
requirements for flow regulation and equalization.
(2) Limits on the average and maximum wastewater constituents and
characteristics, including concentration or mass discharge limits.
(3) The unit charge or schedule of user charges and fees for the
management of the wastewater discharged to the POTW.
(4) Requirements for installation and maintenance (in safe condition)
of inspection and sampling facilities.
(5) Specifications for monitoring programs which may include
sampling locations, frequency of sampling, number, types, and
standards for tests, and reporting schedules.
(6) Compliance schedules.
(7) Requirements for submission of technical reports or discharge
reports.
(8) Requirements for maintaining and retaining plant records relating
to wastewater discharge as specified by the City, and affording the
City Engineer access thereto.
(9) Requirements for notification of the City of any new introduction of
wastewater constituents or of any substantial change in the volume
or character of the wastewater constituents being introduced into
the POTW.
(10) Requirements for the notification of the City of any change in the
manufacturing and/or pretreatment process used by the permittee.
§ 139-100 ONEIDA CODE § 139-101
C:428
§ 139-102. Permit duration.
Permits shall be issued for a specified time period, not to exceed five years.
A permit may be issued for a period less than five years.
§ 139-103. Permit reissuance.
The user shall apply for permit reissuance a minimum of 90 days prior to
the expiration of the user's existing permit. The terms and conditions of the
permit may be subject to modification, by the City Engineer, during the term
of the permit, as limitations or requirements, as identified in subsection, or
other just cause exists. The user shall be informed of any proposed changes
in his permit at least 30 days prior to the effective date of the change. Any
changes or new conditions in the reissued permit shall include a reasonable
time schedule for compliance as established in § 139-99A(12)(a).
§ 139-104. Permit transfer.
Wastewater discharge permits are issued to a specific user for a specific
operation, or discharge at a specific location. A wastewater discharge
permit shall not be reassigned, transferred, or sold to a new owner, new
user, different premises, or a new or changed operation. Should the existing
permitted facility be sold or otherwise transferred, the new owner must
be notified in writing of the existence of the permit and the fact that said
permit is nontransferable. The City Engineer must receive a copy of this
notification prior to transfer of ownership.
§ 139-105. Permit revocation.
Wastewater discharge permits may be revoked for the following reasons:
falsifying self-monitoring reports, tampering with monitoring equipment,
refusing to allow the City Engineer timely access to the industrial premises,
(11) Requirements for notification of excessive, accidental, or slug
discharges.
(12) Where pretreatment equipment has been installed, the owner must
provide for the continuous operation and maintenance of the
facility at their expense.
(13) Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the City to ensure
compliance with this Part 3, and state and federal laws, rules, and
regulations.
B. Conditions of industrial discharge permits shall be uniformly enforced
by the City in accordance with this Part 3 and applicable state and
federal regulations. The permits shall be expressly subject to all
provisions of this Part 3 and all other regulations, industrial surcharges
and fees established by the City and applicable state and federal
regulations.
§ 139-101 CHARTER § 139-105
C:429
failure to meet effluent limitations, failure to pay fines, failure to pay user
charges, and failure to meet compliance schedules.
§ 139-106. Reporting requirements for permittee.
A. The reports or documents required to be submitted or maintained
under this section shall be subject to:
(1) The provisions of 18 USC § 1001 relating to fraud and false
statements;
(2) The provisions of Sections 309(c)(4) of the Act, as amended,
governing false statements, representation or certification; and
(3) The provisions of Section 309(c)(6) of the Act, as amended,
regarding corporate officers.
B. Baseline monitoring report. Within 180 days after promulgation of an
applicable federal categorical pretreatment standard, a user subject to
that standard shall submit, to the City Engineer, the information
required by § 139-99A(8) and (9).
C. Ninety-day compliance report. Within 90 days following the date for
final compliance with applicable pretreatment standards, or, in the case
of a new source, following commencement of the introduction of
wastewater into the POTW, any user subject to pretreatment standards
and requirements shall submit to the City Engineer a report indicating
the nature and concentration of all pollutants in the discharge, from the
regulated process, which are limited by pretreatment standards and
requirements, and the average and maximum daily flow for these
process units in the user's facility which are limited by such
pretreatment standards and requirements. The report shall state
whether the applicable pretreatment standards and requirements are
being met on a consistent basis, and, if not, what additional O&M and/
or pretreatment is necessary to bring the user into compliance with the
applicable pretreatment standards or requirements. This statement
shall be signed by an authorized representative of the industrial user,
and certified to by a qualified professional.
D. Periodic compliance reports.
(1) Any user subject to a pretreatment standard, after the compliance
date of such pretreatment standard, or, in the case of a new source,
after commencement of the discharge into the POTW, shall submit
to the City Engineer, during the months of June and December,
unless required more frequently in the pretreatment standard or by
the City Engineer, a report indicating the nature and concentration
of pollutants in the effluent which are limited by such pretreatment
standards. In addition, this report shall include a record of all daily
flows which, during the reporting period, exceeded the average
daily flow reported in § 139-98. At the discretion of the City
Engineer, and in consideration of such factors as local high or low
§ 139-105 ONEIDA CODE § 139-106
C:430
§ 139-107. Flow equalization.
No person shall cause the discharge of slugs to the POTW. Each person
discharging into the POTW greater than 100,000 gallons per day or greater
than 5% of the average daily flow in the POTW, whichever is lesser, shall
install and maintain, on his property and at his expense, a suitable storage
and flow control facility to ensure equalization of flow over a twenty-fourhour
period. The facility shall have a capacity for at least 50% of the daily
discharge volume and shall be equipped with alarms and a rate of discharge
controller, the regulation of which shall be directed by the City Engineer. A
wastewater discharge permit may be issued solely for flow equalization.
§ 139-108. Monitoring stations (control manholes).
flow rates, holidays, budget cycles, etc., the City Engineer may
agree to alter the months during which the above reports are to be
submitted; however, no fewer than two reports shall be submitted
per year.
(2) The City Engineer may impose mass limitations on users, which are
using dilution to meet applicable pretreatment standards or
requirements, or, in other cases where the imposition of mass
limitations are appropriate. In such cases, the report required by
§ 139-106B shall indicate the mass of pollutants regulated by
pretreatment standards in the effluent of the user. These reports
shall contain the results of discharge sampling and analysis,
including the flow, and the nature and concentration, or production
and mass, where requested by the City Engineer, of pollutants
contained therein, which are limited by the applicable
pretreatment standard. All analyses shall be performed in
accordance with standard methods, by a laboratory certified by
NYSDOH to perform the analyses.
E. Violation report. If sampling performed by the user indicates a violation
of this Part 3 and/or the user's discharge permit, the user shall notify
the City Engineer within 24 hours of becoming aware of the violation.
The user shall also repeat the sampling and analysis and submit the
results of the repeat analysis to the City Engineer within 30 days after
becoming aware of the violation. The user is not required to resample if
the POTW performs monitoring of the user's discharge at least once a
month for the parameter which was violated, or if the POTW performs
sampling for the parameter which was violated between the user's
initial sampling and when the user receives the results of this sampling.
F. Other reports. The City Engineer may impose reporting requirements
equivalent to the requirements imposed by § 139-106A(3) for users not
subject to pretreatment standards.
A. All significant industrial users and other industrial users whose
industrial waste discharge has caused or may cause interference or
pass-through shall install and maintain a suitable monitoring station, on
§ 139-106 CHARTER § 139-108
C:431
§ 139-109. Proper design and maintenance of facilities and
monitoring stations.
Preliminary treatment, and flow equalization facilities, or monitoring
stations, if provided for any wastewater, shall be constructed and
maintained continuously clean, safe, and operational by the owner at his
expense. Where an industrial user has such treatment, equalization, or
monitoring facilities at the time this Part 3 is enacted, the City Engineer
may approve or disapprove the adequacy of such facilities. Where the
City Engineer disapproves of such facilities and construction of new or
upgraded facilities for treatment, equalization, or monitoring are required,
plans and specifications for such facilities shall be prepared by a licensed
professional engineer and submitted to the City Engineer. Construction of
new or upgraded facilities shall not commence until written approval of the
City Engineer has been obtained.
§ 139-110. Tampering with measuring devices.
No unauthorized person shall negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover,
deface, tamper with, prevent access, or render inaccurate, or cause or
permit the negligent breaking, damaging, destroying, uncovering, defacing,
tampering with, preventing access, or rendering inaccurate to:
§ 139-111. Sampling and analysis.
their premises at their expense, to facilitate the observation, sampling,
and measurement of their industrial wastewater discharge.
B. If there is more than one street lateral serving an industrial user, the
City Engineer may require the installation of a control manhole on each
lateral.
C. The City Engineer may require that such monitoring station(s) include
equipment for the continuous measurement and recording of
wastewater flow rate and for the sampling of the wastewater. Such
station(s) shall be accessibly and safely located, and the industrial user
shall allow immediate access, without prior notice, to the station by the
City Engineer, or his designated representative.
A. Any structure, appurtenance, or equipment which is a part of the City of
Oneida POTW; or
B. Any measuring, sampling, and/or testing device or mechanism installed
pursuant to any requirement under this Part 3 except as approved by
the City Engineer.
A. Sampling shall be performed so that a representative portion of the
wastewater is obtained for analysis.
B. All measurements, tests and analyses of the characteristics of waters
and wastes required in any section of this Part 3 shall be carried out in
accordance with Standard Methods, by a laboratory certified by
§ 139-108 ONEIDA CODE § 139-111
C:432
§ 139-112. Accidental discharges; slug discharge control plan.
NYSDOH to perform the analyses. Such samples shall be taken at the
approved monitoring stations described in § 139-108, if such a station
exists. If an approved monitoring station is not required, then samples
shall be taken from another location on the industrial sewer lateral
before discharge to the public sewer. Unless specifically requested
otherwise, or unless specifically not allowed in federal regulation,
samples shall be gathered as flow proportioned (where feasible)
composite samples made up of individual samples taken not less than
once per hour for the period of time equal to the duration of industrial
wastewater discharge during daily operations (including any cleanup
shift).
A. Each user shall provide for protection from accidental or slug
discharges of prohibited materials or discharges of materials in volume
or concentration exceeding limitations of this Part 3 or of an industrial
wastewater discharge permit. Users shall immediately notify the City
Engineer of the discharge of wastes in violation of this Part 3 or any
permit. Such discharges may result from:
(1) Breakdown of pretreatment equipment.
(2) Accidents caused by mechanical failure, or negligence.
(3) Other causes.
B. Where possible, such immediate notification shall allow the City
Engineer to initiate appropriate countermeasure action at the POTW.
The user shall prepare a detailed written statement following any
accidental or slug discharge, which describes the causes of the
discharge and the measures being taken to prevent future occurrences,
within five days of the occurrence, and the City Engineer shall receive a
copy of such report no later than the fifth calendar day following the
occurrence. Analytical results and their interpretation may be
appended to the report at a date not exceeding 45 calendar days after
the occurrence.
C. When required by the City Engineer, detailed plans and procedures to
prevent accidental or slug discharges shall be submitted to the City
Engineer for approval. These plans and procedures shall be called a
"slug discharge control plan." The plan shall address, at a minimum, the
following:
(1) Description of discharge practices, including nonroutine batch
discharges.
(2) Description of stored chemicals.
(3) Procedures for immediately notifying the POTW of any accidental
or slug discharge. Such notification must also be given for any
§ 139-111 CHARTER § 139-112
C:433
§ 139-113. Posting notices.
In order that the industrial user's employees be informed of the City of
Oneida requirements, a notice shall be permanently posted on appropriate
bulletin boards within the user's facility advising employees of the City
requirements and whom to call in case of an accidental discharge in
violation of this Part 3.
§ 139-114. Sample splitting.
When so requested in advance by an industrial user, and when taking a
sample of industrial wastewater, the City representative(s) shall gather
sufficient volume of sample so that the sample can be split into two nearly
equal volumes, each of size adequate for the anticipated analytical protocols
including any quality control (QC) procedures. One of the volumes shall be
given to the industry whose wastewater was sampled, and the other shall
be retained by the City for its own analysis.
§ 139-115. Public disclosure of data; confidential information.
discharge which would violate provision of the permit and any
national prohibitive discharge standard.
(4) Procedures to prevent adverse impact from any accidental or slug
discharge. Such procedures include, but are not limited to,
inspection and maintenance of storage areas, handling and transfer
of materials, loading and unloading operations, control of plant site
runoff, worker training, building of containment structures or
equipment, measures for containing toxic organic pollutants
(including solvents), and/or measures and equipment for
emergency response.
A. When requested, the City Engineer shall make available, to the public,
for inspection and/or copying, information and data on industrial users
obtained from reports, questionnaires, permit applications, permit and
monitoring programs, and inspections, unless the industrial user
specifically requests, and is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of
the City Engineer, that such information, if made public, would divulge
processes or methods of production entitled to protection as trade
secrets of the user. Wastewater constituents and characteristics and
reports of accidental discharges shall not be recognized as confidential.
B. Confidential information shall not be made available for inspection and/
or copying by the public but shall be disclosed, upon written request, to
governmental agencies, for uses related to this Part 3 or the SPDES
permit; provided that the governmental agency making the request
agrees to hold the information confidential, in accordance with state or
federal laws, rules and regulations. The City Engineer shall provide
written notice to the industrial user of any disclosure of confidential
information to another governmental agency.
§ 139-112 ONEIDA CODE § 139-116
C:434
§ 139-116. Access to property and records.
The City Engineer and other authorized representatives of the City,
representatives of EPA, NYSDEC, NYSDOH, and/or the Madison County
Health Department, bearing proper credentials and identification shall be
permitted to enter upon all nonresidential properties at all times for the
purpose of inspection, observation, sampling, flow measurement, and
testing to ascertain a user's compliance with applicable provisions of
federal and state law governing use of the City POTW, and with the
provisions of this Part 3. Inspections of residential properties shall
performed in proper observance of the resident's civil rights. Such
representative(s) shall have the right to set up, on the user's property
or property rented/leased by the user, such devices as are necessary to
conduct sampling or flow measurement. Guard dogs shall be under proper
control of the user while the representatives are on the user's property or
property rented/leased by the user. Such representative(s) shall additionally
have access to and may copy any records the user is required to maintain
under this Part 3. Where a user has security measures in force which would
require proper identification and clearance before entry into the premises,
the user shall make necessary arrangements so that upon presentation
of suitable identification, inspecting personnel will be permitted to enter,
without delay, for the purpose of performing their specific responsibilities.
§ 139-117. Access to easements.
The City Engineer, bearing proper credentials and identification, shall be
permitted to enter all private premises through which the City holds an
easement for the purpose of inspection, observation, measurement,
sampling, repair, and maintenance of any portion of the City public sewer
system lying within the easement. All entry and subsequent work on the
easement shall be done in accordance with the terms of the easement
pertaining to the private premises involved.
§ 139-118. Liability of property owner.
During the performance on private premises of inspections, sampling, or
other similar operations referred to in §§ 139-115 and 139-116, the
inspectors shall observe all applicable safety rules established by the owner
or occupant of the premises. The owner and/or occupant shall be held
harmless for personal injury or death of the inspector and the loss of or
damage to the inspector's supplies and/or equipment; and the inspector
shall indemnify the owner and/or occupant against loss or damage to
property of the owner or occupant by the inspector and against liability
claims asserted against the owner or occupant for personal injury or death
of the inspector or for loss of or damage to the inspector's supplies or
equipment arising from inspection and sampling operations, except as such
may be caused by negligence or failure of the owner or occupant to
maintain safe conditions.
§ 139-119. Special agreements.
§ 139-116 CHARTER § 139-119
C:435
A. Nothing in this article shall be construed as preventing any special
agreement or arrangement between the City and any user of the POTW
whereby wastewater of unusual strength or character is accepted into
the POTW and specially treated, subject to any payments or user
charges, as may be applicable. In entering into such a special
agreement, the City Engineer shall consider whether the wastewater
will:
(1) Pass through or cause interference;
(2) Endanger municipal employees;
(3) Cause violation of the SPDES permit;
(4) Interfere with any purpose stated in § 139-12;
(5) Prevent the equitable compensation to the City for wastewater
conveyance and treatment and sludge management and disposal.
B. No discharge which violates the federal pretreatment standards will be
allowed under the terms of such special agreements.
C. No agreement shall be entered into without the user having been issued
and presently having a permit to discharge wastes into the POTW for
treatment and disposal. Where applicable the conditions of such
agreements shall be included in the user's permit. Additionally the user
shall be in compliance with all conditions in the permit and shall not be
in arrears in any charges due to the City before the agreement is
entered into. The Common Council may condition the agreement.
§ 139-119 ONEIDA CODE § 139-119
C:436
ARTICLE XIII
Enforcement and Penalties; Administrative and Judicial Remedies
§ 139-120. Enforcement response plan.
A. The City Engineer shall prepare an enforcement response plan. The
enforcement response plan, in a step-by-step fashion, shall outline the
procedures to be followed to identify, document, and respond to
violations by users of the POTW. All violations by users of the POTW
shall be met with some type of enforcement response. The response
shall be comprehensive and effective. The enforcement response plan
shall:
(1) Describe how the City Engineer will investigate instances of
noncompliance.
(2) Describe the types of escalated enforcement actions that the City
Engineer will take in response to all anticipated types of user
violations and the time periods within which to initiate and follow
up these actions.
(3) Adequately reflect the Common Council's responsibility to enforce
all applicable standards and requirements.
B. The enforcement response plan shall contain:
(1) Criteria for scheduling periodic inspection and/or sampling visits to
POTW users.
(2) Forms and guidelines for documenting compliance data in a
manner which will enable the information to be used as evidence.
(3) Systems to track due dates, compliance schedule milestones, and
pending enforcement actions.
(4) Criteria, responsible personnel, and procedures to select and
initiate an enforcement action.
C. The range of appropriate enforcement actions shall promote consistent
and timely use of enforcement remedies and shall be based on the
nature and severity of the violation and other relevant factors, such as:
(1) Magnitude of the violation.
(2) Duration of the violation.
(3) Effect of the violation on the receiving water.
(4) Effect of the violation on the POTW.
(5) Effect of the violation on the health and safety of the POTW
employees.
(6) Compliance history of the user.
§ 139-120 CHARTER § 139-120
C:437
§ 139-121. Notification of violation.
Whenever the City Engineer finds that any user has violated or is violating
this Part 3, or any wastewater discharge permit, order, prohibition,
limitation, or requirement permitted by this Part 3, the City Engineer may
serve upon such person a written notice stating the nature of the violation.
Within 10 calendar days of the date the City Engineer mails the notice, an
explanation of the violation and a plan for the satisfactory correction and
prevention thereof shall be submitted to the City Engineer by the user. The
correction and prevention plan shall include specific actions. Submission of
this plan in no way relieves the user of liability for any violations caused by
the user before or after receipt of the notice of violation.
§ 139-122. Consent orders.
The City Engineer is hereby empowered to enter into consent orders,
assurances of voluntary compliance, or other similar documents
establishing an agreement with the user responsible for the noncompliance.
Such orders shall include specific action to be taken by the user to correct
the noncompliance within a time period also specified by the order. Consent
orders shall have the same force and effect as an administrative order.
§ 139-123. Administrative or compliance orders.
(7) Good faith of the user.
D. The Common Council shall approve the enforcement response plan. The
enforcement response plan shall be reviewed at least every five years.
A. When the City Engineer finds that a user has violated or continues to
violate this Part 3 or a permit or administrative order issued
thereunder, he may issue an administrative order to the user
responsible for the discharge directing that, following a specified time
period, sewer service shall be discontinued, severed and abated unless
the violation is corrected and that there is no reoccurrence of the
violation. Administrative orders may also contain such other
requirements as might be reasonably necessary and appropriate to
address the noncompliance, including the installation of pretreatment
technology, additional self-monitoring, and management practices.
B. The user may, within 15 calendar days of receipt of such order, petition
the City Engineer to modify or suspend the order. Such petition shall be
in written form and shall be transmitted to the City Engineer by
certified mail. The City Engineer shall then:
(1) Reject any frivolous petitions;
(2) Modify or suspend the order; or
(3) Order the petitioner to show cause in accordance with § 139-128
and may as part of the show cause notice request the user to supply
additional information.
§ 139-120 ONEIDA CODE § 139-124
C:438
§ 139-124. Administrative fines.
§ 139-125. Cease and desist orders.
§ 139-126. Termination of permit.
A. Notwithstanding any other section of this Part 3, any user who is found
to have violated any provision of this Part 3, or a wastewater discharge
permit or administrative order issued hereunder, shall be fined in an
amount not to exceed $1,000 per violation. Each day on which
noncompliance shall occur or continue shall be deemed a separate and
distinct violation.
B. The user may, within 15 calendar days of notification of the City
Engineer's notice of such fine, petition the City Engineer to modify or
suspend the order. Such petition shall be in written form and shall be
transmitted to the City Engineer by certified mail. The City Engineer
shall then:
(1) Reject any frivolous petitions;
(2) Modify or suspend the fine; or
(3) Order the petitioner to show cause in accordance with § 139-128
and may as part of the show cause notice request the user to supply
additional information.
A. When the City Engineer finds that a user has violated or continues to
violate this Part 3 or any permit or administrative order issued
hereunder, the City Engineer may issue an administrative order to
cease and desist all such violations and direct those persons in
noncompliance to:
(1) Comply forthwith.
(2) Take such appropriate remedial or preventive action as may be
needed to properly address a continuing or threatened violation,
including halting operations or terminating the discharge.
B. The user may, within 15 calendar days of the date the City Engineer
mails notification of such order, petition the City Engineer to modify or
suspend the order. Such petition shall be in written form and shall be
transmitted to the City engineer by certified mail. The City Engineer
shall then:
(1) Reject any frivolous petitions;
(2) Modify or suspend the order; or
(3) Order the petitioner to show cause in accordance with § 139-128
and may as part of the show cause notice request the user to supply
additional information.
§ 139-124 CHARTER § 139-126
C:439
§ 139-127. Water supply severance.
§ 139-128. Show-cause hearing.
A. Any user who violates the following conditions of this Part 3 or a
wastewater discharge permit or administrative order, or any applicable
state and federal law, is subject to permit termination:
(1) Violation of permit conditions or conditions of an administrative
order;
(2) Failure to accurately report the wastewater constituents and
characteristics of its discharge;
(3) Failure to report significant changes in operations or wastewater
constituents and characteristics;
(4) Refusal of reasonable access to the user's premises for the purpose
of inspection, monitoring, or sampling; or
(5) Failure to pay administrative fines, fees or user charges.
B. Noncompliant industrial users will be notified, by certified mail, of the
proposed termination of their wastewater permit.
C. The user may, within 15 calendar days of the date the City Engineer
mails such notification, petition the City Engineer to permit continued
use of the POTW by the user. Such petition shall be in written form and
shall be transmitted to the City Engineer by certified mail. The City
Engineer shall then:
(1) Reject any frivolous petitions;
(2) Order the petitioner to show cause in accordance with § 139-128
and may as part of the show cause notice request the user to supply
additional information.
A. Whenever a user has violated or continues to violate the provisions of
this Part 3 or an order or permit issued hereunder, water service to the
user may be severed and service will only recommence, at the user's
expense, after it has satisfactorily demonstrated its ability to comply.
B. The user may, within 15 calendar days of severance, petition the City
Engineer to reconnect water supply service. Such petition shall be in
written form and shall be transmitted to the City Engineer by certified
mail. The City Engineer shall then:
(1) Reject any frivolous petitions;
(2) Reconnect the water supply; or
(3) Order the petitioner to show cause in accordance with § 139-128
and may as part of the show cause notice request the user to supply
additional information.
§ 139-126 ONEIDA CODE § 139-128
C:440
§ 139-129. Failure of user to petition City Engineer.
In the event the City Engineer issues any administrative order, terminates
the user's permit, or makes any fine as set forth in this article, and the
user fails, within the designated period of time set forth, to petition the City
Engineer, as provided in appropriate sections this article, the user shall be
deemed in default and its rights to test the administrative order or fine shall
be deemed waived.
§ 139-130. Notice.
The notices, orders, petitions, or other notification which the user or City
Engineer shall desire or be required to give pursuant to any sections of
this Part 3 shall be in writing and shall be served personally or sent
by certified mail, and the notice, order, petition, or other communication
A. The City Engineer may order any user appealing administrative
remedies for violations of this Part 3 to show cause, before the Common
Council, why an enforcement action, initiated by the City Engineer,
should not be taken. A notice shall be served on the user specifying the
time and place of a hearing to be held by the Common Council
regarding the violation, the reasons why the action is to be taken, the
proposed enforcement action, and directing the user to show cause
before the Common Council why the proposed enforcement action
should not be taken. The notice of the hearing shall be served at least
10 calendar days before the hearing in accordance with § 139-130 of
this article. Service shall be made on any principal or executive officer
of a user's establishment or to any partner in a user's establishment.
The notice of the hearing shall be served at least 10 calendar days
before the hearing, in accordance with § 139-130.
B. The Common Council may itself conduct the hearing, or may designate
any of its members or any officer or employee of the City of Oneida to
conduct the hearing, which member officer or employee shall:
(1) Issue, in the name of the Common Council, notices of hearings
requesting the attendance and testimony of witnesses, and the
production of evidence relevant to any matter involved in such
hearings.
(2) Take the evidence.
(3) Take sworn testimony.
(4) Transmit a report of the evidence and hearing, including
transcripts and other evidence, together with recommendations to
the Common Council for action thereon.
C. After the Common Council has reviewed the evidence testimony, it may
order the user to comply with the City Engineer's order or fine, modify
the City Engineer's order or fine, or vacate the City Engineer's order or
fine.
§ 139-128 CHARTER § 139-130
C:441
shall be deemed given upon its mailing as provided herein. Any notice,
administrative order, or communication mailed to the user pursuant to the
sections of this Part 3 shall be mailed to the user where the user's effluent is
discharged into transmission lines to the City's POTW. Any notice, petition,
or other communication mailed to the City Engineer shall be addressed and
mailed to P.O. Box 550, City of Oneida, NY 13421-0550.
§ 139-131. Right to choose multiple remedies.
The City Engineer shall have the right, within the City Engineer's sole
discretion, to utilize any one or more appropriate administrative remedies
set forth in this article. The City Engineer may utilize more than one
administrative remedy established pursuant to this article, and the City
Engineer may hold one show-cause hearing combining more than one
enforcement action.
§ 139-132. Civil actions for penalties.
A. Any person who violates any of the provisions of or who fails to perform
any duty imposed by this Part 3, or any administrative order or
determination of the City Engineer promulgated under this Part 3, or
the terms of any permit issued hereunder shall be liable to the City for a
civil penalty not to exceed $1,000 for each such violation, to be
assessed after a hearing (unless the user waives the right to a hearing)
held in conformance with the procedures set forth in this article. Each
violation shall be a separate and distinct violation, and in the case of
continuing violation, each day's continuance thereof shall be deemed a
separate and distinct violation. Such penalty may be recovered in an
action brought by the City Attorney, or his designated attorney, at the
request of the City Engineer in the name of the City of Oneida, in any
court of competent jurisdiction giving preference to courts local to the
City. In addition to above described penalty, the City Engineer may
recover all damages incurred by the City from any persons or users who
violate any provisions of this Part 3, or who fail to perform any duties
imposed by this or any administrative order or determination of the City
Engineer promulgated under this Part 3, or the terms of any permit
issued hereunder. In addition to the above-described damages, the City
Engineer may recover reasonable attorney's fees incurred by the City in
enforcing the provisions of this article, including reasonable attorney's
fees incurred in any action to recover penalties and damages, and the
City Engineer may also recover court costs, and other expenses
associated with the enforcement activities, including sampling and
monitoring expenses.
B. In determining the amount of civil penalty, the court shall take into
account all relative circumstances, including but not limited to the
extent of harm caused by the violation, the magnitude and duration, any
economic benefit gained through the user's violation, corrective actions
by the user, the compliance history of the user, and any other relative
factors as justice may require.
§ 139-130 ONEIDA CODE § 139-132
C:442
§ 139-133. Court orders.
§ 139-134. Criminal penalties.
C. Such civil penalty may be released or compromised by the City
Engineer before the matter has been referred to the City Attorney, and
where such matter has been referred to the City Attorney, any such
penalty may be released or compromised and any action commenced to
recover the same may be settled and discontinued by the City attorney,
with the consent of the City Engineer.
A. In addition to the power to assess penalties as set forth in this article,
the City Engineer shall have the power, following the hearing held in
conformance with the procedures set forth in this article, to seek an
order:
(1) Suspending, revoking, or modifying the violator's wastewater
discharge permit, or
(2) Enjoining the violator from continuing the violation.
B. Any such court order shall be sought in an action brought by the City
Attorney, at the request of the City Engineer, in the name of the City, in
any court of competent jurisdiction giving precedence to courts local to
the City.
C. The City Attorney, at the request of the City Engineer shall petition the
court to impose, assess, and recover such sums imposed according to
this article. In determining amount of liability, the court shall take into
account all relevant circumstances, including, but not limited to, the
extent of harm caused by the violation, the magnitude and duration, any
economic benefit gained through the user's violation, corrective actions
by the user, the compliance history of the user, and any other factor as
justice requires.
A. Any person who willfully violates any provision of this Part 3 or any final
determination or administrative order of the City Engineer made in
accordance with this article shall be guilty of a Class A misdemeanor,
and upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not less than
$500 nor more than $1,000, or imprisonment not to exceed one year or
both. Each offense shall be a separate and distinct offense, and, in the
case of a continuing offense, each day's continuance thereof shall be
deemed a separate and distinct offense.
B. Any user who knowingly makes any false statements, representations,
or certifications in any application, record, report, plan or other
document filed or required to be maintained pursuant to this Part 3, or
wastewater permit, or who falsifies, tampers with, or knowingly
renders inaccurate any monitoring device or method required under
this Part 3 shall be guilty of a Class A misdemeanor and, upon
§ 139-132 CHARTER § 139-134
C:443
§ 139-135. Additional injunctive relief.
Whenever a user has violated or continues to violate the provisions of this
Part 3 or permit or order issued hereunder, the City Engineer, through
counsel may petition the court, in the name of the City, for the issuance
of a preliminary or permanent injunction or both (as may be appropriate)
which restrains the violation of, or compels the compliance with any order
or determination thereunder by the City Engineer.
§ 139-136. Summary abatement.
§ 139-137. Delinquent payments.
conviction, shall be punished by a fine of not more than $1,000 per
violation per day or imprisonment for not more than one year or both.
C. No prosecutions under this section, shall be instituted until after final
disposition of a show-cause hearing, if any, was instituted.
A. Notwithstanding any inconsistent provisions of this Part 3, whenever
the City Engineer finds, after investigation, that any user is causing,
engaging in, or maintaining a condition or activity which, in the
judgment of the City Engineer, presents an imminent danger to the
public health, safety, or welfare, or to the environment, or is likely to
result in severe damage to the POTW or the environment, and it
therefore appears to be prejudicial to the public interest to allow the
condition or activity to go unabated until notice and an opportunity for
a hearing can be provided, the City Engineer may, without prior
hearing, order such user by notice, in writing wherever practicable or
in such other form as practices are intended to be proscribed, to
discontinue, abate, or alleviate such condition or activity, and
thereupon such person shall immediately discontinue, abate, or
alleviate such condition or activity; or where the giving of notice is
impracticable, or in the event of a user's failure to comply voluntarily
with an emergency order, the City Engineer may take all appropriate
action to abate the violating condition. As promptly as possible
thereafter, not to exceed 15 calendar days, the City Engineer shall
provide the user an opportunity to be heard, in accordance with the
provisions of this article.
B. If the user is not within the geographic boundaries of the City, the right
of summary abatement to discontinue, abate, or alleviate conditions or
activities shall be those prescribed in the intermunicipal agreement.
C. The City Engineer, acting upon the belief that an emergency exists,
shall be indemnified against any personal liability that may arise in the
performance of his duties to protect the public health, safety, or
welfare, or to preserve the POTW or the environment.
A. If there shall be any payments which are due to the City, or any
department thereof, pursuant to any article or section of this Part 3,
§ 139-134 ONEIDA CODE § 139-137
C:444
§ 139-138. Performance bonds.
The City Engineer may decline to reissue a permit to any user which has
failed to comply with the provisions of this Part 3 or any order or previous
permit issued hereunder unless such user first files with it a satisfactory
bond, payable to the POTW, in a sum not to exceed a value determined by
the City Engineer to be necessary to achieve consistent compliance.
§ 139-139. Liability insurance.
The City Engineer may decline to reissue a permit to any user which has
failed to comply with the provisions of chapter or any order or previous
permit issued hereunder, unless the user first submits proof that it has
obtained financial assurances sufficient to restore or repair POTW damage
caused by its discharge.
§ 139-140. Informant rewards.
The City Engineer is authorized to pay up to $500 for information leading
to the discovery of noncompliance by a user. In the event that information
provided results in an administrative fine or civil penalty levied against the
user, the City Engineer is authorized to disperse up to 10% of the collected
which shall remain due and unpaid, in whole or in part, for a period
of 20 calendar days from the date of billing by the City, the same shall
constitute a default, and there shall be added to the entire amount
of the original bill, a penalty equal to 20% of the original bill, and
interest shall accrue on the unpaid balance, at the rate of 2% per
month, retroactive to the date of the original billing.
B. In the event that there are any sewer taxes, assessments, or other
service charges which shall have been delinquent for a period of at least
60 calendar days as of December 15 of any year, the City Engineer shall
report the names of the defaulting persons to the Common Council, the
City Clerk, the City Chief Assessor, and the City Chamberlain on or
before December 15 of the same year. The Chief Assessor is hereby
directed to add the entire amount of the sewer tax, assessment, or other
service charge which shall be in default, plus penalty and interest, as
provided for in this Part 3, to the real property taxes due and owing to
City in the next succeeding year, and the Chief Assessor is directed to
collect the same in the same manner as real property taxes due and
owing to the City are collected.
C. Where charges are delinquent and the violator is not a resident of the
City, or is located outside the geographical boundaries of the City, then
the City Attorney is authorized to seek recovery of charges, including
punitive damages, a court of competent jurisdiction or make
arrangements with the appropriate county where the user is located to
add the amount of the sewer assessment or other charges which shall
be in default, plus penalty and interest, as provided for in the chapter,
to the real property taxes due to the county in the next ensuing year.
§ 139-137 CHARTER § 139-140
C:445
fine or penalty to the informant. However, a single reward payment may not
exceed $10,000, including the discovery reward.
§ 139-141. Public notification.
The City Engineer shall provide public notification, in the daily newspaper
with the largest circulation in the City, of users which were in significant
noncompliance of local or federal pretreatment standards or requirements
since the last such notice. The frequency of such notices shall be at least
once per year.
§ 139-142. Contractor listings.
A. Users which have not achieved consistent compliance with applicable
pretreatment standards and requirements are not eligible to receive a
contractual award for the sale of goods or services to the City.
B. Existing contracts for the sale of goods or services to the City held by a
user found to be in significant violation with pretreatment standards
may be terminated at the discretion of the Common Council.
§ 139-140 ONEIDA CODE § 139-142
C:446
ARTICLE XIV
Charges
§ 139-143. General regulations. [Amended 11-5-1997 by Ord. No.
97-04]
§ 139-144. Sewage service charges. [Amended 11-5-1997 by Ord.
No. 97-04]
All persons discharging or depositing normal sewage into the public sewers
shall pay a sewer service charge proportional to the liquid volume of waste
so deposited, which charge shall be collected as a sewer rent. A significant
industrial user shall pay a sewer service charge as determined by § 139-145
of the article, which charge shall cover the cost of treating both the normal
and abnormal sewage components of its discharge into the POTW.
§ 139-145. Total sewer service charge. [Amended 1-7-1997 by Ord.
No. 97-01; 11-5-1997 by Ord. No. 97-04]
A. In addition to any other fees, charges or sewer rents provided by law,
the owner or tenant of any parcel of real property connected with the
sewer system, including but not limited to real property connected with
the sewer system by means of a private sewer or drain emptying into
the sewer system, shall pay a sewer use charge for the use of the sewer
system for discharging any industrial or domestic waste and other
wastes accepted for admission thereto.
B. Charges listed in this article shall apply to all sewer users who have a
discharge to the sewer system. This shall include residences,
commercial establishments, and industries.
C. Acceptance of a commercial or industrial discharge into the sewer
system is contingent upon receipt by the City Engineer the information
required by § 139-99.
D. The owner of real property shall comply with all provisions of this Part
3. The charge for a significant industrial user (SIU) shall be based upon
the SIU's percentage contributions of various parameters to the POTW.
These percentages shall be based on the pollutant concentration as
determined by chemical analyses of the samples taken in accordance
with this article. In case of toxic or prohibited wastes discharged by a
tenant of any building or any parcel of real property, as determined by
chemical analyses of samples taken, the City Engineer may hold either
the tenant or the owner or both, responsible for failure to comply with
any provisions of these rules and regulations applicable to toxic and
prohibited waste discharge.
E. Failure to submit payment of a sewer service charge as determined
under this article will result in penalties and fines as prescribed by this
Part 3.
§ 139-143 CHARTER § 139-145
C:447
A. In accordance with the principles for the user charge established by
Section 204(b)(1) of P.L. 92-500, a sewer use charge shall be computed
by City Engineer using the following formula:
UC(i) = B/1200 * [(BB * BIA) + (BS * SIA) + (BP * PIA) + (BN * NIA)
+ BF * FIA)]
BA SA PA NA FA
Where
UC(i) = Total monthly sewer service charge
B = Annual O&M plus applicable debt service costs
BB = Percent of POTW budget attributable to the treatment
of BOD
BS = Percent of POTW budget attributable to the treatment
of suspended solids
BP = Percent of POTW budget attributable to the treatment
of total phosphorus
BN = Percent of POTW budget attributable to the treatment
of TKN
BF = Percent of POTW budget attributable to the treatment
of flow
BIA = Average daily BOD loading (lb/day) from POTW user
SIA = Average daily suspended solids loading (lb/day) from
POTW user
PIA = Average daily total phosphorus loading (lb/day) from
POTW user
NIA = Average daily TKN loading (lb/day) from POTW user
FIA = Average daily flow from POTW user
BA = Average daily BOD loading (lb/day) at the POTW
treatment plant
SA = Average daily suspended solids loading (lb/day) at the
POTW treatment plant
PA = Average daily total phosphorus loading (lb/day) at the
POTW treatment plant
NA = Average daily TKN loading (lb/day) at the POTW
treatment plant
FA = Billable flow1
NOTES:
1 Billable flow is defined to mean the total of the following:
§ 139-145 ONEIDA CODE § 139-145
C:448
§ 139-146. Measurement of flow. [Amended 11-5-1997 by Ord. No.
97-04]
The volume of flow to be used in computing sewer service charges for
SIUs and non-SIUs shall be based upon metered water consumption as
shown on the records of meter readings maintained by the City Water
Department. In the event that a person discharging wastes into the POTW
produces evidence to the City Engineer demonstrating that a substantial
portion of the total amount of metered water does not reach the POTW,
then the City Engineer shall either establish a percentage of the total
metered water to be used as a basis for such computations, or direct
the installation of appropriate flow measuring (and totalizing) devices to
measure and record the actual amount of flow into the POTW. In the event
that a person discharging wastes into the POTW procures all or part of his
water supply from unmetered sources, the City Engineer shall either direct
the installation of water meters on the other sources of water supply, or
direct the installation of appropriate flow measuring devices to measure
and record the actual amount of flow into the POTW. Any water meters
and/or flow measuring devices installed pursuant to this section shall be of
a type and design acceptable to the City Engineer and shall be installed,
maintained, and periodically tested as required by the City Engineer, at the
(a) Annual sum of the metered water consumption for all users
of the City of Oneida POTW, with the exception of significant
industrial users, for the preceding calendar year divided by
12;
(b) Sum of the actual wastewater flow for the month being
invoiced from all significant industrial users; and
(c) Sum of the actual wastewater flow for the month being
invoiced from those users of the City of Oneida POTW whose
access to the POTW is governed by an intermunicipal
agreement under § 139-25 of Chapter 139, Sewers, Part 3,
Sewer Use.
B. The sewer use charge shall be applied to the user on user's water bill
and shall be distinctly denoted as "sewer use." Charges for the first
charge period shall be based on estimated operation and maintenance
costs for those periods and the anticipated water consumption. Rates
shall be adjusted as required to keep the charges at levels which will
fully reimburse the total operation and maintenance costs to the City,
but at the same time will not create excess revenue over and above
actual operation costs and capital costs as stated below.
C. Consistent with General Municipal Law § 453 and § 139-10 of this
chapter, nothing herein shall prevent the inclusion within the sewer use
charge of an additional amount sufficient to pay for capital
improvements, including replacement of sewers, treatment plant
additions and sewer extensions, and principal and interest on
obligations incurred therefor.
§ 139-145 CHARTER § 139-146
C:449
owner's expenses. All such meters and/or flow measuring devices shall be
subject to periodic inspection, testing, and reading by the City Engineer.
Any person discharging wastes into the POTW may install a flow measuring
device at his option, of the type, design, installation, and maintenance
standards of the City Engineer, at the owner's expense.
§ 139-147. Determination of pollutant concentration. [Amended
11-5-1997 by Ord. No. 97-04]
§ 139-148. Billing period.
The billing period shall be monthly for SIUs and as established by the City
Water Department for non-SIU's.
§ 139-149. Pretreatment program costs.
The additional charges and fees associated with the operation of the
pretreatment program shall be assessed the user and include:
A. The pollutant concentration of any wastewater shall usually be
determined from representative samples discharged to the public
sewers, taken by representatives of the City Engineer at sampling
stations as described under § 139-108, at any period, or time, or of such
duration and in such a manner as the City Engineer may elect, or at any
place or manner mutually agreed upon between the person and the City
Engineer. The intent of any sampling procedure is to establish the
pollutant concentration in the wastewater discharged during an
average or typical working day. This concentration may be derived,
according to the best judgment of the City Engineer, by combining
repeated subsamplings during one day, or by combination of a series of
such days.
B. The analyses of samples taken shall be performed in the laboratory
certified by the New York State Department of Health Environmental
Laboratory Approval Program. Sampling and analytical frequency shall
be determined by the City Engineer.
C. In the event that the pollutant concentration of the waste discharged
from a premises to a public sewer as determined under the above
provisions is disputed by a person, a program of resampling may be
instituted by the City Engineer. In such cases the user may split samples
and perform analyses independent of the City Engineer as long as all
ELAP certifications can be verified. The results of the resampling and
reanalysis shall be considered to be the current analysis of the wastes
discharged to the sewer system and shall be used for determining the
sewer service charge and/or acceptability of the wastes.
A. Reimbursement of costs of setting up and operating the pretreatment
program;
B. Issuing permits;
§ 139-146 ONEIDA CODE § 139-149
C:450
§ 139-150. Charges for trucked and hauled wastes.
The charge for treatment and disposal of trucked or hauled waste which
has been introduced into the POTW shall be as established by the Common
Council. The manner of determining the volume dumped shall be at the
discretion of the City Engineer.
§ 139-151. Capital recovery.
The City may institute an equitable procedure for recovering the costs of
any capital improvements of those parts of the POTW which collect, pump,
treat, and dispose of industrial wastewaters from those persons discharging
such wastewaters into the POTW.
§ 139-152. Collection of charges. [Amended 11-5-1997 by Ord. No.
97-04]
Provisions of Article XIII of this Part 3 relating to the collection of penalties
shall apply to the collection of sewer service charges, unless where
otherwise provided by application of Part 2, Rates and Charges, of this
chapter.
§ 139-153. Fiscal year for system.
The POTW shall be operated on the basis of a fiscal year commencing the
first day of January and ending on the 31st day of December.
§ 139-154. Impact fees.
C. Monitoring, inspections, and surveillance procedures;
D. Costs of equipment and supplies;
E. Reviewing accidental discharge procedures;
F. Construction inspections;
G. Filing appeals;
H. Application for consistent removal status as outlined in 40 CFR 403;
and/or
I. Other reasonable expenses to carry out the program to satisfy the
requirements of this Part 3, the NYSDEC, and the federal government.
A. The Common Council shall have the authority to impose impact fees on
new development, which development may:
(1) Cause enlargement of the service area of the POTW; and/or
(2) Cause increased hydraulic and/or treatment demands on the POTW.
§ 139-149 CHARTER § 139-154
C:451
§ 139-155. Use of revenues.
Revenues derived from user charges and associated penalties, and impact
fees, shall be credited to a special fund. Moneys in this fund shall be used
exclusively for the following functions:
§ 139-156. Records and accounts.
B. Such impact fees shall be charged equitably to the user or discreet
group of users responsible for the increased demand.
A. For the payment of the operation and maintenance, including repair
and replacement costs of the City POTW;
B. For the discovery and correction of inflow and infiltration;
C. For the payment of interest on and the amortization of or payment of
indebtedness which has been or shall be incurred for the construction
or extension of the City of Oneida POTW; and
D. For the extension, enlargement, replacement of, and/or additions to the
POTW, including any necessary appurtenances.
A. The City shall maintain and keep proper books of records and accounts
for the POTW, separate from all other records and accounts, in which
shall be made full and correct entries of all transactions relating to the
POTW. The City will cause an annual audit of such books of record and
account for the preceding fiscal year to be made by a recognized
independent certified public accountant, and will supply such audit
report to authorized officials, and the public, on request.
B. In conjunction with the audit, there shall be an annual review of the
sewer charge system to determine if it is adequate to meet
expenditures for all programs for the coming year. Classification of old
and new industrial users should also be reviewed annually.
C. The City shall maintain and carry insurance on all physical properties of
the POTW, of the kinds and in the amounts normally carried by public
utility companies and municipalities engaged in the operation of
sewage disposal systems. All moneys received for losses under any such
insurance policies shall be applied solely to the replacement and
restoration of the property damaged or destroyed.
§ 139-154 ONEIDA CODE § 139-156
C:452
ARTICLE XV
Public Disclosure of POTW Operations
§ 139-157. Full-disclosure policy of Common Council.
It shall be the policy of the Common Council to conduct all business with
full disclosure to the public.
§ 139-158. Procedural requirements available.
The nature and requirements of all formal procedures for applying for a
permit and for requesting a permit under this Part 3 and for requesting
a hearing shall be formulated by the City and be made available to any
resident of the City upon request.
§ 139-159. Validity through public inspection.
The City of Oneida shall formulate procedures to make available to the
public for inspection such orders, statements of policy, and interpretations
used by the City in administration of this Part 3. No rule, regulation, or civil
order shall be valid until it has been available for public inspection.
§ 139-157 CHARTER § 139-159
C:453

ARTICLE XVI
Miscellaneous Provisions
§ 139-160. Applicability. Articles III, IV, VI, X, XIII, XIV, XV, and XVI
shall apply in all unincorporated areas of the City of Oneida.
Articles V, VII, VIII, IX, XI and XII shall apply only in incorporated
areas of the City which are also within the service area of the POTW.
APPENDIX
Parameters of Concern
Class A - Halogenated hydrocarbons
Class B - Halogenated organics (other than hydrocarbons)
Class C - Pesticides (includes herbicides, algaecides, biocides, slimicides
and mildewcides)
Class D - Aromatic hydrocarbons
Class E - Tars
Class F - Substituted aromatics (other than hydrocarbons and
nonhalogenated)
Class G - Miscellaneous
Class M - Metals and their compounds
Class A - Halogenated hydrocarbons
A01. Methyl chloride
A02. Methylene chloride
A03. Chloroform
A04. Carbon tetrachloride
A05. Freon/Genatron
A06. Other halomethanes
A07. 1,1, 1-Trichloroethane
A08. Other haloethanes
A09. Vinyl fluoride
A10. Vinyl chloride
All. Dichloroethylene
A12. Trichloroethylene
A13. Tetrachloroethylene
A14. Chlorinated propane
A15. Chlorinated propene
A16. Hexachlorobutadiene
A17. Hexachlorocyclopentadiene
A18. Chlorinated benzene
§ 139-160 CHARTER § 139-160
C:455
A19. Chlorinated toluene
A20. Fluorinated toluene
A21. Polychlorinated biphenyl (PCB)
A22. Chlorinated naphthalene
A23. Dechlorane (C10 C112)
A24. Hexachlorocyclohexane (BHC)
A99. Halogenated hydrocarbons not specified above
Class B - Halogenated organics (other than hydrocarbons)
B01. Phosgene
B02. Methyl chloromethyl ether
B03. Bis-chloromethyl ether
B04. Other chloroalkyl ethers
B05. Benzoyl chloride
B06. Chlorothymol
B07. Chlorinated phenol
B08. Chlorinated cresols or xylenols
B09. Chlorendic acid
B10. Chloroaryl ethers
Bll. Dichlorophene or hexachlorophene
B12. Chlorinated aniline [including methylene bis (2- chloroaniline]
B13. Dichlorobenzidine
B14. Chlorinated diphenyl oxide
B15. Chlorinated toluidine
B16. Kepone (C10 Cl10O)
B17. Dichlorovinyl sulfonyl pyridine
B18. Chloropicrin
B19. Trichloromethyl thio-phthalimide
B20. Trichloro-propylsulfonyl pyridine
B21. Tetrachloro-methysulfonyl pyridine
B22. Tetrachloro-isopthalonitrile
B99. Halogenated organics not specified above
Class C - Pesticides (includes herbicides, algaecides, biocides,
slimicides and mildewcides)
C01. Aldrin/dieldrin
C02. Chlordane and metabolites
C03. DDT and metabolites
C04. Endosulfan/thiodan and metabolites
§ 139-160 ONEIDA CODE § 139-160
C:456
C05. Endrin and metabolites
C06. Heptachlor and metabolites
C07. Malathion
C08. Methoxychlor
C09. Parathion
C10. Toxaphene
C11. Sevin
C12. Kelthane
C13. Diazinon
C14. Dithane
C15. Carbaryl
C16. Silvex
C17. Dithiocarbamates
C18. Maneb
C19. Dioxathion
C20. Tandex/karbutilate
C21. Carbofurans
C22. Pentac
C23. Folpet
C24. Dichlone
C25. Rotenone
C26. Lindane/isotox
C27. Simazine
C28. Methoprene
C99. Pesticides not specified above
Class D - Aromatic hydrocarbons
D01. Benzene
D02. Toluene
D03. Xylene
D04. Biphenyl
D05. Naphthalene
D06. Ethylbenzene
D07. Styrene
D08. Acenaphthene
D09. Fluoranthene
D99. Aromatic hydrocarbons not specified above
Class E - Tars
§ 139-160 CHARTER § 139-160
C:457
E01. Coal tar
E02. Petroleum tar
E99. Tars not specified above
Class F - Substituted aromatics (other than hydrocarbons and nonhalogenated)
F01. Phenol, cresol or xylenol
F02. Catechol, resorcinol, or hydroquinone
F03. Nitrophenols
F04. Nitrobenzenes
F05. Nitrotoluenes
F06. Aniline
F07. Toluidines
F08. Nitroanilines
F09. Nitroanisole
F10. Toluene diisocyanate
F11. Dimethylaminoazobenzene
F12. Benzoic acid (and benzoate salts)
F13. Phthalic, isophthalic or terephthalic acid
F14. Phthalic anhydride
F15. Phthalate esters
F16. Phenoxyacetic acid
F17. Phenylphenols
F18. Nitrobiphenyls
F19. Aminobiphenyls (including benzidine)
F20. Diphenylhydrazine
F21. Naphthylamines
F22. Carbazole
F23. Acetylaminofluorene
F24. Dyes and organic pigments
F25. Pyridine
F99. Substituted aromatics not specified above
Class G - Miscellaneous
G01. Asbestos
G02. Acrolein
G03. Acrylonitrile
G04. Isophorone
G05. Nitrosamines
§ 139-160 ONEIDA CODE § 139-160
C:458
G06. Ethyleneimine
G07. Propiolactone
G08. Nitrosodimethylamine
G09. Dimethylhydrazine
G10. Maleic anhydride
G11. Methyl isocyanate
G12. Epoxides
G13. Nitrofurans
G14. Cyanide
Class M - Metals and their compounds
M01. Antimony
M02. Arsenic
M03. Beryllium
M04. Cadmium
M05. Chromium
M06. Copper
M07. Lead
M08. Mercury
M09. Nickel
M10. Selenium
M11. Silver
M12. Thallium
M13. Zinc
M99. Metals not specified above
§ 139-160 CHARTER § 139-160
C:459
Chapter 143
SITE PLAN REVIEW
GENERAL REFERENCES
Sewers — See Ch. 139.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 155.
Zoning — See Ch. 190.
§ 139-160 ONEIDA CODE § 139-160
C:460
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 143-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as "the Site Plan Ordinance
of the City of Oneida."
§ 143-2. Authority and purpose.
§ 143-3. Jurisdiction.
§ 143-4. Fees.
Reasonable fees sufficient to recover incurred costs may be charged.
§ 143-5. Enforcement and penalties.
§ 143-6. Interpretation; conflict.
A. This chapter is adopted pursuant to the authority delegated to the City
of Oneida under New York State enabling legislation and to promote
good planning practice.
B. The purpose of this chapter is to protect the public health, safety, and
general welfare while allowing for cost-saving efficiencies.
C. The provisions in this chapter shall be administered to ensure orderly
growth and development and shall supplement and facilitate the
provisions in the Comprehensive Plan, Chapter 190, Zoning, the Official
Map, and capital budget.
A. The provisions in this chapter shall be applicable in the City of Oneida.
B. This chapter shall become effective on April 1, 1998.
C. When necessary to further its purposes, this chapter shall be amended
by the City of Oneida Common Council.
A. It shall be the duty of the Building Inspector/Code Enforcement Officer
to enforce the provisions of this chapter and to bring to the attention of
the Joint Zoning Board of Appeals/Planning Commission any violations
or lack of compliance. [Amended 11-8-2017 by L.L. No. 5-2017]
B. Violation of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed punishable
by a fine of not more than $250 or imprisonment not exceeding 15 days,
or both. Each day that the violation continues shall constitute a
separate and punishable offense.
A. In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter
shall be held to be the minimum requirements. More stringent
provisions may be required if it is demonstrated that different
§ 143-1 CHARTER § 143-6
C:461
standards are necessary to promote the public health, safety and
welfare.
B. Where the conditions imposed by any provisions of this chapter are
either more restrictive or less restrictive than comparable conditions
imposed by any other applicable law, ordinance, resolution, rule or
regulation of any kind, the regulations which are more restrictive and
impose higher standards or requirements shall govern.
§ 143-6 ONEIDA CODE § 143-6
C:462
ARTICLE II
Terminology
§ 143-7. Definitions.
Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following terms shall, for the
purposes of this chapter, have the meaning herein indicated:
ADT (AVERAGE DAILY TRAFFIC) — The average number of cars per day
that pass over a given point.
AGGRESSIVE SOILS — Soils that may be corrosive to cast-iron and ductile
iron pipe. These soils represent approximately 5% of the soils found within
the United States and include dump areas, swamps, marshes, alkaline
soils, cinder beds, polluted river bottoms, etc., which are considered to be
potentially corrosive.
AREA OF BENEFIT — An area of land which is designated by the Joint
Zoning Board of Appeals/Planning Commission as receiving benefits from
or creating the need for the construction, acquisition, or improvement of a
public facilities project.[Amended 11-8-2017 by L.L. No. 5-2017]
AREA-RELATED FACILITY — A capital improvement which is designated in
the capital improvements program as serving new development and which
is not a site-related facility. Area-related facility may include land dedication
or construction of an oversized capital improvement, whether located off
site, or within or on the perimeter of the development site.
BERM — A mound of soil, either natural or man-made, used to obstruct
views.
BLOCK — A tract of land bounded by streets, or by a combination of
streets and public parks, cemeteries, railroad rights-of-way, shorelines of
waterways, or boundary lines of municipalities.
BLOWOFF — An outlet in a pipe through which water or sediment can be
discharged from a lower sewer. See "cleanout."
BOND — Any form of a surety bond in an amount and form satisfactory to
the Common Council. All bonds shall be approved by the governing body
whenever a bond is required by these regulations.
BUFFER — An area within a property or site, generally adjacent to and
parallel with the property line, either consisting of natural existing
vegetation or created by the use of trees, shrubs, fences, and/or berms,
designed to limit continuously the view of and/or sound from the site to
adjacent sites or properties.
CALIPER — The diameter of a tree trunk measured in inches, six inches
above ground level for trees up to four inches in diameter and 12 inches
above ground level for trees over four inches in diameter.
CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT — A public facility with a life expectancy of three
or more years, to be owned and operated by or on behalf of the local
government.
§ 143-7 CHARTER § 143-7
C:463
CAPITAL IMPROVEMENTS PROGRAM — A proposed schedule of all future
projects listed in order of construction priority, together with cost estimates
and the anticipated means of financing each project.
CAPPED SYSTEM — A completed water supply and/or sewerage system put
in place for future use (contingent upon expansion), rather than to meet
immediate development needs.
CARTWAY — The actual road surface area from curbline to curbline, which
may include travel lanes, parking lanes, and deceleration and acceleration
lanes. Where there are no curbs, the cartway is that portion between the
edges of the paved, or hard surface, width.
CENTER-LINE OFFSET OF ADJACENT INTERSECTIONS — The gap
between the center line of roads adjoining a common road from opposite or
same sides.
CERTIFY — Whenever these regulations require that an agency or official
certify the existence of some fact or circumstance, the City by
administrative rule may require that such certification be made in any
manner, oral or written, which provides reasonable assurance of the
accuracy of the certification.
CHANNEL — The bed and banks of a natural stream which convey the
constant or intermittent flow of the stream.
CHANNELIZATION — The straightening and deepening of channels and/or
the surfacing thereof to permit water to move rapidly and/or directly.
CLEANOUT — An outlet in a pipe through which water or sediment can be
discharged from a lower sewer.
COMMON LATERAL — A lateral serving more than one unit.
COMMON OWNERSHIP — Ownership by the same person, corporation,
firm, entity, partnership, or unincorporated association; or ownership by
different corporations, firm, partnerships, entities, or unincorporated
associations, in which a stockbroker, partner, or associate, or a member of
his family owns an interest in each corporation, firm, partnership, entity, or
unincorporated association.
CONCEPT PLAN — A preliminary presentation and attendant
documentation of a proposed site plan of sufficient accuracy to be used for
the purpose of discussion and classification.
CUL-DE-SAC — A local street with only one outlet that terminates in a
vehicular turnaround and having an appropriate terminal for the safe and
convenient reversal of traffic movement.
CURB — A vertical or sloping edge of a roadway.
CUSHIONS — Supportive or protective bedding materials placed
underneath piping.
DEDICATION — An act transmitting property or interest thereto.
§ 143-7 ONEIDA CODE § 143-7
C:464
DENSITY — The permitted number of dwelling units per gross acre of land
to be developed.
DESIGN FLOOD — The relative size or magnitude of a major flood of
reasonable expectancy, which reflects both flood experience and flood
potential and is the basis of the delineation of the floodway, the flood hazard
area, and the water surface elevations.
DETENTION BASIN — A man-made or natural water collector facility
designed to correct surface and subsurface water in order to impede its flow
and to release the same gradually at a rate not greater than that prior to
the development of the property, into natural or man-made outlets.
DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENT — Agreement between the Common Council
and developer through which the Common Council agrees to vest
development use or intensity or refrain from interfering with subsequent
phases of development through new legislation in exchange for the
provision of public facilities or amenities by the developer in excess of those
required under current community regulations.
DEVELOPMENT REGULATION — Zoning, subdivision, site plan, official
map, floodplain regulation, or other governmental regulation of the use and
development of land.
DIVIDED STREET — A street having an island or other barrier separating
moving lanes.
DRAINAGE — The removal of surface water or groundwater from land by
drains, grading, or other means.
DRAINAGE FACILITY — Any component of the drainage system.
DROP MANHOLE — A manhole provided for inspection and maintenance of
sewers where an incoming sewer is considerably higher than the outgoing.
DROP PIPE — A vertical pipe used to convey sewage from a higher to a
lower elevation.
DRY LINES — See "capped system."
EASEMENT — A right-of-way granted, but not dedicated, for limited use of
private land for a public or quasi-public purpose and within which the owner
of the property shall not erect any permanent structures.
ENVIRONMENTAL CONSTRAINTS — Features, natural resources, or land
characteristics that are sensitive to improvements and may require
conservation measures or the application of creative development
techniques to prevent degradation of the environment, or may require
limited development, or in certain instances may preclude development.
EROSION — The detachment and movement of soil or rock fragments, or
the wearing away of the land surface by water, wind, ice, or gravity.
ESCROW — A deed, a bond, money, or a piece of property delivered to a
third person to be delivered by him to the grantee only upon fulfillment of a
condition.
§ 143-7 CHARTER § 143-7
C:465
EXPENDITURE — A sum of money paid out in return for some benefit or to
fulfill some obligation. The term includes binding contractual commitments
whether by development agreement or otherwise to make future
expenditures as well as any other substantial change in position.
EXTERNAL BUFFER — A naturally vegetated area or vegetated area along
the exterior boundaries of an entire development processed in accordance
with a multiphase or phased site plan application which is landscaped
and maintained, in order to eliminate or minimize conflicts between such
development and adjacent land uses.
FRONTAGE — That side of a lot abutting on a street or way and ordinarily
regarded as the front of the lot, but it shall not be considered as the
ordinary side of a corner lot.
FRONTAGE STREET — Any street to be constructed by the developer or any
existing street where development shall take place on both sides.
GROUND COVER — A planting of low-growing plants or sod that in time
forms a dense mat covering the area, preventing soil from being blown or
washed away and the growth of unwanted plants.
GUTTER — A shallow channel usually set along a curb or the pavement
edge of a road for purposes of catching and carrying off runoff water.
HARDY CROSS METHOD — Method of controlled trial and error by which
a water distribution system can be analyzed, first introduced in 1936 by
Hardy Cross, Professor of Civil Engineering, University of Illinois.
HEALTH, SAFETY, OR GENERAL WELFARE — The purpose for which
municipalities may adopt and enforce land use regulations for the
prevention of harm or promotion of public benefit to the community;
commonly referred to as police power.
HIGHWAY, LIMITED ACCESS — A freeway or expressway providing a
trafficway for through traffic, in respect to which owners or occupants of
abutting property on lands and other persons have no legal right to access
to or from the same, except at such points and in such manner as may be
determined by the public authority having jurisdiction over the trafficway.
HISTORIC DISTRICT — An area related by historical events or themes, by
visual continuity or character, or by some other special feature that helps
give it a unique historical identity. May be designated a historic district by
local, state, or federal government and given official status and protection.
HISTORIC SITE --. A structure or place of historical significance. May be
designated as such by local, state, or federal government. HYDROLOGIC
RESPONSE — The properties, distribution, and circulation of water.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — A surface that has been compacted or covered
with a layer of material so that it is highly resistant to infiltration by water.
IMPOUNDMENT — A body of water, such as a pond, confined by a dam,
dike floodgate, or other barrier.
§ 143-7 ONEIDA CODE § 143-7
C:466
IMPROVEMENT — Any man-made, immovable item which becomes part of,
placed upon, or is affixed to, real estate.
INFILL DEVELOPMENT — Development designed to occupy scattered or
vacant parcels of land which remain after the majority of development has
occurred in an area.
LANDSCAPING — Acting with the purpose of meeting specific criteria
regarding uses of outside space, including ground cover, buffers, and shade
trees.
LATERAL SEWERS — Pipes conducting sewage from individual buildings to
larger pipes called trunk or interceptor sewers that usually are located in
street rights-of-way.
LINKAGE — A program that requires developers constructing
nonresidential structures to either construct affordable housing units or pay
money in lieu of construction into a designated fund to provide housing for
the future employees of the site.
LOCAL ROAD — A road whose sole function is to provide access to abutting
properties and to other roads from individual properties and to provide
right-of-way beneath it for sewer, water, and storm drainage pipes.
LOT AREA — The size of a lot measured within the lot lines and expressed
in terms of acres or square feet.
LOT, CORNER — A lot situated at the intersection of two streets, the interior
angle of such intersection not exceeding 135º.
LOT FRONTAGE — That portion of a lot extending along a street line.
LOT IMPROVEMENT — Any building, structure, place, work of art, or other
object situated on a lot.
MAIN — In any system of continuous piping, the principal artery of the
system to which branches may be connected.
MAINTENANCE GUARANTY — Any security which may be required and
accepted by a governmental agency to ensure that necessary improvements
will function as required for a specific period of time.
MANNING EQUATION — A method for calculating the hydraulic capacity of
a conduit to convey water.
MOVING LANE — Any traffic lane where traffic movement is the primary if
not sole function. (Compare with "parking lane.")
MULCH — A layer of wood chips, dry leaves, straw, hay, plastic, or other
materials placed on the surface of the soil around plants to retain moisture,
prevent weeds from growing, hold the soil in place, or aid plant growth.
NOTICE TO PROCEED — A notice issued by the Director of Planning to the
Joint Zoning Board of Appeals/Planning Commission informing the applicant
for approval of a major subdivision that the sketch plat is in compliance
with these regulations and that the applicant may proceed to apply for
preliminary plat approval.[Amended 11-8-2017 by L.L. No. 5-2017]
§ 143-7 CHARTER § 143-7
C:467
OFFSET — The amount of the reduction of an impact fee designed to
fairly reflect the value of area-related facilities or other oversized facilities,
pursuant to rules herein established or administrative guidelines, provided
by a developer pursuant to the local government's subdivision or zoning
regulations or requirements.
OPEN SPACE — Any parcel or area of land or water essentially unimproved
and set aside, dedicated, designated, or reserved for the public or private
use or enjoyment or for the use and enjoyment of owners and occupants of
land adjoining or neighboring such open space.
PARKING LANE — A lane usually located on the sides of streets, designed
to provide on-street parking for vehicular traffic.
PERC TEST (PERCOLATION TEST) — A test designed to determine the
ability of ground to absorb water, and used to determine the suitability of a
soil for drainage or for the use of a septic system.
PERFORMANCE CRITERIA — Regulation of development based on open
space ratio, impervious surface ratio, density, and floor area ratio.
PERFORMANCE GUARANTY — Any security that may be accepted by a
municipality as a guaranty that the improvements required as part of an
application for development are satisfactorily completed.
PERIMETER STREET — Any existing street to which the parcel of land to
be subdivided abuts on only one side.
PERVIOUS SURFACE — A surface that permits full or partial absorption of
stormwater.
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT (PUD) — An area of a minimum
contiguous size, as specified by ordinance, to be planned, developed,
operated, and maintained as a single entity containing one or more
structures to accommodate commercial or office uses, or both, and
appurtenant common areas and other uses incidental to the predominant
uses.
PREAPPLICATION CONFERENCE — An initial meeting between developers
and municipal representatives which affords developers the opportunity to
present their proposals informally.
PUBLIC FACILITY IMPROVEMENTS PROGRAM — The adopted plan, as
may be amended from time to time, which identifies the public facilities and
their costs for each public facility benefit area or subarea, which serve new
development for a period not to exceed 10 years, which are to be financed
in whole or in part through the imposition of public facilities fees pursuant
to this chapter.
PUD — See "planned unit development."
RATIONAL METHOD — A method of runoff calculation.
RESUBDIVISION — Any change in a map of an approved or recorded
subdivision plat that affects any street layout on the map or area reserved
§ 143-7 ONEIDA CODE § 143-7
C:468
thereon for public use or any lot line, or that affects any map or plan legally
recorded prior to the adoption of any regulations controlling subdivisions.
RETAINING WALL — A structure erected between lands of different
elevation to protect structures and/or to prevent the washing down or
erosion of earth from the upper slope level.
RETENTION BASIN — A pond, pool, or basin used for the permanent
storage of water runoff.
RIGHT-OF-WAY — A strip of land occupied or intended to be occupied
by a street, crosswalk, railroad, road, electric transmission line, oil or
gas pipeline, water main, sanitary or storm sewer main, shade trees, or
for any other special use. The usage of the term "right-of-way" for land
platting purposes shall mean that every right-of-way hereafter established
and shown on a final plat is to be separate and distinct from the lots or
parcels adjoining such right-of-way and not included within the dimensions
or areas of such lots or parcels. Rights-of-way intended for streets,
crosswalks, water mains, sanitary sewers, storm drains, shade trees, or
any other use involving maintenance by a public agency shall be dedicated
to public use by the maker of the plat on which such right-of-way is
established.
ROAD CLASSIFICATION — For the purpose of providing for the
development of the streets, highways, roads and rights-of-way in the
governmental unit, and for their future improvement, reconstruction,
realignment, and necessary widening, including provision for curbs and
sidewalks, each existing street, highway, road, and right-of-way, and those
located on approved and filed plats, have been designated on the Official
Map of the local government and classified therein. The classification of
each street, highway, road, and right-of-way is based upon its location in
the respective zoning districts of the local government and its present and
estimated future traffic volume and its relative importance and function as
specified in the Comprehensive Plan of the local government. The required
improvements shall be measured as set forth for each street classification
on the Official Map.
ROAD RIGHT-OF-WAY WIDTH — The distance between property lines
measured at right angles to the center line of the street.
SALE or LEASE — Any immediate or future transfer of ownership, or
any possessory interest in land, including contract of sale, lease, devise,
intestate succession, or other transfer of an interest in a subdivision or part
thereof, whether by metes and bounds or lot and block description.
SCREENING — Either:
A strip at least 10 feet wide of densely planted (or having equivalent
natural growth) shrubs or trees at least four feet high at the time of
planting, of a type that will form a year-round dense screen at least six
feet high; or
A.
An opaque wall or barrier or uniformly painted fence at least six feet
high.
B.
§ 143-7 CHARTER § 143-7
C:469
SECURITY — The letter of credit or cash escrow provided by the applicant
to secure the promises in the subdivision improvement agreement.
SEDIMENTATION — A deposit of soil that has been transported from its site
of origin by water, ice, wind, gravity, or other natural means as a product of
erosion.
SETBACK — The distance between the street right-of-way line and the front
line of a building or any projection thereof, excluding uncovered steps.
SIGHT TRIANGLE — A triangular-shaped portion of land established at
street intersections in which nothing is erected, placed, planted, or allowed
to grow in such a manner as to limit or obstruct the sight distance of
motorists entering or leaving the intersection.
SITE PLAN — An accurately scaled development plan that illustrates the
existing conditions on a land parcel as well as depicting details of a
proposed development.
SOIL CEMENT — A mixture of portland cement and locally available soil. It
serves as a soil stabilizer.
STABILIZED TURF OR EARTH — Turf, or earth (soil), strengthened usually
by the mixing of cement or lime with the original material to achieve
increased strength, thereby reducing shrinkage and movement.
STORMWATER DETENTION — A provision for storage of stormwater runoff
and the controlled release of such runoff during and after a flood or storm.
STORMWATER RETENTION — A provision for storage of stormwater
runoff.
STREET HIERARCHY — The conceptual arrangement of streets based upon
function. Hierarchal approach to street design classifies streets according
to function, from high-traffic arterial roads down to streets whose function
is residential access. Systematizing street design into a road hierarchy
promotes safety, efficient land use, and residential quality.
STUB STREET — A portion of a street for which an extension has been
proposed and approved. Stub streets be permitted when development is
phased over a period of time, but only if the street in its entirety has been
approved in the preliminary plan.
SUBGRADE — The natural ground lying beneath a road.
TEMPORARY IMPROVEMENT — Improvements built and maintained by a
subdivider during construction of the subdivision and prior to release of the
performance bond.
TRANSFER OF DEVELOPMENT RIGHTS — The conveyance of development
rights by deed, easement or other legal instrument, authorized by ordinance
or regulation, to another parcel of land and the recording of that
conveyance.
USE-TO-USE RELATIONSHIP — Focusing on the unique aspects of
established, newly developed and redeveloping neighborhoods, and
commercial/industrial areas in order to achieve improved compatibility and
§ 143-7 ONEIDA CODE § 143-7
C:470
fit of infill development projects and at the same time assist in the
preservation and conservation of stable existing neighborhoods and
commercial areas.
VARIANCE — A waiver from compliance with a specific provision of Chapter
190, Zoning, granted to a particular property owner because of the practical
difficulties or unnecessary hardship that would be imposed by the strict
application of that provision of the chapter. The granting of variances
traditionally is the responsibility of the Joint Zoning Board of Appeals/
Planning Commission.[Amended 11-8-2017 by L.L. No. 5-2017]
VESTED RIGHTS — Right to initiate or continue the establishment of a use
which will be contrary to a restriction or regulation coming into effect when
the project associated with the use is completed.
§ 143-7 CHARTER § 143-7
C:471

ARTICLE III
Administration
§ 143-8. Joint Zoning Board of Appeals/Planning Commission.
[Amended 11-8-2017 by L.L. No. 5-2017]
§ 143-9. Jurisdiction.
A. The Joint Zoning Board of Appeals/Planning Commission of the City of
Oneida is vested with the authority to review, approve or disapprove
applications for the site development of land.
B. The Director of Planning shall be given the responsibility for ensuring
orderly and expeditious processing of site plan applications.
A. Approval of site plans by resolution of the Joint Zoning Board of
Appeals/Planning Commission is hereby required as a condition for the
issuance of a zoning permit and/or building permit for the development
of any new uses, the construction of any new structures, any changes of
an existing use of land or site and all other building or development
activities in A, R-2, R-3, B, C-S, D-C, C, M-I, L-I, R-P and MDP Zoning
Districts (Chapter 109, Zoning). [Amended 12-19-2000 by Ord. No.
6-2000; 5-5-2009 by Ord. No. 09-03; 11-8-2017 by L.L. No.
5-2017]
B. Site plan review, as provided for in this chapter, any other provisions
notwithstanding, shall apply to:
(1) New construction, excluding single- and two-family residences.
(2) All additions to existing structures (with the exception of singleand
two-family homes), which will result in an increase of existing
floor area, including multiple floors, if such exist, in excess of 10%
or 1,000 square feet, whichever is the lesser.
(3) Any development, except single- and two-family residential, for
which off-street parking areas are provided, as required by this
chapter.
(4) Development of any nonsingle or two-family use or building in any
residential district.
(5) Development of any nonresidential use or building.
(6) The erection, relocation, conversion or structural alteration to any
nonsingle or two-family building, structure or site which results in
additional floor space.
(7) Any development which would establish more than one principal
use on a single lot; (example: a single-family site condominium or
similar project where a single parcel is to be developed with more
than one detached dwelling unit);
§ 143-8 CHARTER § 143-9
C:473
§ 143-10. Waiver and exception.
(8) Any change in the use of land or building to a different class or type
to a more intensive use, which may involve significant changes to
features, such as building appearance, parking needs, traffic flow
and/or volumes, noise, drainage, hours of operation, buffering/
landscape needs, effluent discharge and other similar impacts.
(9) Cellular phone towers. [Added 12-19-2000 by L.L. No. 6-2000]
(10) Essential public service buildings and storage areas. [Added
12-19-2000 by L.L. No. 6-2000]
A. Waiver of site plan application. The Joint Zoning Board of Appeals/
Planning Commission may waive the requirement for site plan approval
where there is a change in use or occupancy and no extensive
construction or improvements (or de minimis construction or
improvements) is sought, and when there is already on file an approved
site plan for the subject property. The waiver may be granted only upon
a resolution by the Joint Zoning Board of Appeals/Planning Commission
finding that the use will not affect existing drainage, circulation,
relationship of buildings to each other, landscaping, buffering, lighting,
and other considerations of site plan approval, and that the existing
facilities do not require upgraded or additional site improvements. The
application for a waiver of site plan shall include a discussion of the
prior use of the site, the proposed use, and its impact. [Amended
11-8-2017 by L.L. No. 5-2017]
B. Exception of specific subdivision and site plan requirements.
(1) The Joint Zoning Board of Appeals/Planning Commission, when
acting upon applications for site plan approval, shall have the
power to grant such exceptions from the requirements for site plan
approval as may be reasonable and within the general purpose and
intent of the provisions for site plan review and approval of this
chapter, if the literal enforcement of one or more provisions of the
chapter is impracticable or will exact undue hardship because of
peculiar conditions pertaining to the land in question. [Amended
11-8-2017 by L.L. No. 5-2017]
(2) Site plan review will not be required for the following:
(a) Construction or erection of permitted single- or two-family
homes and additions to such, as well as structures, accessory
to single- or two-family residences.
(b) Construction or erection of permitted accessory buildings and
structures less than 100 square feet in an area accessory to a
multiple-family, commercial, office, essential service,
municipal or industrial use.
§ 143-9 ONEIDA CODE § 143-10
C:474
(c) Grading, excavation, filling, soil removal, creation of ponds or
clearing of trees within an area of up to 500 square feet,
provided that such activity is normally and customarily
incidental to single-family uses on the site.
(d) Permitted family foster care homes, family day-care homes and
adult day-care homes in single-family zoning districts.
(e) Home businesses or occupations.
(f) Temporary uses, sales and seasonal events.
(g) Improvements to outdoor recreational uses and parks.
(h) Expansion, replanting or alterations of landscaping areas,
consistent with the other requirements of this chapter.
(i) Any interior work or improvements.
(j) Improvements or installations of walls, fences, lighting or
curbing, consistent with the other requirements of this
chapter.
(k) Alterations to the off-street parking layout or installation of
pavement or curbing improvements, of an approved project,
provided that the total number of parking spaces remain
constant.
(l) An existing building and site that are to be reoccupied by a
former use which is currently permitted in the subject zoning
district and that the new use will not require any significant
changes in the existing site facilities, such as parking, lighting
or curbing, consistent with the other requirements of this
chapter. [Amended 5-5-2009 by Ord. No. 09-03]
(m) An increase in the floor area on the subject site by up to 1,000
square feet or 10% of the existing floor area, whichever is less,
with no required increase in parking area.
(n) Construction or erection of permitted accessory buildings and
structures less than 300 square feet for use as animal shelters
in an agricultural zone. [Added 5-5-2009 by Ord. No. 09-03]
§ 143-10 CHARTER § 143-10
C:475

ARTICLE IV
Procedure
§ 143-11. Purpose. [Amended 11-8-2017 by L.L. No. 5-2017]
The purpose of this article is to establish the procedure for Joint Zoning
Board of Appeals/Planning Commission review and action on applications
for site plans. The procedure is intended to provide for the orderly and
expeditious processing of such applications.
§ 143-12. Preapplication.
For the purpose of expediting applications and reducing site plan design
and development costs, the developer is required to attend a preapplication
conference and/or concept plan in accordance with the following
requirements:
A. Preapplication conference.
(1) The Joint Zoning Board of Appeals/Planning Commission shall
authorize a preapplication conference with the applicant at time of
initial contact for a site development action. [Amended
11-8-2017 by L.L. No. 5-2017]
(2) The preapplication conference shall allow the applicant to meet
with appropriate City representatives. These individuals shall
include:
(a) City Engineer.
(b) Director of Planning.
(c) Building Inspector/Code Enforcement Officer.
(d) Fire Chief.
(e) Representatives from the Joint Zoning Board of Appeals/
Planning Commission. [Amended 11-8-2017 by L.L. No.
5-2017]
(f) Representatives from environmental, historic preservation,
and other commissions, as deemed appropriate.
(g) Any other representatives invited by the Joint Zoning Board of
Appeals/Planning Commission Chairperson. [Amended
11-8-2017 by L.L. No. 5-2017]
(3) A brief written summary of the preapplication conference shall be
provided within 15 working days of the final meeting if requested
by the applicant.
(4) The applicant shall not be bound by the determination of the
preapplication conference, nor shall the Joint Zoning Board of
§ 143-11 CHARTER § 143-12
C:477
§ 143-13. Application.
§ 143-14. Site plan approval procedure.
Appeals/Planning Commission be bound by any such review.
[Amended 11-8-2017 by L.L. No. 5-2017]
B. Concept plan.
(1) In addition to the preapplication conference, at the request of the
applicant, the Joint Zoning Board of Appeals/Planning Commission
shall grant an informal review of a concept plan for a development
for which the applicant intends to prepare and submit an
application for development. The purpose of the concept plan is to
provide Joint Zoning Board of Appeals/Planning Commission input
in the formative stages of site plan design. [Amended 11-8-2017
by L.L. No. 5-2017]
(2) If requested by the applicant, a brief written summary of the
concept plan review shall be provided within 15 working days of
the final meeting.
(3) The applicant shall not be bound by any concept plan for which
review is requested, nor shall the Joint Zoning Board of Appeals/
Planning Commission be bound by any such review. [Amended
11-8-2017 by L.L. No. 5-2017]
A. Content. An application for development shall include the items
specified in Article VI of this chapter which constitutes a checklist of
items to be submitted for site plan review.
B. Complete application a site plan application shall be complete for
purposes of commencing the applicable time period for action when so
certified by the Joint Zoning Board of Appeals/Planning Commission. In
the event such certification of the application is not made within 62
days of the date of its submission, the application shall be deemed
complete upon the expiration of the sixty-two-day period for purposes of
commencing the applicable time period unless: [Amended
12-19-2000 by Ord. No. 6-2000; 11-8-2017 by L.L. No. 5-2017]
(1) The application lacks information indicated on the checklist of
items to be submitted specified in Article VI and provided in writing
to the applicant, and
(2) The Director of Planning has notified the applicant, in writing, of
the deficiencies in the application within 45 days of submission of
the application. The Joint Zoning Board of Appeals/Planning
Commission may subsequently require correction of any
information found to be in error and submission of additional
information not specified in the chapter, as is reasonably necessary
to make an informed decision.
§ 143-12 ONEIDA CODE § 143-14
C:478
A. Any applicant requesting approval of a proposed site plan as defined in
this chapter shall submit to the Director of Planning 15 copies of the
items required in Article VI of this chapter, together with an executed
application form and the prescribed fee.
B. The application shall be declared complete or incomplete within a fortyfive-
day period from the date of its submission.
C. The action of the Joint Zoning Board of Appeals/Planning Commission
under this article must be taken within 45 days, or 90 days if a variance
is involved, or within such further time as is agreed to by the applicant
and the Joint Zoning Board of Appeals/Planning Commission. Failure of
the Joint Zoning Board of Appeals/Planning Commission to act within
the period prescribed shall constitute site plan approval, and a
certificate of the Director of Planning as to the failure of the Joint
Zoning Board of Appeals/Planning Commission to act shall be issued on
request of the applicant. [Amended 11-8-2017 by L.L. No. 5-2017]
§ 143-14 CHARTER § 143-14
C:479

ARTICLE V
Design and Improvement Standards
§ 143-15. Purpose.
The purpose of good site design is to create a functional and attractive
development, to minimize adverse impacts, and to ensure a project will be
an asset to a community. To promote this purpose, a site plan shall conform
to the following standards which are designed to result in a well-planned
community without adding unnecessarily to development costs.
§ 143-16. Site design standards.
A. Site design.
(1) Design of the development shall take into consideration all existing
local and regional plans for the surrounding community.
(2) Development of the site shall be based on the site analysis. To the
maximum extent practicable, development shall be located to
preserve the natural features of the site, to avoid areas of
environmental sensitivity, and to minimize negative impacts and
alteration of natural features.
(3) The following specific areas shall be preserved as undeveloped
open space, to the extent consistent with the reasonable utilization
of land, and in accordance with applicable state or local
regulations:
(a) Unique and/or fragile areas, including wetlands as defined in
Section 404, Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments
of 1972, and delineated on wetlands maps prepared by the
United States Fish and Wildlife Service, field verified by on site
inspection;
(b) Significant trees or stands of trees, defined as the largest
known individual trees of each species in the state, large trees
approaching the diameter of the known largest tree, or species
or clumps of trees that are rare to the area or of particular
horticultural or landscape value;
(c) Lands in the floodplain, as defined by state or local regulations;
(d) Steep slopes in excess of 20% as measured over a ten-foot
interval unless appropriate engineering measures concerning
slope stability, erosion, and resident safety are taken;
(e) Habitats of endangered wildlife, as identified on federal or
state lists; and
(f) Historically significant structures and sites, as listed on federal
or state lists of historic places.
§ 143-15 CHARTER § 143-16
C:481
(4) The development shall be laid out to avoid adversely affecting
groundwater and aquifer recharge; to reduce cut and fill; to avoid
unnecessary impervious cover; to prevent flooding; to provide
adequate access to lots; and to mitigate adverse effects of shadow,
noise, glare, traffic, drainage, and utilities on neighboring
properties.
B. Residential development design.
(1) In planned unit developments (PUD), the Joint Zoning Board of
Appeals/Planning Commission may vary lot areas and dimensions,
yards, and setbacks for the purpose of encouraging and promoting
flexibility, economy, and environmental soundness in layout and
design, provided that the average lots, areas and dimensions,
yards, and setbacks within the subdivision conform to the minimum
requirements of the City's development regulations, and provided
that such standards shall be appropriate to the type of development
permitted. [Amended 11-8-2017 by L.L. No. 5-2017]
(2) Residential lots shall front on residential access or subcollector
streets, not on collector streets.
(3) Every lot shall have sufficient access to it for emergency vehicles as
well as for those needing access to the property in its intended use.
(4) The placement of units in residential developments shall take into
consideration topography, privacy, building height, orientation,
drainage, and aesthetics.
(5) Buildings shall be spaced so that adequate privacy is provided for
units.
C. Commercial and industrial development design. Commercial and
industrial developments shall be designed according to the same
principles governing the design of residential developments; namely,
buildings shall be located according to topography, with
environmentally sensitive areas avoided to the maximum extent
practicable; factors such as drainage, noise, odor, and surrounding land
uses considered in siting buildings; sufficient access shall be provided;
and adverse impacts buffered.
D. Circulation system design.
(1) The road system shall be designed to permit the safe, efficient, and
orderly movement of traffic; to meet but not exceed the needs of
the present and future population served; to have a simple and
logical pattern; to respect natural features and topography; and to
present an attractive streetscape.
(2) In planned residential developments, the road system shall be
designed to serve the needs of the neighborhood and to discourage
use by through traffic.
§ 143-16 ONEIDA CODE § 143-16
C:482
§ 143-17. Open space and recreation.
(3) The pedestrian system shall be located as required for safety. In
conventional developments, walks shall be placed parallel to the
street, with exceptions permitted to preserve natural features or to
provide visual interest. In residential planned developments, walks
may be placed away from the road system, but they may also be
required parallel to the street for safety reasons.
(4) Bikeways shall be required only if specifically indicated in the
Comprehensive Plan.
E. Landscape design.
(1) Reasonable landscaping should be provided at development
entrances, in public areas, and adjacent to dwellings. The type and
amount of landscaping required shall be allowed to vary with the
type of development.
(2) The plant or other landscaping material that best serves the
intended function shall be selected. Landscaping materials shall be
appropriate for the local environment, soil conditions, and
availability of water. The impact of the proposed landscaping plan
at various time intervals shall also be considered.
A. Purpose. Planned unit residential developments shall be required to
provide open space. Developed open space shall be designed to provide
active recreational facilities to serve the residents of the development.
Undeveloped open space shall be designed to preserve important site
amenities and environmentally sensitive area. [See § 143-16A(3) for
areas to be preserved as undeveloped open space.]
B. Minimum requirements.
(1) Amount of open space required. Ten percent of the tract proposed
for development shall be set aside for developed and undeveloped
open space, adjusted, as appropriate, for conditions such as
population density, existing municipal facilities, topography and
other appropriate site and development-specific factors.
(2) Size of open space parcels. The area of each parcel of open space
designed for active recreational purposes shall be of such minimum
dimensions as to be functionally usable.
(3) Location of open space parcels. Open space parcels shall be
convenient to the dwelling units they are intended to serve.
However, because of noise generation, they shall be sited with
sensitivity to surrounding development.
C. Improvements of open space parcels. [Amended 11-8-2017 by L.L.
No. 5-2017]
§ 143-16 CHARTER § 143-17
C:483
(1) Developed open space. The Joint Zoning Board of Appeals/Planning
Commission may require the installation of recreational facilities,
taking into consideration:
(a) The character of the open space land;
(b) The estimated age and the recreation needs of persons likely to
reside in the development;
(c) Proximity, nature, and excess capacity of existing municipal
recreation facilities; and
(d) The cost of the recreational facilities.
(2) Undeveloped open space. As a general principle, undeveloped open
space should be left in its natural state. A developer may make
certain improvements such as the cutting of trails for walking or
jogging, or the provision of picnic areas, etc. In addition, the Joint
Zoning Board of Appeals/Planning Commission may require a
developer to make other improvements, such as removing dead or
diseased trees, thinning trees or other vegetation to encourage
more desirable growth, and grading and seeding.
D. Open space ownership. The type of ownership of land dedicated for
open space purposes shall be selected by the owner, developer, or
subdivider, subject to the approval of the Joint Zoning Board of Appeals/
Planning Commission. Type of ownership may include, but is not
necessarily limited to, the following: [Amended 11-8-2017 by L.L.
No. 5-2017]
(1) The municipality, subject to acceptance by the governing body of
the municipality;
(2) Other public jurisdictions or agencies, subject to their acceptance;
(3) Quasi-public organizations, subject to their acceptance;
(4) Homeowner, condominium, or cooperative associations or
organizations; or
(5) Shared, undivided interest by all property owners in the
subdivision.
E. Homeowners' association. If the open space is owned and maintained
by a homeowner or condominium association, the developer shall file a
declaration of covenants and restrictions that will govern the
association, to be submitted with the application for the preliminary
approval. The provisions shall include, but are not necessarily limited
to, the following:
(1) The homeowners' association must be established before the
homes are sold;
§ 143-17 ONEIDA CODE § 143-17
C:484
§ 143-18. Landscaping standards.
The intent of this section is to promote the public's health, safety, and
general welfare by minimizing noise, air, and visual pollution; improving the
appearance of off-street parking and other vehicular use areas; requiring
buffering between incompatible land uses; regulating the appearance of
property abutting public rights-of-way; protecting and preserving the
appearance, character and value of the community and its residential
neighborhood areas; preventing soil erosion and soil depletion; and
promoting groundwater retention.
(2) Membership must be mandatory for each home buyer and any
successive buyer;
(3) The open space restrictions must be permanent, not just for a
period of years;
(4) The association must be responsible for liability insurance, local
taxes, and the maintenance of recreational and other facilities;
(5) Homeowners must pay their pro rata share of the cost, and the
assessment levied by the association can become a lien on the
property if allowed in the master deed establishing the
homeowners' association; and
(6) The association must be able to adjust the assessment to meet
changed needs.
F. Maintenance of open space areas. The person or entity identified in
Subsection D of this section as having the right of ownership or control
over the open space shall be responsible for its continuing upkeep and
proper maintenance.
A. Application. These requirements shall apply to all uses, for which site
plan review is required. No site plan shall be approved unless said site
plan shall show landscaping, greenbelt buffers and screening
consistent with the requirements set forth herein. Screening is the
enclosure of an area by a visual barrier, which may include a landscape
buffer, solid fencing or other materials as specified in Subsections C, D,
E and H of this section.
B. Landscaping plan required. A separate detailed landscaping plan shall
be required to be submitted as part of a site plan review. The
landscaping plan shall include but not necessarily be limited to the
following items:
(1) Location, spacing, size, and root type [bare root (BR) or balled and
burlapped (BB)] and descriptions for each plant type proposed for
use within the required landscape area.
(2) Minimum scale: 1 inch = 100 feet.
§ 143-17 CHARTER § 143-18
C:485
(3) Existing and proposed contours on-site and 150 feet beyond the
site at intervals not to exceed two feet.
(4) Typical straight cross section including slope, height, and width of
berms and type of ground cover or height and type of construction
of wall or fence, including footings.
(5) Significant construction details to resolve specific site conditions,
such as tree wells to preserve existing trees or culverts to maintain
natural drainage patterns.
(6) Planting and staking details in either text or drawing form to
ensure proper installation and establishment of proposed plant
materials.
(7) Identification of existing trees and vegetative cover to be
preserved.
(8) Identification of grass and other ground cover and method of
planting.
(9) Identification of landscape maintenance program, including
statement that all diseased, damaged, or dead materials shall be
replaced in accordance with standards of this chapter.
C. Parking lot landscaping. Separate landscaped areas shall be required
either within or at the perimeter of parking lots. There shall be one tree
for every 10 parking spaces, with a minimum landscaped space within a
designated parking area of 50 square feet. A minimum distance of three
feet shall be established between proposed tree or shrub plantings and
the backside of the curb or edge of the pavement.
D. Greenbelt buffers. A strip of land with a minimum width, determined by
the front yard setback of its zoning classification, shall be located
between the abutting right-of-way of a public street or major
thoroughfare and shall be landscaped with a minimum of one tree not
less than 12 feet in height or a minimum caliper of two inches
(whichever is greater at the time of planting) for each 30 linear feet or
major portion thereof of frontage abutting said right-of-way. The
remainder of the greenbelt shall be landscaped in berms, ground cover,
shrubs, and/or other natural living, landscape material.
E. Site landscaping.
(1) In addition to any landscape greenbelt and/or parking lot
landscaping required by this section, 10% of the site area,
excluding existing thoroughfare right-of-way, shall be landscaped.
(2) Areas used for storm drainage purposes, such as unfenced
drainage courses or retention areas in front or side yards, may be
included as a portion of the required landscaped area not to exceed
5% of the site area.
§ 143-18 ONEIDA CODE § 143-18
C:486
F. Landscape elements. The following minimum standards shall apply:
(1) Quality. Plant material and grasses shall be of generally acceptable
varieties and species, free of insects and diseases, hardy to
Madison County, conform to the current minimum standard of the
American Association of Nurserymen and shall have proof of any
required governmental regulations and/or inspections.
(2) Composition. A mixture of plant material, such as evergreen,
deciduous trees and shrubs, is recommended as a protective
measure against insect and disease infestation. A limited mixture of
hardy species is recommended rather than a large quantity of
different species to produce a more aesthetic, cohesive design and
avoid a disorderly appearing arrangement.
(3) Berms. Berms shall be constructed with slopes not to exceed a 1:3
gradient with side slopes designed and planted to prevent erosion,
and with a rounded surface a minimum of two feet in width at the
highest point of the berm, extending the length of the berm. Berm
slopes shall be protected with sod, seed, shrubs or other form of
natural ground cover.
(4) Existing trees.
(a) If existing plant material is labeled "To Remain" on site plans
by the applicant or required by the Joint Zoning Board of
Appeals/Planning Commission, protective techniques, such as
but not limited to fencing or barriers laced at the dripline
around the perimeter of the plant material shall be installed
during construction. No vehicle or other construction
equipment shall be parked or stored within the dripline of any
plant material intended to be saved. Other protective
techniques may be used, provided that such techniques are
approved by the Joint Zoning Board of Appeals/Planning
Commission. [Amended 11-8-2017 by L.L. No. 5-2017]
(b) In the event that healthy trees which are used to meet the
minimum requirements of this chapter or those labeled to
remain are cut down, destroyed, damaged, or excavated at the
dripline, as determined by the Joint Zoning Board of Appeals/
Planning Commission, the contractor shall replace them with
trees which meet ordinance requirements. [Amended
11-8-2017 by L.L. No. 5-2017]
(c) Installation, maintenance, and completion. All landscaping
required by this chapter shall be planted prior to obtaining a
certificate of occupancy. A letter of credit and/or certified
check shall be placed in escrow in the amount of the cost of
landscaping, to be released only after landscaping is
completed.
G. Installation and maintenance.
§ 143-18 CHARTER § 143-18
C:487
§ 143-19. Streets.
(1) All landscaping and landscape elements shall be planted and earth
moving or grading performed, in a sound workmanlike manner and
according to accepted good planting and grading procedures.
(2) The owner of property required to be landscaped by this chapter
shall maintain such landscaping in a reasonably healthy condition,
free from refuse and debris. All unhealthy and dead material shall
be replaced within one year of damage or death or the next
appropriate planting period, whichever comes first. All landscaped
areas shall be provided with a readily available and acceptable
water supply.
H. Fencing and screening. Unless otherwise specified or determined by
the Joint Zoning Board of Appeals/Planning Commission, fencing and
screening is to be no greater than six feet in height. Measurement in
excess of six feet in height shall require a variance. Gateposts and other
superstructures over site entrances and exits may be up to 12 feet in
height. Fencing and screening materials of a height greater than three
feet are not to be located within a required front setback or side
setback adjacent to a street. [Amended 11-8-2017 by L.L. No.
5-2017]
(1) Outdoor storage: to be screened on all sides by a solid wall or
fencing.
(2) Public utility substations: to be screened on all sides by a solid wall
or fencing and landscaping.
A. General.
(1) The arrangement of streets shall conform to the circulation plan of
the Comprehensive Plan or Official Map for the City of Oneida.
(2) For streets not shown on the Comprehensive Plan or Official Map,
the arrangement shall provide for the appropriate extension of
existing streets.
(3) Residential streets shall be arranged so as to discourage through
traffic and provide for maximum privacy.
B. Street hierarchy.
(1) Streets shall be classified in a street hierarchy system with design
tailored to function.
(2) The street hierarchy system shall be defined by road function and
average daily traffic (ADT), calculated by trip generation rates
prepared by the Institute of Transportation Engineers. Trip
generation rates from other sources may be used if the applicant
demonstrates that these sources better reflect local conditions.
§ 143-18 ONEIDA CODE § 143-19
C:488
(3) Each residential street shall be classified and designed for its
entire length to meet the City's standards.
(4) The applicant shall demonstrate to the Joint Zoning Board of
Appeals/Planning Commission's satisfaction that the distribution of
traffic to the proposed street system will not exceed ADT
thresholds, for any proposed street type. [Amended 11-8-2017 by
L.L. No. 5-2017]
C. Cartway width.
(1) Cartway width for each street classification shall be determined by
parking and curbing requirements which are based on form and
intensity of development.
(2) Intensity of development shall be based on lot frontage as follows:
Intensity of Development
Low Medium High
Lot frontage
(in feet)
More
than
150
75
to
150
Less
than
75
(3) Cartway width shall also consider possible limitations imposed by
sight distances, climate, terrain, and maintenance needs. In order
to minimize street costs, the minimum width assuring satisfaction
of needs shall be selected.
D. Curbs and gutters.
(1) Curbing shall be required for the purposes of drainage, safety, and
delineation and protection of pavement edge.
(2) Curb requirements shall vary according to street hierarchy and
intensity of development.
(a) Curbing may also be required:
[1] For storing water management;
[2] To stabilize pavement edge;
[3] To delineate parking areas;
[4] Ten feet on each side of drainage inlets;
[5] At intersections;
[6] At corners; and
[7] At tight radii.
§ 143-19 CHARTER § 143-19
C:489
(b) Handicap accessible curb cuts/ramps are required at all
intersections.
(3) Where curbing is not required, some sort of edge definition and
stabilization shall be furnished for safety reasons and to prevent
pavement unraveling.
(4) Where curbing is required, this requirement may be waived and
shoulders and/or drainage swales used when it can be shown that:
(a) Shoulders are required by state regulations;
(b) Soil or topography makes the use of shoulders and/or drainage
swales preferable; or
(c) It is in the best interests of the community to preserve its rural
character by using shoulders and/or drainage swales instead of
curbs.
(5) At medium development intensity, the curbing requirement may be
waived where front setbacks exceed 40 feet and it can be
demonstrated that sufficient on-site parking exists.
(6) Flexibility regarding curb type shall be permitted as long as the
curb type accommodates the system of drainage proposed.
(7) Curbing shall be designed to provide a ramp for bicycles and/or
wheelchairs as required by state law.
(8) Curbing shall be constructed according to City specifications.
E. Shoulders.
(1) Shoulders and/or drainage swales shall be required instead of
curbs when:
(a) Shoulders are required by state law;
(b) Soil or topography makes the use of shoulders and/or drainage
swales preferable; or
(c) It is in the best interest of the community to serve its rural
character by using shoulders and/or drainage swales instead of
curbs.
(2) Shoulder requirements shall vary according to street hierarchy and
intensity of development in accordance with the City specifications.
(3) Shoulders shall measure four feet in width on each side for all
streets and shall be located within the right-of-way. The width of
swales shall be determined by site-specific conditions.
(4) Shoulders shall consist of stabilized turf or other material
acceptable to the Joint Zoning Board of Appeals/Planning
Commission. [Amended 11-8-2017 by L.L. No. 5-2017]
§ 143-19 ONEIDA CODE § 143-19
C:490
F. Sidewalks.
(1) Sidewalks and/or graded areas shall be required depending on
road classification and intensity of development in accordance with
the City's requirements.
(2) Where sidewalks are optional, they may be required if close to
pedestrian generators, to continue a walk on an existing street, to
link areas, or depending on probable future development as
indicated in the applicable Comprehensive Plan.
(3) In commercial areas sidewalks should be an integral part of the
curb/sidewalk design.
(4) In planned developments, sidewalks may be located away from the
road system to link dwelling units with other dwelling units, the
street, and on-site activity centers such as parking areas and
recreational areas. They may also be required parallel to the street
for safety and other reasons.
(5) Pedestrian-way easements 10 feet wide may be required by the
Joint Zoning Board of Appeals/Planning Commission through the
center of blocks more than 600 feet long to provide circulation or
access to schools, playgrounds, shopping, or other community
facilities. [Amended 11-8-2017 by L.L. No. 5-2017]
(6) Sidewalks shall measure five feet in width; wider widths may be
necessary near pedestrian generators and employment centers.
The width of graded areas shall be the same as for sidewalks.
(7) Sidewalks and graded areas shall be constructed according to City
specifications.
(8) Handicapped accessible curb cuts/ramps shall be required at all
intersections.
(9) Sidewalks interrupted by curbed driveways shall be required to
have curb ramps for the handicapped.
G. Bikeways.
(1) Separate bicycle paths shall be required only if such paths have
been specified as part of the Comprehensive Plan.
(2) Bicycle lanes, where required, shall be placed in the outside lane of
a roadway, adjacent to the curb or shoulder. When on-street
parking is permitted, the bicycle lane shall be between the parking
lane and the outer lane of moving vehicles. Lanes shall be
delineated with markings, preferably stripping. Raised reflectors or
curbs shall not be used.
(3) Bikeways shall be constructed according to City specifications.
H. Utility and shade tree areas.
§ 143-19 CHARTER § 143-19
C:491
(1) Utilities and shade trees shall generally be located within the rightof-
way on both sides and parallel to the street. Shade trees may
also be placed outside the public right-of-way.
(2) Utility and shade tree areas shall be planted with grass or ground
cover, or treated with other suitable cover material.
I. Right-of-way.
(1) The right-of-way shall be measured from lot line to lot line and shall
be sufficiently wide to contain the cartway, curbs, shoulders,
sidewalks, graded areas, utilities and shade trees (if they are
placed within the right-of-way).
(2) The right-of-way width of a new street that is a continuation of an
existing street shall in no case be continued at a width less than
that of the existing street.
(3) The right-of-way shall reflect future development as indicated by
the Comprehensive Plan.
J. Street grade and intersections. See City specifications.
K. Pavement section.
(1) Street pavement thickness shall vary by street hierarchy, subgrade
properties, and pavement type.
(2) Pavement design for residential access streets, subcollectors, and
collectors shall conform to City specifications.
L. Lighting.
(1) Lighting shall be provided in accordance with a plan designed by
the utility company, or using as a guideline the standards set forth
by the IES Lighting Handbook.
(2) Lighting for safety shall be provided at intersections, along
walkways, at entryways, between buildings, and in parking areas.
(3) Spacing of standards shall be equal to approximately four times the
height standard.
(4) The maximum height of standards shall not exceed the maximum
building height permitted, or 25 feet, whichever is less.
(5) The height and shielding of lighting standards shall provide proper
lighting without hazard to drivers or nuisance to residents, and the
design of lighting standards shall be of a type appropriate to the
development and the City of Oneida.
(6) Spotlights, if used, shall be placed on standards pointing toward
the building and positioned so as not to blind the residents, rather
§ 143-19 ONEIDA CODE § 143-19
C:492
§ 143-20. Water supply.
than on the buildings and directed outwards which creates dark
shadows adjacent to the buildings.
M. Underground wiring.
(1) Electric, telephone, television, and other communication lines, both
main and service connections, servicing new developments are
encouraged to be placed underground within easements or
dedicated public rights-of-way and installed in accordance with the
prevailing standards and practices of the utility or other companies
providing such services.
(2) Where overhead lines are to be utilized, the placement and
alignment of poles shall be designed to lessen the visual impact of
such. Alignments and pole locations shall be carefully routed to
avoid locations along horizons; clearing swaths through treed areas
shall be avoided by selective cutting and a staggered alignment;
trees shall be planted in open areas and at key locations to
minimize the view of the poles and the alignments.
(3) Year-round screening of any utility apparatus appearing above the
surface of the ground, other than utility poles, shall be required.
A. General.
(1) All installations shall be properly connected with an approved and
functioning public community water system.
(2) Distance.
(a) Depending on the number of housing units, planned residential
developments shall be connected to an existing public water
supply system if public service is available within the following
distances:
Size of Development
(units)
Distance
(feet)
1 200
2 400
3 600
4 800
5-15 1,000
(b) For planned developments with more than 15 units and located
within one mile of an existing public water system, adequate
justification shall be provided as to why they shall not provide a
connection to the existing public water supply system. For
planned developments with more than 15 units and located
§ 143-19 CHARTER § 143-20
C:493
more than one mile from an existing system, the water supply
system strategy shall be determined on a case-by-case basis
taking into consideration density of the development, costs,
and groundwater availability and quality.
(3) If a public water supply system is to be provided to the area within
a six-year period as indicated in the City of Oneida's water plan,
Official Map, or other official document, the City may require
installation of a capped system, or dry lines (mains only), within the
road right-of-way; or the City may require a payment in lieu of the
improvement.
(4) All proposals for new public community water supplies or
extensions to existing public water systems or the installation of
dry lines shall be approved by the officially designated agency of
local, state or other unit of government.
B. Capacity.
(1) The water supply system shall be adequate to handle the necessary
flow based on complete development.
(2) The demand rates for all uses shall be considered in computing the
total system demand. Where fire protection is provided, the system
shall be capable of providing the required fire demand plus the
required domestic demand.
(3) Average daily residential demand can be computed in accordance
with the housing unit type and size data shown herein.
(4) Nonresidential demand can be computed in accordance with data
shown herein.
(5) Fire protection shall be furnished for any development connected
to the City's water supply system, and minimum fire flows shall be
based on recommendations by the American Insurance Association
and the National Board of Fire Underwriters.
(6) The water system shall be designed to carry peak-hour flows and be
capable of delivering peak hourly demands indicated herein.
(7) For developments one- and two-family dwellings, not exceeding two
stories in height, the short method indicated herein.
C. System design and placement. System design and placement shall
comply with City construction specifications.
D. Fire hydrants.
(1) Hydrants shall be spaced to provide necessary fire flow. The
average area per hydrant shall not exceed 120,000 square feet. In
addition, hydrants shall be spaced so that each residence shall be
within 500 feet of a hydrant.
§ 143-20 ONEIDA CODE § 143-20
C:494
§ 143-21. Sanitary sewers.39
(2) A hydrant shall be located at all low points and at all high points
with adequate means of drainage provided.
(3) Hydrants shall be located at the ends of lines, and valves of full line
size shall be provided after hydrant tees at the ends of all dead
lines that may be extended in the future.
(4) Size, type and installation of hydrants shall conform to City
specifications.
A. General.
(1) All installations shall be properly connected to an approved and
functioning sanitary sewer system prior to the issuance of a
certificate of occupancy.
(2) Distance.
(a) Depending on the number of housing units, planned residential
developments shall be connected to an existing public sanitary
sewer supply system if public service is available within the
following distances:
Size of Development
(units)
Distance
(feet)
1 100
2 100
3 600
4 800
5-15 1,000
(b) For developments with more than 15 units and located within
one mile of an existing public sanitary sewer system, adequate
justification shall be provided as to why they should not
provide a connection to the existing public sanitary sewer
system. For developments with more than 15 units and located
more than one mile from an existing system, the sanitary sewer
system strategy shall be determined on a case-by-case basis,
taking into consideration the density of development and cost.
(c) If a public system is not in place or cannot be extended, the
developer must provide individual subsurface disposal systems
where appropriate, given site density, soil, slope, and other
conditions and subject to applicable state and other prevailing
regulations.
39.Editor's Note: See Ch. 139, Sewers.
§ 143-20 CHARTER § 143-21
C:495
§ 143-22. Stormwater management.
(d) If a public sanitary sewer system will be provided to the area
within a six-year period as indicated in the City's sewer plan,
Official Map, or other official document, the City may require
installation of a capped system, or "dry lines" (mains only),
within the road right-of-way; or the City may require a payment
in lieu of the improvement.
(e) All proposals for new public sanitary sewer systems, or
extensions to existing public sewer systems or the installation
of dry lines or the use of individual subsurface disposal systems
shall be approved by the officially designated agency of local,
state, or other unit of government.
B. System design and placement.
(1) The sanitary sewer system shall be adequate to handle the
necessary flow based on complete development.
(2) Average daily residential sewer flow shall be calculated as shown
herein.
(3) Sanitary sewerage facilities shall be designed, approved and
constructed IAW with following references as may be appropriate
for public sanitary sewers or individual household disposal
systems:
(a) Chapter 139, Sewers of the Code of the City of Oneida.
(b) "Recommended Standards for Wastewater Facilities" as
published by the Great Lakes-Upper Mississippi River Board of
State Public Health and Environmental Managers (common
title: "Ten State Standards"), 1990.
(c) "Design Standards for Wastewater Treatment Works," as
published by the New York State Department of Environmental
Conservation.
(d) "Wastewater Treatment Standards - Individual Household
Systems," Appendix 75-A of Part 75 of the Administrative Rules
and Regulations contained in Chapter 11 of Title 10 (Health) of
the Official Compilation of Codes, Rules and Regulations of the
State of New York.
A. General.
(1) Design of the stormwater management system shall be consistent
with general and specific concerns, values, and standards of the
City's Comprehensive Plan and applicable county, regional, and
state storm drainage control programs, including Mosquito
Commission Control Standards, if applicable. Design shall be based
§ 143-21 ONEIDA CODE § 143-22
C:496
on environmentally sound site planning and engineering
techniques.
(2) The best available technology shall be used to minimize off-site
stormwater runoff, increase on-site infiltration, encourage natural
filtration functions, simulate natural drainage systems, and
minimize off-site discharge of pollutants to groundwater and
surface water. Best available technology may include measures
such as retention basins, recharge trenches, porous paving and
piping, contour terraces, and swales.
B. System strategy and design. Stormwater management system strategy
and design shall comply with City specifications.
§ 143-22 CHARTER § 143-22
C:497

ARTICLE VI
Document Specifications
[Amended 11-8-2017 by L.L. No. 5-2017]
§ 143-23. Purpose.
The documents to be submitted are intended to provide the Joint Zoning
Board of Appeals/Planning Commission with sufficient information and data
to assure compliance with all City of Oneida codes and specifications and
ensure that the proposed development meets the design and improvement
standards contained in this chapter. The specification of documents to be
submitted is based on the type of development and particular stage of
development application.
§ 143-24. Requirements.
The documents to be submitted are shown on the following pages. In
specific cases and for documented reasons, the Joint Zoning Board of
Appeals/Planning Commission may waive the submission of a particular
document. The reasons for the waiver shall be indicated in the minutes of
the Joint Zoning Board of Appeals/Planning Commission.
Appendix A
Required Submission Documents
Site Plan
Item Number
Description
I. Project Information
1. Name, address of owner and applicant.
2. Name, signature, license number, seal and address of engineer, land
surveyor, architect, planner, and/or landscape architect, as applicable,
involved in preparation of the site plan.
3. Title block denoting type of application, tax map sheet, county, name
of municipality, block and lot, and street location.
4. A key map at specified scale showing location of parcel(s) with
reference to surrounding properties, streets, municipal boundaries,
etc., within 500 feet; date of current survey.
5. A schedule of required and provided zoning district(s) requirements
including lot area, width, depth, yard setbacks, building coverage,
parking, etc.
6. North arrow and scale.
7. Proof that taxes are current.
8. Signature blocks for the Chairman.
§ 143-23 CHARTER § 143-24
C:499
Appendix A
Required Submission Documents
Site Plan
Item Number
Description
9. Appropriate certification blocks. Each site plan sheet is to be signed
and sealed by a professional engineer and/or registered architect.
10. Monumentation.
11. Metes and bounds description showing dimensions, bearings, curve
data, length of tangents, radii, arcs, chords and central angles for all
center lines and rights-of-way.
12. Acreage of the parcel to the nearest tenth of an acre.
13. Date of original site plan and all revisions.
14. Size and location of any existing or proposed structures with all
setbacks dimensioned.
15. Location and dimensions of any existing or proposed streets.
16. All proposed lot lines and area of lots in square feet.
17. Copy and/or delineation of any existing or proposed deed restrictions
or covenants.
18. Any existing or proposed easement or land reserved for or dedicated
to public use.
19. Development stages or staging plans.
20. List of required regulatory approvals or permits.
21. List of variances required or requested.
22. Requested or obtained design waivers or exceptions.
23. Payment of application fees.
II. Setting - Environmental Information
24. Property owners and lines of all parcels within 200 feet identified on
most recent tax map sheet.
25. All existing streets, water courses, floodplains, wetlands or other
environmentally sensitive areas on and within 200 feet of site.
26. Existing rights-of-way and/or easements on and within 200 feet of
tract.
27. Topographical features of subject property from USC & GS map.
28. Existing and proposed contour intervals based on USC & GS data.
Contours to extend at least 200 feet beyond subject property as
follows:
Up to 3% grade = 1 foot
3% + grade = 2 feet
§ 143-24 ONEIDA CODE § 143-24
C:500
Appendix A
Required Submission Documents
Site Plan
Item Number
Description
29. Boundary, limits, nature and extent of wooded areas, specimen trees,
and other significant physical features.
30. Existing system of drainage of subject site.
31. Drainage area map.
32. Drainage calculations.
III. Improvements and Construction Information
33. Proposed utility infrastructure plans, including sanitary sewer, water,
stormwater management, telephone, electric, etc.
34. Soil erosion and sediment control plan.
35. Spot and finished elevations at all property corners, corners of all
structures or dwellings, existing or proposed first floor elevations.
36. Construction details as required by ordinance.
37. Road and paving cross sections and profiles.
38. New block and lot numbers confirmed with City Assessor.
39. Lighting plan and details.
40. Landscape plan and details.
41. Solid waste management plan.
42. Site identification signs, traffic control signs, and directional signs.
43. Sight distance.
44. Vehicular and pedestrian circulation patterns.
45. Parking plan showing spaces, size and type, aisle width, curb cuts,
drives, driveways, and all ingress and egress areas and dimensions.
46. Preliminary architectural plan and elevations.
Appendix B
Improvement Standards:
Construction Specifications
§ 1. Curbs.
Please refer to City appropriate sections of NYSDOT Standard
Specifications and Standard Detail Drawings.
§ 2. Sidewalks and bikeways.
A. Sidewalks and graded areas.
§ 143-24 CHARTER § 143-24
C:501
Appendix B
Improvement Standards:
Construction Specifications
(1) Sidewalks shall be four inches thick except at points of vehicular
crossing where they shall be at least six inches thick. At vehicular
crossings, sidewalks shall be reinforced with welded wire fabric
mesh or an equivalent.
(2) Concrete sidewalks shall be Class C concrete, having a twentyeight-
day compressive strength of 4,500 psi. Other paving
materials, such as gravel, crushed stone, brick, etc., may be
permitted depending on the design of the development.
(3) Graded areas shall be planted with grass or treated with other
suitable ground cover, and their width shall correspond to that of
sidewalks.
B. Bikeways.
(1) Bicycle paths. Dimensions and construction specifications of
bicycle paths shall be determined by the number and type of users
and the location and purpose of the bicycle path. A minimum
eight-foot paved width should be provided for two-way bicycle
traffic and a five-foot width for one-way traffic.
(a) Choice of surface materials, including bituminous mixes,
concrete, gravel, soil cement, stabilized earth and wood
planking, shall depend on use and users of the path.
(b) Gradients of bike paths should generally not exceed a grade
of 5%, except for short distances.
(2) Bicycle lanes. Lanes shall be four feet wide, or wide enough to
allow safe passage of bicycles and motorists.
(3) Drainage grates. Bicycle-safe drainage grates shall be used in the
construction of all residential streets.
§ 3. Street grade, intersections, pavement, and lighting.
A. Street grade.
(1) Minimum street grade permitted for all streets shall be 0.5%; but
streets constructed at this grade shall be closely monitored and
strict attention paid to construction techniques to avoid ponding.
Where topographical conditions permit, grades in excess of 0.5%
shall be used.
(2) Maximum street grade shall vary by road hierarchy, with flatter
grades required for roads with higher ADT's, in accordance with
the requirements shown herein.
B. Intersections.
(1) Minimum intersection angle. Street intersections shall be as
nearly at right angles as possible and in no case shall be less than
75º.
§ 143-24 ONEIDA CODE § 143-24
C:502
Appendix B
Improvement Standards:
Construction Specifications
(2) Minimum center-line offset of adjacent intersections. New
intersections along one side of an existing street shall, if possible,
coincide with any existing intersections on the opposite side of
each street. Use of "T" intersections in subdivisions shall be
encouraged. To avoid corner-cutting when inadequate offsets
exist between adjacent intersections, offsets shall measure at
least 175 feet to 200 feet between center lines.
(3) Minimum curb radius. Intersections shall be rounded at the
curbline, with the street having the highest radius requirement
as shown herein determining the minimum standard for all
curblines.
(4) Grade. Intersections shall be designed with a flat grade wherever
practicable. Maximum grade within intersections shall be 5%
except for collectors which shall be 3%.
(5) Minimum center-line radius; minimum tangent length between
reverse curves; and curb radii. Requirements shall be as shown
herein.
(6) Sight triangles. Sight triangle easements shall be required and
shall include the area on each street corner that is bounded by
the line which connects the sight or "connecting" points located
on each of the right-of-way lines of the intersecting street. The
planting of trees or other plantings or the location of structures
exceeding 30 inches in height that would obstruct the clear sight
across the area of the easements shall be prohibited, and a public
right-of-entry shall be reserved for the purpose of removing any
object, material or otherwise, that obstructs the clear sight.
C. Pavement. Pavement design for residential, subcollectors and
collectors shall follow the specification shown herein.
D. Lighting. Lighting shall be designed in accordance with a plan designed
by the utility company, or the standards recommended in the IES
Lighting Handbook shall be used as a guideline.
§ 4. Water supply: system design and placement.
A. System design and placement shall comply with all applicable state,
American Water Works Association (AWWA), and City of Oneida
standards, with the strictest standards governing.
§ 143-24 CHARTER § 143-24
C:503
Appendix B
Improvement Standards:
Construction Specifications
B. Water and sewer mains generally shall be separated a distance of at
least 10 feet horizontally. If such lateral separation is not possible,
the pipes shall be in separate trenches with the sewer at least 24
inches below the bottom of the water main or such other separation
as approved by the state or other regulatory body shall be made. In
general, the vertical separation at a crossing of water and sewer line
shall be at least 18 inches. Where this is not possible, the sewer shall
be constructed of cast-iron pipe using mechanical or slip-on joints for
a distance of at least 10 feet on either side of the crossing, or other
suitable protection shall be provided.
C. Distribution mains shall be connected into loops so that the supply may
be brought to the consumer from more than one direction. In balancing
loops in a design, the Hardy Cross method or an equivalent method
shall be used.
D. Valves shall be located on distribution mains so that no more than one
street or block would be out of service for a single break. They shall be
located in all small branches off larger mains, and where eight-inch or
larger lines intersect, a valve shall be located in each branch.
E. Arteries and secondary feeder mains shall be valved so that not more
than 1/4 of a mile would be affected by a single break. Geared valves
on sixteen-inch mains or larger shall be furnished.
F. Dead ends shall not be allowed without permission of the City of Oneida
and, in any case, shall not be permitted in excess of 400 feet. If deadend
lines are permitted, they shall be provided with a hydrant as a
means of flushing.
G. No pipe shall be placed on private property unless the owner of the
land is to own or operate the pipe, or an easement deeded to the
municipality is obtained. All easements shall be unrestricted, and a
minimum of 20 feet wide or wider if necessary unless otherwise
specified by utility companies.
H. House service connections. A service connection consists of the pipe
and appurtenances between the municipal street main and any
customer's property line. A house service connection shall be
comprised of a corporation stop at the main, a curb stop, and an inside
compression stop, in that order. Meters shall be located as specified by
the public or private water supplier.
(1) Separate water service for each unit shall be utilized for detached
housing where maintenance is the responsibility of the individual
homeowner.
§ 143-24 ONEIDA CODE § 143-24
C:504
Appendix B
Improvement Standards:
Construction Specifications
(2) Common water service connections, a cost-efficient design, may
be allowed for multifamily housing where there is an entity (such
as a homeowners' association) responsible for the maintenance of
the common water laterals. Where common laterals are utilized,
individual water shutoffs shall be provided for each unit.
I. Pipe size. Water mains shall be a minimum diameter of eight inches
unless another size is required for fire flow and other criteria as
determined by the Hardy Cross method or other appropriate
procedures. House service connection pipe shall be a minimum
diameter of 3/4 inch.
J. Pipe materials. Pipe materials used in the construction of water mains
shall be cement-lined ductile iron, prestressed concrete cylinder pipe,
or PVC pipe. All pipe and appurtenances shall comply with the latest
applicable American Water Works Association (AWWA) standards.
(1) Ductile iron pipe, appurtenances, and fittings shall comply with
AWWA C1100 (fittings), C111 (gasket joints), C115 (flanged
joints), and C151 (pipe). Thickness shall be designed in
accordance with AWWA C150 and be a minimum of Class 52. They
shall be cement mortar-lined in accordance with AWWA C104.
Joints shall conform to AWWA C111 and be equal to TYTON.
In aggressive soils, ductile iron pipe wrapped in polyethylene
according to AWWA C105-72 shall be used if it is a suitable system
to prevent corrosion. The developer's engineer shall certify the
ability of whatever pipe materials are chosen to resist all
degradation caused by soil conditions. The exterior of the ductile
iron pipe shall be covered with a coal-tar, epoxy-type coating
where such protection is necessary (i.e. in acidic soil conditions).
(2) Suitable adapters to flanged fittings shall be furnished where
required.
(3) Valves. Gate valves shall be full size, and those on sixteen-inch
mains or larger shall be geared and have suitable bypasses. Valve
boxes shall be of the adjustable type, with the cover marked
"water" and direction of valve operation indicated.
(4) House service connection pipe shall be Type K copper.
§ 143-24 CHARTER § 143-24
C:505
Appendix B
Improvement Standards:
Construction Specifications
K. Fire hydrants. Size, type, and installation of hydrants shall be in
accordance with local practice, or shall conform to the American Water
Works Association standard for dry barrel fire hydrants (AWWA C502).
Hydrants shall have at least three outlets: one outlet shall be a pumper
outlet and the other outlets shall be at least two-and-one-half-inch
nominal size. Street main connections should be not less than six
inches in diameter. Rose threads on outlets shall conform to national
standard dimensions. A valve shall be provided on connections between
hydrants and street mains. All pipe, fittings, and appurtenances
supplying fire hydrants shall be AWWA or ASTM approved. All fire
hydrants shall conform to the City color.
§ 5. Sanitary sewers: system design and placement.
Sanitary sewerage facilities shall be designed, approved and constructed
IAW with following references as may be appropriate for public sanitary
sewers or individual household disposal systems:
A. Chapter 139, Sewers of the Code of the City of Oneida.
B. "Recommended Standards for Wastewater Facilities" as published by
the Great Lakes-Upper Mississippi River Board of State Public Health
and Environmental Managers (common title: "Ten State Standards"),
1990.
C. "Design Standards for Treatment Works," New York State Department
of Environmental Conservation, 1988.
D. "Wastewater Treatment Standards - Individual Household Systems,"
Appendix 75-A of Part 75 of the Administrative Rules and Regulations
contained in Chapter 11 of Title 10 (Health) of the Official Compilation
of Codes, Rules and Regulations of the State of New York.
§ 6. Stormwater management: system demand, strategy, and design.
A. Project description.
(1) Describe what is being proposed (i.e., residential lot subdivision,
planned unit development, commercial/retail development, or
industrial development
(2) Describe project size (i.e., number of acres, proposed number of
dwelling units or other buildings).
(3) Describe other improvements which will be made on project site,
including streets and roads, utilities (water, sewer, etc.), and give
particular attention to acreage of land that will become paved and
covered with buildings. Lawn acreage also should be specified.
(4) Provide a location map 40
40.Note: Include a North arrow on all maps,which identifies upstream watersheds which
contribute flow through the proposed development as well as downstream watersheds
§ 143-24 ONEIDA CODE § 143-24
C:506
Appendix B
Improvement Standards:
Construction Specifications
(5) Provide a base map containing boundary lines of the project site,
subcatchments, and contributory watersheds at a scale agreed
upon by the City Engineer and developer.41
(6) Provide an analysis of site limitations and development
constraints by including such factors as slope, soil erodibility,
depth to bedrock, depth to seasonal high water, soil percolation,
etc., to facilitate evaluation of site suitability for proposed
stormwater and erosion control facilities in relation to the overall
development proposal.
(7) Provide a general description of the approaches which will be
taken to control erosion and sedimentation and stormwater
runoff.
(8) Provide a statement indicating when the project is to begin and
the expected date that all infrastructure will be completed.
(9) Provide a map and description of all critical environmental areas,
conservation areas, wildlife habitats, easements, etc., to be
protected.
(10) Provide an analysis of potential impacts from the proposed
development to natural resource features on site and off site, such
as streams, lakes, wetlands, and water supplies. A determination
as to whether the proposed development will affect any
designated primary or principal aquifer should also be included.
B. Existing (pre-development) conditions.
(1) Provide a map showing topography (contours) under existing
conditions. On this same map, show drainage patterns, including
ditches, culverts, permanent streams, intermittent streams,
wetlands, or other water bodies, and existing roads. Indicate
sizes of existing culverts. Delineate watershed and subwatershed
boundaries on the map. Clearly identify the path used in each
subcatchment used in the time of concentration (Tc)
determination.
(2) Provide a map showing existing land use, open space, public
facilities, utility lines, water supply wells on site, and predominant
vegetation cover types (forested, brushland, grassland, cropland,
pasture, etc.).
which may be impacted by project. Also, show highways, roads, and proximity of project to
the nearest water body, and other prominent features.
41.Note: For subdivision review purposes, maps associated with the stormwater management
report should have a scale of more than 1 inch = 50 feet. The contour interval for the
maps should be two feet or an appropriate interval selected on the basis of site conditions
and agreed upon by the City Engineer and developer.
§ 143-24 CHARTER § 143-24
C:507
Appendix B
Improvement Standards:
Construction Specifications
(3) Provide soils survey information and, by subcatchment, provide
tabular information detailing the area in acres that are in each
of the Soil Conservation Service (SCS) Hydrologic Soil Groups
A, B, C or D. (Refer to the Madison County Soil Survey.) Soils
information should be obtained by conducting a site-specific soil
survey.
(4) Where applicable, provide a map showing designated onehundred-
year floodplain boundaries, any available one-hundredyear
flood elevations and floodways. Show culverts downstream of
project and culvert size which are within 500 feet of the boundary
of the proposed development. Show existing easements for storm
drains, sewers, and other utilities. Show the extent of the
drainage area served by a man-made stormwater drainage
network if that network system is collecting runoff from outside
of the natural drainage basin and is discharging into or passing
through the proposed development.
(5) IAW with methodology contained in SCS TR-55, prepare a preconstruction
hydrologic analysis. This should include:
(a) Precipitation data for two-year, ten-year, and one-hundredyear
storms for a twenty-four-hour duration. This shall include
peak discharge in cubic feet per second, the time of the peak
discharge and the total volume for each of the design storms.
(b) Provide stream channel survey data by subcatchment showing
channel conditions, including roughness and vegetation.
C. Proposed future (development) conditions.
(1) Provide a map showing by subcatchment the completed project,
including lot layout, approximate location of buildings, streets,
and other paved surfaces, final contours, utility lines, water
supply wells, individual sewage disposal systems, and location
and types of easements.
(2) IAW SCS TR-55 methodology, provide tabular information, by
subcatchment, showing the acres of impervious area created in
the proposed development as well as the extent of lawn and
areas where the land has been made more impervious than predevelopment
conditions.
(3) By subcatchment, show on a map changes to land surface,
including areas of cuts and fills, changes in vegetative cover
types, and final contours. Indicate by subcatchment, land clearing
and earthmoving start-up and completion dates.
(4) Indicate construction schedule including estimated completion
date(s) and proposed winter shutdowns.
§ 143-24 ONEIDA CODE § 143-24
C:508
Appendix B
Improvement Standards:
Construction Specifications
(5) IAW SCS TR-55 methodology, prepare a post-construction
stormwater analysis by subcatchment.
(a) Precipitation data for two-year, ten-year, and one-hundredyear
storms for a twenty-four-hour duration. This shall include
peak discharge in cubic feet per second, the time of the peak
discharge and the total volume for each of the design storms.
(b) Provide stream channel survey data by subcatchment showing
channel conditions including roughness and vegetation.
D. Comparison of pre-development with post-development runoff.
(1) Methodologies. IAW with SCS TR-55 methodology compare and
evaluate pre-construction with post-development runoff
conditions in terms of volumes, peak rates of runoff, routing, and
hydrographs.
(a) Peak discharge rates and total runoff volumes from the project
area for existing site conditions and post-development
conditions for the two-year, ten-year, and one-hundred-year;
twenty-four-hour storm events shall be calculated. The
derivation of relevant variables used in this determination,
such as curve number and time of concentration (Tc) shall be
included.
(b) Downstream analysis of the two-year, ten-year and onehundred-
year; twenty-four-hour events, including peak
discharge rates, total runoff volumes and evaluation of
impacts to receiving waters and/or wetlands shall be
evaluated.
(c) Storage volume and surface area requirements necessary to
provide flood control for runoff generated during two-year,
ten-year and one-hundred-year, twenty-four-hour storm events
shall be calculated.
(d) Discharge provisions for the proposed control measures,
including peak discharge rates, outlet design, discharge
capacity for each stage, outlet channel design, and a
description of the point of discharge should be provided. Postconstruction
peak discharge rates shall not exceed preconstruction
discharge rates.
(e) Sufficient detail should be provided to show that the
stormwater facility(ies) is capable of withstanding the
discharge from the one-hundred-year storm event.
§ 143-24 CHARTER § 143-24
C:509
Appendix B
Improvement Standards:
Construction Specifications
(f) The developer shall be responsible for acquiring a dam permit
from the New York State Department of Environmental
Conservation if applicable. The stormwater management
report shall clearly state whether or not a dam permit will be
required.
(2) Calculations.
(a) State any assumptions used in making the calculations.
(b) Provide assumptions and coefficient values used in the
hydrologic calculations for making above comparisons.
Evaluate the post-development effect of stormwater runoff on
identified floodplains or designated flood hazard areas in the
community.
(c) Computer-generated peak discharges, volumes, and
hydrographs may be used if the model has been prior
approved for such use by the City Engineer.
E. Stormwater management.
(1) Stormwater management facilities.
(a) Describe in a narrative and show on a map, by subcatchment,
proposed stormwater management facilities. A soil profile to
at least one foot below the stormwater management facility
should be provided.
(b) Provide designs of proposed structural stormwater
management facilities. Identify the materials to be used in
constructing these facilities.
(c) Calculations for sizing stormwater facilities shall be provided.
(d) Provide designs and calculations for siting and sizing such
specialized measures and devices as filter strips, water quality
inlets (oil/grit separator) forebays, first flush attenuation, etc.,
which will be used to remove sediment, oil-based products,
and other contaminants found in urban runoff.
(e) Provide information on the design provisions that address
safety considerations (e.g., gentle slopes and benches in
ponds) and accommodate maintenance needs (including
access to conduct maintenance operations).
(2) Stormwater conveyance system.
(a) Describe in a narrative and map by subcatchment the
stormwater conveyance (drainage) system. Indicate which
segments of the drainage system are open channels and which
segments are piped (culverts). Provide rationale and
justification for installing piped segments.
§ 143-24 ONEIDA CODE § 143-24
C:510
Appendix B
Improvement Standards:
Construction Specifications
(b) Provide plan view and cross-sectional designs of stormwater
conveyance systems. Hydrologic calculations for siting and
sizing the stormwater conveyance system shall be provided.
Identify materials to be used.
(c) Provide plans, designs and identify materials to be used for
preventing erosion in channel sections of stormwater
conveyance systems. Show how erosion at culvert inlets and
outfalls will be prevented.
(3) Recreational and/or landscape features (optional at discretion of
the Joint Zoning Board of Appeals/Planning Commission).
(a) Describe and illustrate any recreational or landscape features
which are to be factored into the stormwater management
system to enhance the aesthetics of the facility(s) and provide
multiple use options.
(b) On the map show the location of recreational facilities.
(c) Provide landscaping sketches and designs for the stormwater
management facilities.
F. Erosion and sediment control.
(1) Temporary erosion and sediment control facilities (to be used
during land clearing, land grading and the construction phases).
(a) Describe temporary structural facilities and vegetative
measures which will be used to control erosion and
sedimentation.
(b) Provide a map showing, by subcatchment, the location of
temporary vegetative and structural erosion and sediment
control facilities.
(c) Provide dimensional details of proposed erosion and sediment
control facilities and identify the materials that will be used
in developing these facilities. Calculations used in siting and
sizing sediment basins should be provided. (See New York
Guidelines for Urban Erosion and Sediment Control.) 42
(d) Identify temporary erosion and sediment control facilities
which will be converted to permanent stormwater
management facilities.
(e) Provide an implementation schedule for the staging of
temporary erosion and sediment control facilities.
(f) Provide a maintenance schedule for soil erosion and sediment
control facilities.
42.Note: Include a North arrow on all maps.
§ 143-24 CHARTER § 143-24
C:511
Appendix B
Improvement Standards:
Construction Specifications
(2) Permanent erosion and sediment control facilities.
(a) Describe permanent structural and vegetative practices which
will be used to provide long-term control of erosion and
sedimentation when construction activities are completed and
the project site is restored.
(b) Provide a map showing, by catchment, the location of
permanent erosion control facilities, including both structural
and vegetative.
(c) By subcatchment, provide an implementation schedule for
restoring the project site with permanent erosion and
sediment control facilities.
§ 143-24 ONEIDA CODE § 143-24
C:512
Chapter 145
SMALL CELL WIRELESS DEPLOYMENT REQUIREMENTS
§ 143-24 CHARTER § 143-24
C:513

ARTICLE I
Purpose and Definitions
§ 145-1. Purpose and intent.
A. Purpose.
(1) The purpose of this chapter is to regulate the placement of certain
wireless communication facilities in the City. The standards set
forth herein are created to provide objective, technically feasible
criteria applied in a nondiscriminatory manner that reasonably
match the aesthetics and character of the immediate area
regarding all of the following, which the City shall consider when
reviewing an application:
(a) The location of the ground-mounted communication facilities;
(b) The location of a wireless facility on a pole or other device;
(c) The appearance and concealment of certain wireless
communication facilities, including those relating to materials
used for arranging, screening and landscaping;
(d) The design and appearance of a wireless support structure
including any height requirements adopted in accordance with
this chapter.
(2) This chapter applies to the public ROW but does not restrict the
City's right to regulate wireless communication facilities on non-
City-owned property or outside of the public ROW under the same
terms and conditions set forth herein.
B. Intent. In enacting this chapter, the City is establishing uniform
standards to address issues presented by certain wireless facilities,
including without limitation, to:
(1) Prevent interference with the use of streets, sidewalks, alleys,
parkways and other public ways and places;
(2) Prevent the creation of visual and physical obstructions and other
conditions that are hazardous to vehicular and pedestrian traffic;
(3) Prevent interference with existing facilities and operations of
facilities presently lawfully located in rights-of-way or public
property;
(4) Ensure efforts are made to preserve the character of
neighborhoods in which facilities are installed;
(5) Protect against environmental damage, including damage to trees,
public and private property; and
(6) Facilitate the appropriate and reasonable deployment of small
wireless facilities to provide the benefits of reliable access to
§ 145-1 CHARTER § 145-1
C:515
§ 145-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW — Ministerial review of an application by the
City relating to the review and issuance of a permit, including review by the
Code Enforcement Officer to determine whether the issuance of a permit is
in conformity with the applicable provisions of this chapter.
ANTENNA — Communications equipment that transmits and/or receives
electromagnetic radio frequency signals used in the provision of wireless
services. This definition does not apply to broadcast antennas, antennas
designed for amateur radio use, or satellite dishes for residential or
household purposes.
APPLICABLE CODES — Uniform building, fire, safety, electrical, plumbing,
or mechanical codes adopted, or incorporated, by the City.
APPLICANT — Any person who submits an application under this chapter.
APPLICATION — A written request, on a form provided by the City, for a
permit.
AUTHORITY or CITY — The City of Oneida or any agency, subdivision or any
instrumentality thereof.
COLLOCATE — To install or mount a small wireless facility on an existing
support structure, an existing tower, or on an existing pole to which a small
wireless facility is attached at the time of the application. "Collocation" has
a corresponding meaning.
COMMUNICATIONS FACILITY — Collectively, the equipment at a fixed
location(s) within the public ROW or on public or private property that
enables communications services, including: radio transceivers, antennas,
coaxial, fiber-optic or other cabling, power supply (including backup
battery), and comparable equipment, regardless of technological
configuration; and all other equipment associated with any of the foregoing.
A communications facility does not include the pole, tower or support
structure to which the equipment is attached.
COMMUNICATIONS SERVICE — Cable service, as defined in 47 U.S.C.
§ 522(6); information service or broadband, as defined in 47 U.S.C.
§ 153(24); or telecommunications service, as defined in 47 U.S.C. § 153(53).
COMMUNICATIONS SERVICE PROVIDER — A provider of communications
services and includes a cable operator, as defined in 47 U.S.C. § 522(5).
DECORATIVE POLE — A pole that is specially designed and placed for
aesthetic purposes.
wireless telecommunications technology, broadband and 9-1-1
services to homes, businesses and schools within the City.
§ 145-1 ONEIDA CODE § 145-2
C:516
DISCRETIONARY REVIEW — Review of an application by the City Planning
Commission/Zoning Board of Appeals relating to the review and issuance of
a permit that is other than an Administrative Review.
ELIGIBLE FACILITIES REQUEST — An eligible facility request as set forth
in 47 C.F.R. § 1.40001(b)(3), as that section may be amended from time to
time.
FCC — The Federal Communications Commission of the United States.
LAWS — Collectively, any and all federal, state, or local law, statute,
common law, code, rule, regulation, order, or ordinance.
ORDINARY MAINTENANCE AND REPAIR — Inspections, testing and/or
repair of existing communication facilities that maintain functional capacity,
aesthetic and structural integrity of a communications facility and/or the
associated support structure, pole or tower, that does not require blocking,
damaging or disturbing any portion of the public ROW.
PERMIT — A written authorization (in electronic or hard copy format) to
install, at a specified location(s) in the public ROW or at a specific location
on public or private property, a communications facility, tower or a pole to
support a communications facility.
PERMITTEE — An applicant who has received a permit under this chapter.
PERSON — An individual, corporation, limited liability company,
partnership, association, trust, or other entity or organization, including a
governmental entity.
POLE — A legally constructed pole, such as a utility, lighting, traffic, or
similar pole made of wood, concrete, metal or other material, located or to
be located within the public right-of-way. A pole does not include a tower or
support structure.
PROVIDER — A communications service provider or a wireless services
provider and includes any person who owns and/or operates within the
public ROW any communications facilities, wireless facilities, poles built
for the sole or primary purpose of supporting communications facilities, or
towers.
PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY or PUBLIC ROW — The area on, below, or above
property that has been designated for use as or is used for a public roadway,
highway, street, sidewalk, alley or similar purpose, and for purposes of this
chapter shall include public utility easements, but only to the extent the City
has to permit use of the area or public utility easement for communications
facilities or poles, towers and support structures that support
communications facilities. The term does not include a federal interstate
highway or other areas that are not within the legal jurisdiction, ownership
or control of the City.
PUBLIC UTILITY EASEMENT — Unless otherwise specified or restricted
by the terms of the easement, the area on, below, or above a property in
which the property owner has dedicated an easement for use by utilities.
Public utility easement does not include an easement dedicated solely for
§ 145-2 CHARTER § 145-2
C:517
City's use, or where the proposed use by the provider is inconsistent with
the terms of any easement granted to the City.
REPLACE or REPLACEMENT — In connection with an existing pole,
support structure or tower, to replace (or the replacement of) same with a
new structure, substantially similar in design, size and scale to the existing
structure and in conformance with this chapter and any other applicable
City regulations, in order to address limitations of the existing structure to
structurally support collocation of a communications facility.
SMALL WIRELESS FACILITY — A wireless facility that meets both of the
following qualifications:
STATE — The State of New York.
SUPPORT STRUCTURE — A freestanding structure other than a pole or a
tower to which a wireless facility is attached at the time of the application.
TOWER — Any structure built for the sole or primary purpose of supporting
a wireless facility. A tower does not include a pole or a support structure.
WIRELESS FACILITY — The equipment at a fixed location(s) that enables
wireless services. The term does not include the support structure, tower
or pole on, under, or within which the equipment is located or collocated;
or coaxial, fiber-optic or other cabling that is between communications
facilities or poles or that is otherwise not immediately adjacent to or directly
associated with a particular antenna. A small wireless facility is one type of
a wireless facility.
WIRELESS INFRASTRUCTURE PROVIDER — A person who builds or
installs wireless communication transmission equipment, wireless
telecommunications facilities or wireless telecommunications support
structures, but that is not a wireless services provider.
WIRELESS SERVICES — Any services provided using wireless
telecommunications facilities.
WIRELESS SERVICES PROVIDER — A person who provides wireless
services and is authorized to provide such services pursuant to an FCC
license.
Each antenna could fit within an enclosure of no more than three cubic
feet in volume; and
A.
All other wireless equipment associated with the antenna, including
the provider's preexisting equipment, is cumulatively no more than 28
cubic feet in volume.
B.
§ 145-2 ONEIDA CODE § 145-2
C:518
ARTICLE II
Governance of Deployment in ROW
§ 145-3. Access to public ROW.
A. Agreement. Prior to installing any communications facility in a public
ROW, or any pole built for the sole or primary purpose of supporting a
communications facility, or any tower, a person shall enter into a license
agreement ("license agreement") with the City, which shall be filed with
the Madison County Clerk's Office, expressly authorizing use of the
public right-of-way for the communications facility, pole or tower
proposed to be installed.
(1) General terms. The license agreement shall include:
(a) The term of the license agreement shall be annual, which shall
renew automatically unless terminated by the City upon 90
days' written notice.
(b) The license agreement authorizes the provider's nonexclusive
use of the public ROW for the sole purpose of installing,
maintaining and operating communications facilities, including
any pole built for the sole or primary purpose of supporting the
communications facilities and any tower, to provide the
services expressly authorized in the license agreement, subject
to applicable laws, this chapter and the terms and conditions of
the license agreement. The license agreement authorizes use
only of the public ROW in which the City has an actual interest.
It is not a warranty of title or interest in any public ROW and it
does not confer on the provider any interest in any particular
location within the public ROW. No other right is granted
except as expressly set forth in the license agreement. Nothing
herein shall authorize the use of the City's poles, towers,
support structures, or other structures in the public ROW. All
use of City poles, towers, support structures, and other
structures in the public ROW shall require the execution of an
"attachment agreement," and the payment of separate fees for
such use.
(c) The provider shall, at its sole cost and expense, keep and
maintain its communications facilities, poles, support
structures and towers in the public ROW in a safe condition,
and in good order and repair.
(d) The provider shall keep and maintain liability insurance in the
amount of $1,000,000 for each incident and an umbrella policy
in the amount of $5,000,000 for each communication facility in
a public ROW. The City shall be named an additional insured on
each policy on a primary, noncontributory basis. The provider
shall provide the City with proof of such insurance in a form
acceptable to legal counsel for the City. Each insurance policy
§ 145-3 CHARTER § 145-3
C:519
shall contain an endorsement obligating the insurance
company to furnish the City with at least 30 days' written
notice prior to the cancellation of the insurance policy. The
insurance policies shall be issued by an insurance company
licensed to do business in New York State and shall have a
Best's rating of at least A.
(e) The license agreement shall include the name and contact
information for the provider to be called in cases of
emergencies.
(f) Licensees using space in ducts, conduits and on poles must
comply with the terms of this license agreement, unless
expressly exempted by the City.
(g) The City shall have the right to access books and records,
including audit rights, of the provider to determine that all
applicable fees and payments have been made to the City.
(h) The provider shall provide proof to the City that it has a license
or authority from the owner to use an existing pole, tower or
support structure in the public ROW for a communications
facility.
(i) The terms and conditions set forth herein are not exclusive and
the City reserves the right to require additional terms and
conditions to the license agreement.
(2) Public ROW construction and installation requirements:
(a) ROW permit.
[1] Unless expressly authorized in this chapter or in writing by
the City, no person may construct, maintain or perform any
other work in the public ROW related to communications
facilities, poles built for the sole or primary purpose of
supporting communications facilities, or towers without
first receiving a permit to the extent required under this
chapter, and any other permit or authorization required by
applicable laws.
[2] The City shall not issue a permit unless the applicant, or a
provider on whose behalf the applicant is constructing
communications facilities, poles or towers, has executed a
license agreement required by this chapter, or otherwise
has a current and valid franchise with the City expressly
authorizing use of the public ROW for the communications
facilities, poles or towers proposed in the application, and
all applicable fees have been paid.
(b) Location of new facilities.
§ 145-3 ONEIDA CODE § 145-3
C:520
[1] The provider shall not locate or maintain its
communications facilities, poles and towers so as to
unreasonably interfere with the use of the public ROW by
the City, by the general public or by other persons
authorized to use or be present in or upon the public ROW.
[2] Aboveground placement of new poles and equipment
cabinets shall meet the requirement set forth in § 145-5D
of this chapter.
[3] Unless otherwise agreed to in writing by the City or
otherwise required by applicable laws, whenever any
existing electric utilities or communications facilities are
located underground within a public ROW, the provider
with permission to occupy the same portion of the public
ROW shall locate its communications facilities
underground at its own expense. The City may, in its sole
discretion, approve aboveground placement of equipment
cabinets, pedestals and similar equipment, pursuant to
§ 145-5D of this chapter. For facilities or equipment such
as wireless facilities that cannot, by their nature, operate
unless located aboveground, the provider and City shall
work to find a suitable location for such facilities or
equipment, which may be outside the public ROW.
(c) Construction standards. In performing any work in or affecting
the public ROW, the provider, and any agent or contractor of
the provider, shall comply with the provisions of § 145-7 of this
chapter and all other applicable laws.
(d) Restoration requirements.
[1] The provider, or its agent or contractor, shall restore,
repair and/or replace any portion of the public ROW that is
damaged or disturbed by the provider's communications
facilities, poles, towers or work in or adjacent to the public
ROW as required in § 145-7 of this chapter and all other
applicable laws.
[2] If the provider fails to timely restore, repair or replace the
public ROW as required in this subsection, the City or its
contractor may do so and the provider shall pay the City's
costs and expenses in completing the restoration, repair or
replacement.
(e) Removal, relocation and abandonment.
[1] Within 60 days following written notice from the City, the
provider shall, at its own expense, protect, support,
temporarily or permanently disconnect, remove, relocate,
change or alter the position of any of its communications
facilities, poles, support structures or towers within the
§ 145-3 CHARTER § 145-3
C:521
public ROW, including relocation of aboveground
communications facilities underground (consistent with
the provisions of this chapter), whenever the City has
determined, in its sole discretion, that such removal,
relocation, change or alteration is necessary for the
construction, repair, maintenance, or installation of any
City improvement, the operations of the City in, under
or upon the public ROW, or otherwise is in the public
interest. The provider shall be responsible to the City for
any damages or penalties it may incur as a result of the
provider's failure to remove or relocate communications
facilities, poles, support structures or towers as required
in this subsection.
[2] The City retains the right and privilege to cut or move any
communications facility, pole, support structure or tower
located within the public ROW, as the City may determine,
in its sole discretion, to be necessary, appropriate or useful
in response to any public emergency. If circumstances
permit, the City shall notify the provider and give the
provider an opportunity to move its own facilities prior to
cutting or removing the communications facility, pole,
support structure or tower. In all cases the City shall notify
the provider after cutting or removing the communications
facility, pole, support structure or tower as promptly as
reasonably possible.
[3] A provider shall notify the City of abandonment of any
communications facility, pole, support structure or tower
at the time the decision to abandon is made, however, in no
case shall such notification be made later than 30 days
prior to abandonment. Following receipt of such notice,
the provider shall remove its communications facility, pole,
support structure or tower at the provider's own expense,
unless the City determines, in its sole discretion, that the
communications facility, pole, support structure or tower
may be abandoned in place. The provider shall remain
solely responsible and liable for all of its communications
facilities, poles, support structures and towers until they
are removed from the public ROW unless the City agrees
in writing to take ownership of the abandoned
communications facilities, poles, support structures or
towers. Upon the issuance of a permit, the provider shall
provide a removal bond in the amount estimated for the
removal of all of the communication facilities that are the
subject of an application, such estimated amount to be
determined by the Code Enforcement Officer, after
consultation with the Engineer for the City.
§ 145-3 ONEIDA CODE § 145-3
C:522
[4] If the provider fails to timely protect, support, temporarily
or permanently disconnect, remove, relocate, change or
alter any of its communications facilities, poles, support
structures or towers or remove any of its abandoned
communications facilities, poles, support structures or
towers as required in this subsection, the City or its
contractor may do so and the provider shall pay all costs
and expenses related to such work, including any delay
damages or other damages the City incurs arising from the
delay.
(f) As-builts and maps. Maps showing the location of equipment in
public ROW and as-builts after construction shall be provided
to the City within 30 days after completion of construction, in
conformance to the requirements of the Engineer for the City.
B. Fees and charges.
(1) Permit application fee. Every applicant for a collocation shall pay a
permit application fee of $500 for a single up-front application,
which application may include up to five small wireless facilities,
and $100 per application for each additional small wireless facility
thereafter. The fee shall be paid upon submission of the application.
(2) Every application for a new pole in the public ROW shall pay a
permit application fee of $1,000. The fee shall be paid upon
submission of the application.
(3) License agreement fee. Every person requesting a license
agreement from the City shall pay an administrative fee of $340,
which shall include the legal costs of drafting such license
agreement.
(4) ROW use fee. In exchange for the privilege of nonexclusive
occupancy of the public ROW, the provider shall pay the City $270
per small wireless facility, per year, for as long as the license
agreement is effective. The ROW use fee shall be due and payable
within 30 days of issuance of the license agreement.
(5) Attachment fees. The provider shall be subject to an additional
attachment fee of $500 if the small wireless facilities will be
attached to property (either real or personal) owned by the City. No
attachment will be allowed except after issuance of a permit
pursuant to an attachment agreement.
(6) Other fees. The applicant or provider shall be subject to any other
generally applicable fees of the City or other government body,
such as those required for electrical permits, building permits, or
street opening permits, which the applicant or provider shall pay as
required in the applicable laws, as well as attachment fees for the
use of City-owned poles, towers, support structures, ducts,
§ 145-3 CHARTER § 145-3
C:523
§ 145-4. Permit applications.
conduits or other structures in the public ROW, as set forth in
attachment agreements authorizing such use.
(7) No refund. Except as otherwise provided in a license agreement,
the provider may remove its communications facilities, poles or
towers from the public ROW at any time, upon not less than 30
days' prior written notice to the City, and may cease paying to the
City any applicable recurring fees for such use, as of the date of
actual removal of the facilities and complete restoration of the
public ROW. In no event shall a provider be entitled to a refund of
fees paid prior to removal of its communications facilities, poles or
towers.
A. Permit required. Unless expressly authorized in this chapter or in
writing by the City, no person may construct, install or maintain in the
public ROW any communications facilities or poles built for the primary
purpose of supporting communications facilities, or towers, including
the installation or collocation of communications facilities on existing
poles, towers, support structures or other structures within the public
ROW, without first receiving a permit. Notwithstanding the foregoing,
in the event of an emergency, a provider or its duly authorized
representative may work in the public ROW prior to obtaining a permit,
provided that the provider shall attempt to contact the City prior to
commencing the work and shall apply for a permit as soon as
reasonably possible, but not later than 12 hours after commencing the
emergency work. For purposes of this subsection, an "emergency"
means a circumstance in which immediate repair to damaged or
malfunctioning facilities is necessary to restore lost service or prevent
immediate harm to persons or property.
B. Permit application requirements. The application shall be made by the
provider or its duly authorized representative and shall contain the
following:
(1) The applicant's name, address, telephone number, and e-mail
address, including emergency contact information for the
applicant.
(2) The names, addresses, telephone numbers, and email addresses of
all consultants, if any, acting on behalf of the applicant with respect
to the filing of the application.
(3) A description of the proposed work and the purposes and intent of
the proposed facility sufficient to demonstrate compliance with the
provisions of this chapter. The applicant shall state whether the
applicant believes the proposed work is subject to administrative
review or discretionary review and if the permit is an eligible
facilities request.
§ 145-3 ONEIDA CODE § 145-4
C:524
(4) If applicable, a copy of the authorization for use of the property
from the pole, tower or support structure owner on or in which the
communications facility will be placed or attached.
(5) Detailed construction drawings regarding the proposed
communication facility.
(6) To the extent the proposed facility involves collocation on a pole,
tower or support structure, a structural report performed by a duly
licensed engineer evidencing that the pole, tower or support
structure will structurally support the collocation (or that the pole,
tower or support structure will be modified to meet structural
requirements) in accordance with applicable codes.
(7) For any new aboveground facilities or structures, accurate visual
depictions or representations, if not included in the construction
drawings.
(8) If new construction, a plan demonstrating how collocations on the
new pole, tower or support structure would be possible for other
providers who may wish to deploy small cell technology in the
geographic area of the subject application.
C. Proprietary or confidential information in application. Applications are
public records that may be made available pursuant to the New York
State Freedom of Information Law.43 Notwithstanding the foregoing,
applicant may designate portions of its application materials that it
reasonably believes contain proprietary or confidential information as
"proprietary" or "confidential" by clearly marking each portion of such
materials accordingly, and the City shall treat the information as
proprietary and confidential, subject to the requirements of the New
York State Freedom of Information Law and the City's determination
that the applicant's request for confidential or proprietary treatment of
application materials is reasonable.
D. Ordinary maintenance and repair. A permit shall not be required for
ordinary maintenance and repair. The provider or other person
performing the ordinary maintenance and repair shall obtain any other
permits required by applicable laws and shall notify the City in writing
at least 48 hours before performing the ordinary maintenance and
repair.
E. Material changes. The City may require payment of an additional
permit application fee in the event the City determines, in its sole
discretion, that material changes to an application after submission
amount to a new application and will materially increase the time and/
or costs of the permit review process. Unless otherwise agreed to in
writing by the City, any material changes to an application, as
determined by the City in its sole discretion, shall be considered a new
43.Editor's Note: See McKinney's Public Officers Law § 84 et seq.
§ 145-4 CHARTER § 145-4
C:525
§ 145-5. Administrative review.
application for purposes of the time limits set forth in § 145-5B(2),
unless otherwise provided by applicable laws.
F. Application fees. Unless otherwise provided by applicable laws, all
applications pursuant to this chapter shall be accompanied by the fees
required under § 145-3B.
G. Effect of permit. A permit from the City authorizes an applicant to
undertake only the activities in the public ROW specified in the
application and permit, and in accordance with this chapter and any
general conditions included in the permit. A permit does not authorize
attachment to or use of existing poles, towers, support structures or
other structures in the public ROW; a permittee or provider must obtain
all necessary approvals and pay all necessary fees from the owner of
any pole, tower, support structure or other structure prior to any
attachment or use. A permit does not create a property right or grant
authority to the applicant to interfere with other existing uses of the
public ROW.
H. Duration. Any permit for construction issued under this chapter shall be
valid for a period of 90 days after issuance and can be extended for an
additional 90 days upon written request of the applicant, if the failure to
complete construction is a result of circumstances beyond the
reasonable control of the applicant.
I. An applicant may simultaneously submit up to five applications for
communications facilities, or may file a single, consolidated application
covering a batch of not more than 20 such communications facilities,
provided that the proposed communications facilities are to be
deployed on the same type of structure using similar equipment and
within an adjacent, related geographic area of the City. If the applicant
files a consolidated application, the applicant shall pay the application
fee calculated as though each communication facility were a separate
application. No applicant shall submit more than one consolidated
application over a six-month period. The Code Enforcement Officer has
the discretion to determine whether a provider is submitting a
consolidated application through the submission of multiple single
small wireless facilities.
A. Permitted use. The following uses within the public ROW shall be
permitted uses, subject to administrative review and issuance of a
permit as set forth in this § 145-5. All such uses shall be in accordance
with all other applicable provisions of this chapter, including without
limitation, those set forth in § 145-7 below and the terms of any license
agreement. Administrative review will not be available for consolidated
applications or simultaneous applications for more than five
communication facilities.
§ 145-4 ONEIDA CODE § 145-5
C:526
(1) Collocation of a small wireless facility that does not exceed the
maximum height set forth in Subsection C or a collocation that
qualifies as an eligible facilities request.
(2) Modification of a pole, tower or support structure or replacement
of a pole for collocation of a communications facility where the
modification or replacement qualifies as an eligible facilities
request.
(3) Construction of a new decorative pole or a monopole tower (but no
other type of tower) to be used for a small wireless facility that does
not exceed the maximum height set forth in Subsection C, provided
that there are existing poles of similar height within 100 feet of
either side of the proposed new pole or monopole tower.
(4) Construction of a communications facility, other than those set
forth in Subsection (1), (2) or (3) in this Subsection A, involving the
installation of coaxial, fiber-optic or other cabling, that is installed
underground or aboveground between two or more existing poles
or an existing pole and an existing tower and/or existing support
structure, and related equipment and appurtenances.
B. Application review.
(1) The City shall review the application either under the
administrative review or discretionary review, as the case may be,
and, if the application conforms with applicable provisions of
§ 145-4 and this section, the City shall issue the permit, subject to
the design standards set forth in § 145-5D of this chapter.
(2) Except as otherwise provided by applicable laws, the City shall:
(a) Within 10 days of receiving an application, notify the applicant
if the application is incomplete and identify the missing
information. The applicant may resubmit the completed
application within 30 days without additional charge, in which
case the City shall have 10 days from receipt of the
resubmitted application to verify the application is complete,
notify the applicant that the application remains incomplete or,
in the City's sole discretion, deny the application; and
(b) Make its final decision to approve or deny the application
within 60 days for a collocation, and 90 days for any new
structure, after the application is complete (or deemed
complete in the event the City does not notify the applicant
that the application or resubmitted application is incomplete).
(3) The City shall advise the applicant in writing of its final decision.
C. Maximum height of permitted use. Small wireless facilities, and new,
modified or replacement poles, towers and support structures in the
§ 145-5 CHARTER § 145-5
C:527
§ 145-6. Discretionary review and approval.
All other uses within the public ROW not expressly set forth or referenced
in § 145-5A shall require compliance with, and issuance of, a site plan
approval pursuant to Chapter 143 of the Oneida City Code. In determining
the deployment and placement of communication facilities, the Planning
Commission/Zoning Board of Appeals shall consider the following criteria
and its impact on the surrounding neighborhood during the site plan review
process: the design standards set forth in § 145-5D of this chapter; the
compatibility of further deployments and their potential impact on the
surrounding neighborhood; the potential for collocation of other provider's
communication facilities; and the density fulfillment needs of the
neighborhood.
§ 145-7. General public ROW installation requirements.
public ROW may be approved through administrative review as
provided in § 145-5A only if the following requirements are met:
(1) Each new, modified or replacement pole, tower or support
structure installed in the public ROW shall not exceed 35 feet in
height.
(2) New small wireless facilities in the public ROW shall not exceed 35
feet in height.
D. Design standards. The design standards for communication facilities,
poles built for the sole or primary purpose of supporting
communications facilities, or towers shall be adopted by the Common
Council and shall be published on the official City website and made
available to all applicants at their request or upon submission of an
application. The design standards shall be subject to change upon 30
days' notice to an applicant and upon a majority vote of the Common
Council.
A. General work requirements.
(1) General safety and compliance with laws. The permittee shall
employ due care during the installation, maintenance or any other
work in the public ROW, and shall comply with all safety and public
ROW protection requirements of applicable laws, applicable codes,
and any generally applicable City guidelines, standards and
practices, and any additional commonly accepted safety and public
ROW protection standards, methods and devices (to the extent not
inconsistent with applicable laws).
(2) Traffic control. Unless otherwise specified in the permit, the
permittee shall erect a barrier around the perimeter of any
excavation and provide appropriate traffic control devices, signs
and lights to protect, warn and guide the public (vehicular and
pedestrian) through the work zone. The manner and use of these
§ 145-5 ONEIDA CODE § 145-7
C:528
§ 145-8. Attachment to and replacement of decorative poles.
Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this chapter, an applicant
may not install a small wireless facility on a decorative pole, or replace a
decorative pole with a new decorative pole unless the City has determined,
in its sole discretion as part of the administrative review process, that each
of the following conditions has been met:
devices shall be described within a traffic control plan in
accordance with the Uniform Manual of Traffic Control Devices.
The permittee shall maintain all barriers and other traffic control
and safety devices related to an open excavation until the
excavation is restored to a safe condition or as otherwise directed
by the City.
(3) Interference. The permittee shall not interfere with any existing
facilities or structures in the public ROW, and shall locate its lines
and equipment in such a manner as not to interfere with the usual
traffic patterns (vehicular or pedestrian) or with the rights or
reasonable convenience of owners of property that abuts any public
ROW.
(4) Utility location. Before beginning any excavation in the public ROW,
the permittee shall comply with Dig Safely New York, Inc.
B. Compliance with permit.
(1) All construction practices and activities shall be in accordance with
the permit and approved final plans and specifications. The City
and its representatives shall be provided access to the work site
and such further information as they may require to ensure
compliance with such requirements. All work that does not comply
with the permit, the approved plans and specifications for the work,
or the requirements of this chapter, shall be removed at the sole
expense of the permittee. The City may stop work in order to assure
compliance with the provision of this chapter.
(2) In addition to obtaining a permit for installation of a
communications facility, poles built for the sole or primary purpose
of supporting communications facilities, or towers in the public
ROW, an applicant must obtain all other required permits.
C. Mapping data. The permittee shall provide to the City as-builts, in a
format designated by the City or otherwise compatible with such
format, showing the location of communications facilities, poles,
support structures and towers upon completion of the permitted work.
A. The application qualifies for issuance of a permit under § 145-5A; and
B. The attachment and/or the replacement pole is in keeping with the
aesthetics of the decorative pole.
§ 145-7 CHARTER § 145-9
C:529
§ 145-9. Violation of this chapter.
Violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall be a violation
punishable with a civil penalty of $250 for each violation. Each day that
a violation occurs or is permitted to exist by the applicant or provider
constitutes a separate offense.
§ 145-9 ONEIDA CODE § 145-9
C:530
Chapter 147
SOLID WASTE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Appearance tickets — See Ch. 21.
Building construction — See Ch. 34.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 61.
Health and sanitation — See Ch. 73.
Junkyards — See Ch. 85.
§ 147-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
assigned to them below:
ASHES — The residue from fires used for cooking and heating buildings.
GARBAGE — Includes any refuse from animal and vegetable matter, and
foodstuffs after it has been used as food, refuse from the kitchen, market,
house or store, floor sweepings, table waste or animal or vegetable matter,
vegetables, meats, fish, bones, fat and all offal and organic waste substance,
but shall not include fresh trimmings from meat markets or
slaughterhouses.
PUBLIC NUISANCE AFFECTING HEALTH — A nuisance which is a thing,
act or occupation, or use of property, premises, equipment or structure,
either private or public, affecting the health of one or more persons.
REFUSE or RUBBISH — Includes combustible trash, including but not
limited to paper, carton boxes, barrels, wood, excelsior, tree branches, yard
trimmings, wood furniture, bedding; noncombustible trash, including but
not limited to metal, tin cans, metal furniture, dirt, small quantities of rock
and pieces of concrete, glass, crockery, other metal fixtures; street rubbish,
including but not limited to street sweepings, dirt, catch basin dirt, contents
of litter receptacles; however, "refuse" shall not include earth and wastes
from construction operations.
§ 147-2. Littering.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to throw, spill, place or deposit or
leave or cause to be thrown, spilled, placed, deposited or left, or to
permit any servant, agent or employee to throw, spill, place, deposit or
leave in or upon any street, highway, alley, sidewalk, park, public
building, in any running water or body of water within the City or other
public place in the City any refuse, garbage or ashes subject to be
carried by the wind or unwholesome or putrescible matter of any kind.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person, as passenger in or owner or driver of
any cart, truck, automobile, bicycle or other vehicle to scatter, drop or
spill or permit to be scattered, dropped or spilled, whether the same is
§ 145-9 CHARTER § 147-2
C:531
§ 147-3. Collection and disposal generally.
wrapped up in bundles, in bags or otherwise, any dirt, stone or
construction rubbish, other light materials of any sort, refuse, rubbish,
ashes or garbage, or other offensive matter therefrom, or permit the
same to be blown therefrom by the wind in or upon any street, sidewalk,
alley, vacant lot, vacant premises, public buildings or other public place.
C. It shall be unlawful for any person, either as owner, lessee, agent,
tenant or otherwise, to throw, cast, deposit or place or to cause or
permit to run, drop or remain or to be thrown, cast or deposited any
rubbish, garbage, manure, offal or other decomposable organic or
putrescible matter which will or might create a nuisance, or act as or
become a breeding place for flies or as food for rats, or discarded thing
capable of holding water which might serve as breeding places for
mosquitoes, or combustible matter which might serve to increase the
fire hazard of neighboring property, in or upon any vacant lot or land or
vacant place upon the surface of any lot or land, enclosed or otherwise,
except at such places designated or provided by the Department of
Public Works, provided that garbage, manure, offal and other
putrescible matter may be temporarily kept in suitable cans, bags,
vessels, tanks, dumpsters and/or containers which are watertight with
tightly fitting covers. Nothing in this subsection shall be construed as to
prohibit the depositing of manure or fertilizers upon any private
property for the purpose of cultivating or improving the same.
[Amended 11-7-2001]
D. No person, agent or occupant of a lot or premises wherever a building
of any kind may exist or a vacant lot shall allow any collection of
garbage, rubbish, waste matter or filth of any description to remain on
such lot or premises except for that material which is properly stored
garbage, as outlined in § 147-3, that is waiting trash pickup and not
placed at curbside until allowed as outlined in § 147-4. [Amended
11-7-2001; 1-5-2005 by Ord. No. 05-02]
E. No furniture, mattresses or other household items being discarded will
be placed at curbside until allowed by § 147-4. Any item that the trash
hauler did not pick up that remains at curbside the day after trash
pickup will be considered to be in violation. Residents can arrange for
pickup of large items with their hauler if the material cannot be picked
up on trash day. Such items must be kept in a closed building or stored
properly, as outlined in § 147-3, and not left outside or at curbside.
[Added 1-5-2005 by Ord. No. 05-02]
F. In the case of a multiple housing unit (two or more units), where the
violator cannot be identified, the property owner will be responsible.
[Added 1-5-2005 by Ord. No. 05-02]
A. All garbage shall be kept in covered dumpsters or covered cans. All
other refuse or ashes and materials of like character must be kept in
suitable heavy-duty plastic bags, covered dumpsters or receptacles.
§ 147-2 ONEIDA CODE § 147-3
C:532
§ 147-4. Curbside collection requirements.
Cans and receptacles other than bags shall have two handles to carry
and a close-fitting cover. No can or bag shall exceed 50 pounds in
weight. No can, bag or other receptacle filled with or holding garbage,
rubbish or other material shall at any time, within the established inside
district, be placed or kept on ground level of any premises at any
point nearer the street line fronting such premises than the rear line
of the main building, except on the designated curbside collection day
provided for herein. [Amended 5-21-2019 by Ord. No. 19-03]
B. All collection, transport and disposal of garbage, refuse, solid waste and
recyclables anywhere in the City shall be in conformance with the
requirements of Local Law No. 3 of 1990 of the County of Madison
("County Local Law"), which are herein incorporated by reference, and
as the same may from time to time be amended.
C. No person shall keep or maintain an open dump within the general
limits of the City.
D. Burning or burying. No person shall bury or burn or cause to be buried
or burned any solid waste within the City limits unless authorized in
writing by authority of the City Common Council upon advice of the City
Fire Marshal, and also by the Madison County Department of Solid
Waste and Sanitation ("County Department"). [Amended 12-19-2000
by L.L. No. 6-2000]
E. Nothing herein shall prohibit backyard composting of lawn and food
waste so long as such composting is done in accordance with the
Cornell Cooperative Extension guidelines and maintained so as to not
create a public health nuisance.
A. Generally. All residential garbage shall be placed curbside, except for
those residents covered in § 147-4C(1) below, not before 9:00 p.m. of
the day prior to scheduled collection. If placed out the night before
collection, all garbage must be in animal-proof containers (plastic or
metal garbage cans with locking covers). If placed out after sunrise the
day of collection, the garbage may be in plastic bags. Also, by 9:00 p.m.
of collection day, all garbage cans or containers and any waste
materials not collected must be removed from the curbside.
B. Definition. As used herein, "curbside" shall mean within five feet of the
roadside or between the sidewalk and the curb, or other appropriate
place near the sidewalk in front of the main building on the premises, so
as not to obstruct snow plowing or snow removal of streets, sidewalks
or driveways.
C. Curbside collection exceptions.
(1) If the residence is in a building occupying the entire lot and is in the
business section of the City, then such containers shall be kept in
§ 147-3 CHARTER § 147-4
C:533
§ 147-5. Recyclables.
the building until collected and shall not be placed on the public
sidewalk or curb or between the two before collection.
(2) Residents unable to place garbage curbside may arrange with their
collector for pickup from other appropriate part of the premises.
(3) Covered dumpsters servicing commercial establishments and/or
apartments shall be placed in a suitable location on said premises
where the dumpster does not constitute a public nuisance. Waste in
these dumpsters must be collected at least once per week.
D. Residential curbside collection schedule.
(1) All curbside garbage shall be collected pursuant to the following
schedule: [Amended 9-21-2010 by Ord. No. 10-05;
10-18-201144]
(a) Monday: There shall be no collection allowed on Monday.
(b) Tuesday: Route 46 at southern boundary north both sides to
Route 356A; north to Oneida Creek not including Route 46; all
properties east of Route 46 to east boundary
(c) Wednesday: North end of west boundary south to and including
both sides of Genesee Street; east to Route 365A; Route 365A
both sides to Route 46; Route 46 north, both sides to Oneida
Creek; Oneida Creek to northern end; all properties within
(d) Thursday: Intersection of Routes 5 and 365A east to Route 46;
Route 46 north to Route 365A; Route 365A west to intersection
of Route 5 and Route 365A; all properties contained within not
including Routes 5, 46 and 365A.
(e) Friday: Southern boundary Route 46 north to Route 5; Route 5
both sides west to intersection of Route 365A; west to
boundary line not including Route 5; all properties south to
southern boundary.
(2) The hauler shall provide to the customer reasonable advance notice
of any needed deviation from the schedule due to holidays or other
justifiable cause.
A. All recyclables shall be prepared, collected, hauled and disposed of in
accordance with Section III(4) of the County Local Law, and as the same
may from time to time be amended.
B. All recyclables must be placed curbside along with the garbage, to be
collected at the same time as the garbage. Once curbside, all
recyclables become county property, pursuant to the County Local Law.
44.Editor’s Note: This resolution provided an effective date of 1-1-2012.
§ 147-4 ONEIDA CODE § 147-5
C:534
§ 147-6. Administration.
The City shall designate an Administrator of Solid Waste, who shall be
responsible for all ministerial and administrative duties described or
reasonably required by the terms of this chapter, and who shall act in
cooperation with the County Department.
§ 147-7. Penalties for offenses.
§ 147-8. Construal of provisions.
This chapter and the definitions of all terms used herein shall be interpreted
and construed so as to be consistent with similar or identical provisions
of the County Local Law, and if a provision herein is not consistent, then
the county or City provision being the more restrictive and protective of
the public health, safety and welfare shall apply. The definition of all terms
stated in this chapter or applicable to the same shall be as stated in the
C. Consistent with said County Local Law, it is hereby declared unlawful
for any person to collect and/or dispose of garbage containing
recyclables in the City.
D. The owner, manager or superintendent of multiresidential (five or more
units) buildings shall provide and maintain a recycling collection area
suitable for carrying out required recycling duties by building residents
in conformance with law.
E. City residents may deliver recyclables to the dropoff facility known as
"SORT (Save Oneida's Recyclable Trash)," on Sconondoa Street, or to
charitable organizations, provided that in the latter case the
recyclables are kept in the residence until collected.
F. Lawn wastes. Leaves, branches, garden and grass clippings are
recyclable material. The City shall continue to collect these recyclable
materials throughout the year.
A. Any person violating any provision of this chapter or any rule or
regulation promulgated pursuant to lawful authority, in addition to
other penalties and sanctions provided by law, shall be guilty of a
violation, punishable by a fine of not less than $100 nor more than $250
and/or 15 days' imprisonment together with restitution for a first
offense; and a fine of not less than $250 and/or 15 days' imprisonment
together with restitution for any subsequent violations of this section.
[Amended 11-7-200145]
B. Any violation of a provision of the County Local Law, all of which terms
are incorporated herein, shall be deemed, and punishable also
hereunder, as a violation of the terms of this chapter, if occurring within
the City.
45.Editor's Note: This ordinance provided that it take effect 1-1-2002.
§ 147-5 CHARTER § 147-8
C:535
County Local Law except as may be made more restrictive and protective
herein.
§ 147-9. License. [Added 11-19-1991 by Ord. No. 91-08]
Chapter 151
STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND PUBLIC PLACES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Bicycles and skateboards — See Ch. 26.
Curfew — See Ch. 40.
Parades — See Ch. 110.
Sewers — See Ch. 139.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 155.
Zoning — See Ch. 190.
A. No person shall, for hire, collect or transport refuse, solid waste or
recyclables anywhere within the City without a license issued by the
City Clerk. The fee for such a license shall be established by resolution
of the Common Council. Such fees may thereafter be amended from
time to time by like resolution. The license shall expire on December 31
of each year. [Amended 12-6-2005 by Ord. No. 05-04; 11-20-2012
by Ord. No. 12-08]
B. Nothing herein shall affect the requirements for permits and licensing
set forth in the County Local Law referred to in this chapter.
§ 147-8 ONEIDA CODE § 147-9
C:536
ARTICLE I
Special Lighting Districts
§ 151-1. Districts.
A. The following special lighting districts are hereby established:
(1) A district consisting of improvements at the following locations: On
both sides of Schoolheimer Road, from approximately 370 feet
north of Lebzetter Road and southerly on said Schoolheimer Road
approximately 4,004 feet to the dead-end of said street as shown on
map on file in the City Clerk's office with 10 fixtures to be attached
and installed on Niagara-Mohawk poles 8, 10, 12, 15, 16, 18, 20,
23, 24-1, 25 1/2.
(2) A district consisting of improvements at the following locations: On
both sides of Schoolheimer Road commencing at the northerly end
of said road within the city and proceeding southerly approximately
2,157 feet as shown on map on file in the City Clerk's office with
five fixtures to be attached and installed on Niagara-Mohawk poles
32.1, 34, 35, 36, 38.1.
(3) A district consisting of seven one-hundred-seventy-five-watt
mercury vapor fixtures in the following locations:
(a) Canal Road, pole 1.
(b) Tanner Road, pole 14-1.
(c) Lake Road, poles 12, 14, 14.1, 17, 20, 22, 25.
(4) A district consisting of eight mercury vapor lamps in the following
locations:
(a) Corner of Genesee Street and Palmer Drive, pole 117 (400
watts).
(b) Palmer Drive, poles 3, 4, 6, 8 (175 watts).
(c) Oatman Drive, poles 2, 3, 4 (175 watts).
B. A special lighting district tax is hereby levied, assessed and to be
collected annually on all taxable real property in each district for 50%
of such charges and expenses incurred on account of the
aforementioned improvements in each district. The balance shall be
assessed, levied and collected upon the taxable property in said city at
large in the same manner as city tax charges or expenses are assessed,
levied and collected.
§ 151-1 CHARTER § 151-1
C:537

ARTICLE II
Activities in City Parks
§ 151-2. Vehicles in parks.
No person shall operate or ride upon any mechanically propelled vehicle or
device within or upon any of the parks or playgrounds of this city without
the consent of the Common Council.
§ 151-3. Curfew for city parks.
It shall be unlawful for any person to be or remain in or upon any city
park or playground in the city between 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m., except as
specifically authorized by the Recreation and Youth Services Department of
the city.
§ 151-4. Penalties for offenses. [Added 12-16-2014 by L.L. No.
11-201446]
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall, upon
conviction thereof, be subject to a fine of not more than $250 or
imprisonment for not more than 15 days, or to both such fine and
imprisonment.
46.Editor's Note: This local law also redesignated former §§ 151-4 through 151-18 as §§ 151-5
through 151-19, respectively.
§ 151-2 CHARTER § 151-4
C:539

ARTICLE III
Obstructions in Streets
§ 151-5. Removal of earth, stone, etc.
No person shall dig, remove or carry away, or cause to be done, any stone,
earth, sand or gravel from any street, highway, alley, square or public
grounds without permission of the Common Council.
§ 151-6. Removal or interference with barricade.
No person shall remove, displace or interfere with any barricade, railing
or protection around a defective place in any street or about any trench,
excavation, repair or construction work or pavement placed by or under
authority of the Common Council or by any authorized board or official of
the city.
§ 151-7. Moving buildings.
No person shall move, or cause or permit to be moved, any building into,
along or upon any street without written permission from the Common
Council, and then only under the supervision and according to the
directions of the Commissioner of Public Works.
§ 151-8. Placement of building materials in streets.
§ 151-9. Placement and maintenance of permanent structures in
City streets and highway rights-of-way. [Amended 6-21-2011 by L.L.
No. 4-2011]
A. No person shall keep or place building materials in a public street
without the written permission of the Commissioner of Public Works.
B. The Commissioner of Public Works may grant written permission to
place and keep building materials in a public street for a period not
exceeding four months. Such permission shall contain a condition that
it shall be void unless the materials are so placed that they occupy no
more than 1/2 of the sidewalk and 1/2 of the space between it and the
center of the roadway. Such permission may be revoked at any time by
the Commissioner of Public Works.
C. Every person to whom permission is granted pursuant to the provisions
of this section shall cause all materials and rubbish arising from his
occupation of the street to be removed by the expiration of the time
granted by the permission or upon the revocation of such permission by
the Commissioner of Public Works.
A. Restrictions. Except as specifically permitted under the provisions of
this section, no structure or obstruction shall be erected, placed or
maintained within the boundaries of any City street or highway right-ofway.
The provisions of this section shall not apply to streets or rights-of-
§ 151-5 CHARTER § 151-9
C:541
way under the jurisdiction of any governmental entity other than the
City of Oneida.
B. Mailboxes.
(1) Each residence and business building in the City that receives mail
delivery from the United States Postal Service via rural route
carrier may, without notifying the City or otherwise complying with
the provisions of this section, erect one mailbox within the
boundaries of the adjoining City street or highway right-of-way,
provided such mailbox is erected and installed in accordance with
United States Postal Service regulations, and also in accordance
with the following construction specifications:
(a) All mailboxes shall be mounted on a wooden post or a post
comprised of high-density plastic (or a combination of such
wood and plastic materials) constructed in such a manner as to
readily break away or bend in the event of impact by a moving
vehicle.
(b) A newspaper tube may be attached to the mailbox post or
included as an integral part of a mailbox post constructed of
high-density plastic.
(2) The City shall not be liable or responsible for repair of any damage
to any mailbox not installed in accordance with the provisions of
this Subsection B.
C. Other permitted structures. Other than mailboxes permitted under
Subsection B above, structures or obstructions (other than living
vegetation) may be placed within the boundaries of City streets and
highway rights-of-way only if placed and/or erected in accordance with
the following conditions and criteria:
(1) The property owner(s) shall have previously entered into a license
and indemnification agreement with the City of Oneida in such
form and content as shall have been approved from time to time by
the City Attorney and the Common Council, and shall have
submitted to the City Chamberlain a cash payment in the amount
equal to the cost to record the license and indemnification
agreement in the office of the Madison County Clerk.
(2) The property owner(s) shall have previously submitted to the City
Clerk, and the City Attorney shall have previously approved of the
form and content of, a certificate of general liability insurance
naming the property owner as primary insured and the City of
Oneida as additional insured with respect to all actions and
activities within the City street or highway rights-of-way by the
property owner(s) or other persons covered by the policy of
insurance. Such policy of insurance shall be issued by a carrier
licensed by the State of New York and shall have coverage limits of
not less than $300,000 per occurrence for bodily injury, including
§ 151-9 ONEIDA CODE § 151-9
C:542
death. Such policy and certificate shall also provide that such
insurance will not be cancelled or modified except upon at least 30
days' prior written notice to the City of Oneida.
(3) No structure or obstruction (other than living vegetation) shall be
constructed upon any type of permanent foundation, nor extend
more than six inches below ground level.
(4) No stone or masonry structure shall be constructed with any type
of mortar or any non-masonry reinforcing material.
(5) No structure or obstruction shall be more than five feet in height,
nor more than two feet in either width or depth.
(6) No structure or obstruction shall in any way obstruct or hinder the
use of the street or highway for public travel, or in any way hinder
or interfere with street maintenance, repairs or improvements, or
with snow-plowing operations or the storage of snow within the
street or highway right-of-way.
(7) No structure or obstruction shall in any way obstruct, hinder or
interfere with any public utility lines or facilities that may be within
the street or highway right-of-way.
(8) No structure or obstruction shall be placed less than three feet
from the curb, or three feet from the edge of the street pavement if
there is no curb.
(9) If the speed limit on the adjoining street or highway is more than 30
miles per hour, but less than 41 miles per hour, no structure or
obstruction shall be placed less than four feet from the curb, or four
feet from the edge of the street pavement if there is no curb.
(10) If the speed limit on the adjoining street or highway is more than
40 miles per hour, no structure or obstruction shall be placed less
than five feet from the curb, or five feet from the edge of the street
pavement if there is no curb.
(11) Upon the determination by the City of noncompliance with any
provision of this section, or the City Engineer's determination that
the structure or obstruction otherwise poses a risk or threat to the
public health or safety, the property owner shall remedy such
noncompliant condition as directed by the City Engineer, Code
Enforcement Officer or City Attorney, or shall remove the structure
or obstruction from the public right-of-way immediately upon
receipt of written notice and directive of the City. The
determination of the City Engineer, Code Enforcement Officer or
City Attorney with respect to any determination of noncompliance
with the provisions of this section and/or the determination of risk
or threat to the public health and safety shall be final and
conclusive.
§ 151-9 CHARTER § 151-9
C:543
(12)No provision of this section shall be deemed to limit the authority of
the City Engineer or any other officers and/or employees of the City
of Oneida with respect to the repair and/or maintenance of City
streets or highways, nor shall any provision of this section be
deemed to create any rights of private parties that are in conflict
with, or in derogation of any rights granted to the City of Oneida
and its officers and employees under any and all federal, state and
local laws. The City shall at all times have the right to remove any
structure within the City street or right-of-way when such removal
is warranted, and, in the event of such removal, the City shall not
be liable in any respect for such removal or the cost of restoration
or replacement of any such structure.
D. Existing mailboxes and other structures.
(1) The provisions of this section shall apply both to proposed
mailboxes, structures and obstructions, and also to mailboxes,
structures and obstructions placed within City street and highway
rights-of-way prior to the initial effective date of this section.
Existing mailboxes, structures and obstructions not in compliance
with the provisions of this section as of its initial effective date shall
be permitted to remain in place for a period of time ending on the
date of the first transfer of title to the subject property occurring
after the initial effective date of this section if the property
owner(s) comply with the provisions of Subsections C(1) and C(2)
above. Existing nonconforming mailboxes, structures and
obstructions not modified to conform with the provisions of this
section by the date of such initial transfer of title shall be removed
from within the public right-of-way.
(2) The City Assessor shall notify the City Engineer of all real property
transfers within the City as the City Assessor receives notification
of such transfers.
§ 151-9 ONEIDA CODE § 151-9
C:544
ARTICLE IV
Sidewalk Construction
§ 151-10. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated below:
CONCRETE — A mixture of cement, sand and crushed stone in proportions
designated by the City Engineer, the minimum mixture being one part
cement, two parts sand and four parts crushed stone, unless otherwise
designated by the City Engineer.
SIDEWALK — That portion of a street between the curblines and the
adjacent property lines commonly and publicly used by pedestrians.
§ 151-11. Permit.
§ 151-12. Materials.
All sidewalks within the inside district shall be constructed, made, paved,
relayed, reset, mended and repaired of concrete, except as follows:
A. No sidewalk shall be constructed, made, paved, relayed, reset, mended
or repaired by any person or owner, possessor or occupant of land
adjoining such sidewalk within the inside district of the City of Oneida
without a written permit from the City Engineer. Said permit shall
specify the proportions for the concrete mixture and the width and
thickness of the sidewalk. The City Engineer shall determine the line
and level of said sidewalk.
B. The City Engineer, upon his own initiative, or the Common Council may
revoke or suspend the permit for failure to comply with any provision of
this article or the permit granted hereunder.
A. The City Engineer may issue a temporary permit to repair a defect in a
sidewalk with blacktop material. Such permit may be for a period of
time until the weather is satisfactory for permanent repairs to be made
with concrete.
B. Where blacktop driveways or approaches are being constructed and an
existing concrete sidewalk is being used by the public, the covering of
such walk with blacktop is absolutely prohibited.
C. In locations throughout the city in the residential districts where
concrete sidewalks have not been constructed or application for a
sidewalk permit has not been requested, it will be permissible to use
blacktop between the road and the property line, but in the event that
sidewalks are constructed, the blacktop driveway area where the
sidewalk crosses the same shall be replaced by portland cement
concrete.
§ 151-10 CHARTER § 151-12
C:545
D. In all other districts, permission for the use of blacktop where there are
no existing concrete sidewalks shall be obtained from the Common
Council.
§ 151-12 ONEIDA CODE § 151-12
C:546
ARTICLE V
Pavement Excavation and Removal
§ 151-13. Permit required.
No person shall remove, displace or injure any pavement, curbing,
sidewalks or crosswalks on any street in the city for the purpose of making
a connection with or repairing any gas pipe, water pipe or sewer or for any
other purpose without a permit issued by the City Engineer.
§ 151-14. Application; fees.
A. A person desiring the permit required by the provisions of this article
shall make written application to the City Engineer upon a form
provided by the City. The fee for said permit shall be established from
time to time by resolution of the Common Council. [Amended
6-17-2014 by Ord. No. 14-03]
B. The person requesting the permit shall sign the same and thereby agree
to accept the following conditions contained in the application:
(1) Permission is hereby granted to the person requesting this permit
to excavate in the public highway in front of location designated on
permit and for the period and purpose stated, the work to be done
under the supervision and according to the directions of the City
Engineer.
(2) The permit will be granted upon the express promise and
agreement of the person to whom the same is granted that he will
erect and maintain suitable guards and lights to prevent injury to
persons or property by or in consequence of said excavations and
that such person will indemnify the city and hold the city harmless
against all loss, damage or other expense that may arise by or
through any neglect of such person or those in his employ to erect
or maintain such guards or lights, or either of them; also upon the
further promise and agreement that the person accepting this
permit shall replace and restore said street to as good condition as
it was prior to such excavation or as specified by the City Engineer.
C. The person obtaining the permit shall also agree that in case the repair
of the pavement is not carried out within a reasonable length of time or
the repair is made in an unsatisfactory manner, the city shall proceed to
do the work either with its own Department of Public Works forces or by
a contractor and the cost of the same shall be borne by the person
obtaining the permit.
D. The applicant shall agree that at all times during the existence of the
permit he will maintain in force, furnish and file with the city, at its own
expense, a general comprehensive liability insurance policy in
protection of the city, its boards, commissions, officers, agents and
employees, in a company authorized to do business in the state and in
§ 151-13 CHARTER § 151-14
C:547
§ 151-15. Bond.
An applicant for the permit required by this article shall, if request is made
during the year for several permits in various locations throughout the
city, file with the City Clerk before application is made for a permit and
at all times thereafter maintain in full force and effect for the period in
which permits will be requested, at its expense, a corporate surety bond,
in a company approved by and in a form satisfactory to the City Attorney,
in the amount of $10,000 renewable annually, and conditioned upon the
faithful performance of the applicant. In the event the applicant shall fail to
comply with any one or more of the provisions of the permit or this article,
form satisfactory to the City Attorney, protecting the city and said
persons against liability for loss or damages for personal injury, death
and property damage occasioned by the operations of applicant under
the permit, with minimum liability limits of $250,000 for personal injury
or death of any one person and $500,000 for personal injury or death of
two or more persons in any one occurrence, and $50,000 for damage to
property resulting from any one occurrence. Such policies shall contain
a provision that a written notice of any cancellation or reduction in
coverage of said policy shall be delivered to the city 10 days in advance
of the effective date thereof. If such insurance is provided in either case
by a policy which also covers the applicant or any other person than
those above named, then such policy shall contain the standard crossliability
endorsement.
E. An applicant for a permit where only one request is made for a short
period of time shall furnish the city with proof of the required insurance
and also provide a bond or, in lieu thereof, a certified check, made out to
the City of Oneida, New York, in an amount equal to the cost of the
pavement repair as estimated by the City Engineer. This sum will be
used to repair the pavement in case the applicant signing the permit
does not complete the work within a reasonable length of time. The
check will be returned, however, if the repair work is completed without
any expense to the city and approved by the City Engineer. The
depositing of such check shall not relieve the applicant of the
responsibility of fulfilling the obligations required by ordinance but will
be used by the city as a guaranty that the work will be performed in a
satisfactory manner.
F. Extended maintenance costs. Extended maintenance costs in addition
to the regular permit fee shall be paid by the permit applicant whenever
an excavation will be made in a newly reconstructed or newly
resurfaced pavement. There shall be extended maintenance costs
charged at the time of permit issuance for a period of six years after a
street has been reconstructed and for a period of five years after a
street has been resurfaced with asphalt concrete. The cost of the
extended maintenance shall be based on the size of the pavement
excavation as determined by the City Engineer. [Amended 6-17-2014
by Ord. No. 14-03]
§ 151-14 ONEIDA CODE § 151-15
C:548
then there shall be recoverable jointly and severally from the principal and
surety of such bond any damages or loss suffered by the city as a result
thereof, including the full amount of any compensation, indemnification or
cost of renewal or abandonment of property as prescribed herein which may
be in default and costs up to the full amount of the bond; said condition
to be a continuing obligation for the duration of the permit and thereafter
until the applicant has liquidated all of its obligations with the city that may
have arisen from the acceptance of the permit by the applicant or from its
exercise of any privilege herein granted. The bond shall provide that 30
days' prior written notice of intention not to renew, cancellation or material
change be given to the City Clerk.
§ 151-16. Civil liability.
Neither the provisions of this article, any bond accepted by the city
pursuant hereto, nor any damages recovered by the City hereunder shall be
construed to excuse faithful performance by a permit applicant or limit the
liability of the applicant under the permit or for damages either to the full
amount of the bond or otherwise.
§ 151-17. Violations.
Any violation of any of the provisions of this article or of the rules and
regulations contained in any permit granted in accordance with the terms
thereof shall be a misdemeanor.
§ 151-15 CHARTER § 151-17
C:549

ARTICLE VI
Fire Hydrants
§ 151-18. Obstruction and misuse.
§ 151-19. Penalties for offenses.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall, upon
conviction thereof, be subject to a fine of not more than $250 or to
imprisonment for not more than 15 days, or to both such fine and
imprisonment.
A. It shall be unlawful for any unauthorized person to obstruct or impede
or hinder the use of or access to any fire hydrant, gates or stopcocks
located within the city. No unauthorized person shall place any object(s)
within 10 feet on either side of any such hydrants, gates or stopcocks.
B. No unauthorized person shall open, draw water from, unfasten or
damage any fire hydrant within the City.
C. No person shall use a wrench or other implement for opening or closing
fire hydrants, except such wrench or implement as has been approved
by the Water Superintendent.
§ 151-18 CHARTER § 151-19
C:551
Chapter 155
SUBDIVISION OF LAND
GENERAL REFERENCES
Appearance tickets — See Ch. 21.
Building code administration and
enforcement — See Ch. 33.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 64.
Freshwater wetlands — See Ch. 68.
Housing standards — See Ch. 77.
Sewers — See Ch. 139.
Site plan review — See Ch. 143.
Streets, sidewalks, and public places — See
Ch. 151.
Zoning — See Ch. 190.
§ 151-19 ONEIDA CODE § 151-19
C:552
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 155-1. Title.
These regulations shall officially be known, cited, and referred to as the
Subdivision Regulations of the City of Oneida (hereinafter "these
regulations").
§ 155-2. Policy.
§ 155-3. Purposes.
These regulations are adopted for the following purposes:
A. It is declared to be the policy of the City of Oneida to consider the
subdivision of land and the subsequent development of the subdivided
plat as subject to the control of the City of Oneida pursuant to the
official Comprehensive Plan of the City of Oneida for the orderly,
planned, efficient, and economical development of the City of Oneida.
B. Land to be subdivided shall be of such character that it can be used
safely for building purposes without danger to health or peril from fire,
flood, or other menace, and land shall not be subdivided until adequate
public facilities and improvements exist and proper provision has been
made for drainage, water, sewerage, and capital improvements such as
schools, parks, recreational facilities, transportation facilities, and
improvements.
C. The existing and proposed public improvements shall conform to and be
properly related to the proposals shown in the Comprehensive Plan,
Official Map, and the capital budget and program of the City of Oneida,
and it is intended that these regulations shall supplement and facilitate
the enforcement of the provisions and standards contained in building
and housing codes, zoning ordinances,47 the Comprehensive Plan,
Official Map and land use plan, and the capital budget and program of
the City of Oneida.
D. Land that has been subdivided prior to the effective date of these
regulations should, whenever possible, be brought within the scope of
these regulations to further the purposes of regulation(s) identified in
§ 155-3.
A. To protect and provide for the public health, safety, and general welfare
of the City of Oneida.
B. To guide the future growth and development of the City of Oneida in
accordance with the Comprehensive Plan.
47.Editor's Note: See Ch. 33, Building Code Administration and Enforcement; Ch. 77,
Housing Standards; and Ch. 190, Zoning.
§ 155-1 CHARTER § 155-3
C:553
§ 155-4. Authority. [Amended 11-8-2017 by L.L. No. 5-2017]
The Joint Zoning Board of Appeals/Planning Commission of the City of
Oneida (hereinafter "Joint Zoning Board of Appeals/Planning Commission")
is vested with the authority to review, approve, conditionally approve and
disapprove applications for the subdivision of land, including sketch,
preliminary, and final plats. The Joint Zoning Board of Appeals/Planning
Commission may grant variances from these regulations pursuant to the
provisions of § 155-12.
§ 155-5. Jurisdiction.
C. To provide for adequate light, air, and privacy, to secure safety from fire,
flood, and other danger, and to prevent overcrowding of the land and
undue congestion of population.
D. To protect the character and the social and economic stability of all
parts of the City of Oneida and to encourage the orderly and beneficial
development of the community through appropriate growth
management techniques assuring the timing and sequencing of
development, promotion of infill development in existing neighborhoods
and nonresidential areas with adequate public facilities, to assure
proper urban form and open space separation of urban areas, to protect
environmentally critical areas and areas premature for urban
development.
E. To provide the most beneficial relationship between the uses of land
and buildings and the circulation of traffic throughout the City of
Oneida, having particular regard to the avoidance of congestion in the
streets and highways and the pedestrian traffic movements appropriate
to the various uses of land and buildings, and to provide for the proper
location and width of streets and building lines.
F. To prevent the pollution of air, streams, and ponds; to assure the
adequacy of drainage facilities; to safeguard the water table, and to
encourage the wise use and management of natural resources
throughout the City of Oneida in order to preserve the integrity,
stability, and beauty of the community and the value of the land.
G. To provide for open spaces through the most efficient design and layout
of the land, including the use of average density in providing for
minimum width and area of lots, while preserving the density of
development as established in Chapter 190, Zoning, of the Code of the
City of Oneida.
A. These regulations apply to all subdivision of land, as defined in Article
II, located within the corporate limits of the City of Oneida or outside
the corporate limits as provided by law.
B. No land may be subdivided through the use of any legal description
other than with reference to a plat approved by the Joint Zoning Board
§ 155-3 ONEIDA CODE § 155-5
C:554
§ 155-6. Enactment. [Amended 11-8-2017 by L.L. No. 5-2017]
In order that land may be subdivided in accordance with these purposes
and policies, these subdivision regulations are hereby adopted and made
effective as of January 1, 1998. All applications for subdivision approval,
including final plats, pending on the effective date of these regulations shall
be reviewed under these regulations except that these regulations will not
apply if preliminary plat approval was obtained prior to the effective date
of these regulations, unless the Joint Zoning Board of Appeals/Planning
Commission determines on the record that application of these regulations
is necessary to avoid a substantial risk of injury to public health, safety, and
general welfare.
§ 155-7. Interpretation; conflict of provisions.
of Appeals/Planning Commission in accordance with these regulations.
[Amended 11-8-2017 by L.L. No. 5-2017]
C. No land described in this section shall be subdivided or sold, leased,
transferred or developed until each of the following conditions has
occurred in accordance with these regulations:
(1) The subdivider or his agent has submitted a conforming sketch plat
of the subdivision to the Director of Planning; and
(2) The subdivider or his agent has obtained approval of the sketch
plat, a preliminary plat when required, and a final plat from the
Joint Zoning Board of Appeals/Planning Commission; and
[Amended 11-8-2017 by L.L. No. 5-2017]
(3) The subdivider or his agent has obtained the required approvals
from the Madison County Department of Health and/or the New
York State Department of Environmental Conservation, pursuant to
water supply and sewage disposal. The subdivider or his agent
should refer to New York State Rules and Regulations (NYCRR),
Part 74 of 10 NYCRR; Part 902 of 9 NYCRR, and Part 903 of 9
NYCRR.
(4) No building permit or certificate of occupancy shall be issued for
any parcel or plat of land created by subdivision after the effective
date of, and not in substantial conformity with, the provisions of
these subdivision regulations, and no excavation of land or
construction of any public or private improvements shall take place
or be commenced except in conformity with these regulations.
A. Interpretation. In their interpretation and application, the provisions of
these regulations shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the
promotion of the public health, safety, and general welfare. These
regulations shall be construed broadly to promote the purposes for
which they are adopted.
§ 155-5 CHARTER § 155-7
C:555
§ 155-8. Construal of provisions.
These regulations shall not be construed as abating any action now pending
under, or by virtue of, prior existing subdivision regulations, or as
discontinuing, abating, modifying, or altering any penalty accruing or about
to accrue, or as affecting the liability of any person, firm, or corporation, or
as waiving any right of the City of Oneida under any section or provision
existing at the time of adoption of these regulations, or as vacating or
annulling any rights obtained by any person, firm, or corporation by lawful
action of the municipality except as shall be expressly provided for in these
regulations.
§ 155-9. Reservations and repeals.
Upon the adoption of these regulations according to law, the Subdivision
Regulations of the City of Oneida adopted July 5, 1978, as amended, are
hereby repealed, except as to those sections expressly retained in these
regulations.
§ 155-10. Amendments. [Amended 11-8-2017 by L.L. No. 5-2017]
For the purpose of protecting the public health, safety, and general welfare,
the Joint Zoning Board of Appeals/Planning Commission may from time
to time propose amendments to these regulations which shall then be
approved or disapproved by the Common Council at a public meeting
following public notice.
B. Public provisions. These regulations are not intended to interfere with,
abrogate, or annul any other ordinance, rule or regulation, statute, or
other provision of law except as provided in these regulations. Where
any provision of these regulations imposes restrictions different from
those imposed by any other provision of these regulations or any other
ordinance, rule or regulation, or other provision of law, the provision
which is more restrictive or imposes higher standards shall control.
C. Private provisions. These regulations are not intended to abrogate any
easement, covenant or any other private agreement or restriction,
provided that where the provisions of these regulations are more
restrictive or impose higher standards or regulations than such
easement, covenant, or other private agreement or restriction, the
requirements of these regulations shall govern. Where the provisions of
the easement, covenant, or private agreement or restriction impose
duties and obligations more restrictive or standards that are higher
than the requirements of these regulations, or the determinations of the
Joint Zoning Board of Appeals/Planning Commission in approving a
subdivision or in enforcing these regulations, and the private provisions
are not inconsistent with these regulations, then the private provisions
shall be operative and supplemental to these regulations and the
determinations made under the regulations. [Amended 11-8-2017 by
L.L. No. 5-2017]
§ 155-7 ONEIDA CODE § 155-11
C:556
§ 155-11. Public purpose. [Amended 11-8-2017 by L.L. No. 5-2017]
Regulation of the subdivision of land and the attachment of reasonable
conditions to land subdivision is an exercise of valid police power delegated
by the state to this municipality. The developer has the duty of compliance
with reasonable conditions laid down by the Joint Zoning Board of Appeals/
Planning Commission for design, dedication, improvement, and restrictive
use of the land to conform to the physical and economic development of the
municipality and to the health, safety, and general welfare of the future lot
owners in the subdivision and of the community at large.
§ 155-12. Waiver of conditions. [Amended 11-8-2017 by L.L. No.
5-2017]
§ 155-13. Enforcement, violations, and penalties.
A. General. Where the Joint Zoning Board of Appeals/Planning
Commission finds that extraordinary hardships or practical difficulties
may result from strict compliance with these regulations and/or the
purposes of these regulations may be served to a greater extent by an
alternative proposal, it may approve variances, exceptions, and waiver
of conditions to these subdivision regulations so that substantial justice
may be done and the public interest secured, provided that the
variance, exception, or waiver conditions shall not have the effect of
nullifying the intent and purpose of these regulations; and further
provided the Joint Zoning Board of Appeals/Planning Commission shall
not approve variances, exceptions, and waiver of conditions unless it
shall make findings based upon the evidence presented to it in each
specific case that:
(1) The granting of the waiver of conditions will not be detrimental to
the public safety, health, or welfare or injurious to other property.
(2) The relief sought will not in any manner vary the provisions of
Chapter 190, Zoning, Comprehensive Plan, or Official Map, except
that those documents may be amended in the manner prescribed
by law.
B. Conditions. In approving waivers of conditions, the Joint Zoning Board
of Appeals/Planning Commission may require such conditions as will, in
its judgment, secure substantially the purpose described in § 155-3.
C. Procedures. A petition for a waiver of conditions shall be submitted in
writing by the subdivider at the time when the preliminary plat is filed
for the consideration of the Joint Zoning Board of Appeals/Planning
Commission. The petition shall state fully the grounds for the
application and all of the facts relied upon by the petitioner.
A. General.
§ 155-11 CHARTER § 155-13
C:557
(1) It shall be the duty of the Director of Planning to enforce these
requirements and to bring to the attention of the City Attorney or
his designated agent any violations of these regulations.
(2) No owner, or agent of the owner, of any parcel of the land located in
a proposed subdivision shall transfer or sell any part of the parcel
before a final plat of the subdivision has been approved by the Joint
Zoning Board of Appeals/Planning Commission in accordance with
the provisions of the regulations and filed with the Clerk and
Recorder of Madison County. [Amended 11-8-2017 by L.L. No.
5-2017]
(3) The subdivision of any lot or any parcel of land by the use of metes
and bounds description for the purpose of sale, transfer, lease, or
development is prohibited, unless the lot or parcel is also identified
by the lot or parcel number shown on the filed plat.
(4) No building permit shall be issued for the construction of any
building or structure located on a lot or plat subdivided or sold in
violation of the provisions of these regulations, nor shall the
municipality have any obligation to issue certificates of occupancy
or to extend utility services to any parcel created in violation of
these regulations.
B. Violations and penalties. Any person who violates any of these
regulations shall be subject to a fine of not more than $250 or
imprisonment for a term not exceeding 15 days or both, such fine and
imprisonment pursuant to the provisions of the Penal Law of the State
of New York. Each day that the violation continues shall constitute a
separate and punishable offense.
C. Civil enforcement. Appropriate sections and proceedings may be taken
in law or in equity to prevent any violation of these regulations, to
prevent illegal occupancy of a building, structure or premises. These
remedies shall be in addition to the penalties described above.
§ 155-13 ONEIDA CODE § 155-13
C:558
ARTICLE II
Definitions
§ 155-14. Terms defined.
Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following terms shall for the
purposes of these regulations have the meaning herein indicated. (See
bibliography for sources.)48
ADT (AVERAGE DAILY TRAFFIC) — The average number of cars per day
that pass over a given point.
AFFORDABLE HOUSING — Housing that is affordable to very low-income,
low-income, or moderate-income persons as defined by the Department of
Housing and Urban Development regulation for the municipality and is
maintained for occupancy exclusively for such very low-income, low-income,
or moderate-income person(s) for a period of not less than 30 years through
the use of a covenant or deed restriction, a development agreement, or by
transferring an interest to a state or municipal housing agency or nonprofit
housing organization.
AGGRESSIVE SOILS — Soils that may be corrosive to cast iron and ductile
iron pipe. These soils represent approximately 5% of the soils found within
the United States and include dump areas, swamps, marshes, alkaline
soils, cinder beds, polluted river bottoms, etc., which are considered to be
potentially corrosive.
APPLICATION FOR DEVELOPMENT — The application form and all
accompanying documents required by ordinance for approval of a site plan.
BASE COURSE — That portion of the flexible pavement structure
immediately beneath the surface course which is constructed on the
subbase, or if no subbase is used, directly on the subgrade. Performs the
major function as a structural portion of the pavement and usually consists
of crushed stone.
BERM — A mound of soil, either natural or man-made, used to obstruct
views.
BOND — Any form of a surety bond in an amount and form satisfactory to
the Common Council. All bonds shall be approved by the governing body
whenever a bond is required by these regulations.
BUFFER — An area within a property or site, generally adjacent to and
parallel with the property line, either consisting of natural existing
vegetation or created by the use of trees, shrubs, fences, and/or berms,
designed to limit continuously the view of and/or sound from the site to
adjacent sites or properties.
CALIPER — The diameter of a tree trunk measured in inches, six inches
above ground level for trees up to four inches in diameter and 12 inches
above ground level for trees over four inches in diameter.
48.Editor's Note: The bibliography for the terms used in these regulations is not set out
herein.
§ 155-14 CHARTER § 155-14
C:559
CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT — A public facility with a life expectancy of
three or more years (10 years for roadway improvements) to be owned and
operated by or on behalf of the local government.
CAPITAL IMPROVEMENTS PROGRAM — A proposed schedule of all future
projects listed in order of construction priority, together with cost estimates
and the anticipated means of financing each project.
CAPPED SYSTEM — A completed water supply and/or sewerage system put
in place for future use (contingent upon expansion), rather than to meet
immediate development needs.
CLUSTER DEVELOPMENT or CLUSTER ZONING — A development
approach in which building lots may be reduced in size and buildings
sited closer together, usually in groups or clusters, provided that the total
development density does not exceed that which could be constructed
on the site under conventional zoning and subdivision regulations. The
additional land that remains undeveloped is then preserved as open space
and recreational land.[Amended 5-3-2000 by Ord. No. 00-03]
COMMON LATERAL — A sanitary sewer service lateral serving more than
one occupancy unit (generally not permitted).
COMMON OPEN SPACE — Land within or related to a development, not
individually owned or dedicated for public use, which is designed and
intended for the common use or enjoyment of the residents of the
development. It may include complementary structures and improvements.
COMMON OWNERSHIP — Ownership by the same person, corporation,
firm, entity, partnership, or unincorporated association; or ownership by
different corporations, firm, partnerships, entities, or unincorporated
associations, in which a stockbroker, partner, or associate, or a member of
his family owns an interest in each corporation, firm, partnership, entity, or
unincorporated association.[Added 12-19-2000 by L.L. No. 6-2000]
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN — A comprehensive long-range plan intended to
guide the growth and development of a community or region. Includes
analysis, recommendations, and proposals for the community's population,
economy, housing, transportation, community facilities, and land use.
CONCURRENCY — Requirement that development applications
demonstrate that adequate public facilities be available at prescribed levels
of service concurrent with the impact or occupancy of development units.
CONSTRUCTION PLAN — The maps or drawings accompanying a
subdivision plat and showing the specific location and design of
improvements to be installed in the subdivision in accordance with the
requirements of the Joint Zoning Board of Appeals/Planning Commission as
a condition of the approval of the plat.[Amended 11-8-2017 by L.L. No.
5-2017]
CONVENTIONAL DEVELOPMENT — Development other than planned
development.
§ 155-14 ONEIDA CODE § 155-14
C:560
CULVERT — A structure designed to convey a watercourse not incorporated
in a closed drainage system under a road or pedestrian walk or driveway.
CUSHIONS — Supportive or protective bedding materials placed
underneath piping.
DEDICATION — An act transmitting property or interest thereto.
DENSITY — The permitted number of dwelling units per gross acre of land
to be developed.
DESIGN FLOOD — The relative size or magnitude of a major flood of
reasonable expectancy, which reflect both flood experience and flood
potential and is the basis of the delineation of the floodway, the flood hazard
area, and the water surface elevations.
DESIGN STANDARDS — Standards that set forth specific improvement
requirements.
DETENTION BASIN — A man-made or natural water collector facility
designed to collect surface and subsurface water in order to impede its flow
and to release the same gradually at a rate not greater than that prior to
the development of the property, into natural or man-made outlets.
DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENT — Agreement between the Common Council
and developer through which the Common Council agrees to vest
development use or intensity or refrain from interfering with subsequent
phases of development through new legislation in exchange for the
provision of public facilities or amenities by the developer in excess of those
required under current community regulations.
DEVELOPMENT REGULATION — Zoning, subdivision, site plan, official
map, floodplain or other governmental regulation of the use and
development of land.
DRAINAGE — The removal of surface water or groundwater from land by
drains, grading, or other means.
DRAINAGE SYSTEM — The system through which water flows from the
land, including all watercourses, water bodies, and wetlands.
DROP MANHOLE — A manhole provided for inspection and maintenance of
sewers where an incoming sewer is considerably higher than the outgoing.
DROP PIPE — A vertical pipe used to convey sewage from a higher to a
lower elevation.
EASEMENT — A right-of-way granted, but not dedicated, for limited use of
private land for a quasi-public purpose and within which the owner of the
property shall not erect any permanent structures.
ENVIRONMENTAL CONSTRAINTS — Features, natural resources, or land
characteristics that are sensitive to improvements and may require
conservation measures or the application of creative development
techniques to prevent degradation of the environment, or may require
limited development, or in certain instances may preclude development.
§ 155-14 CHARTER § 155-14
C:561
ESCROW — A deed, a bond, money, or a piece of property delivered to a
third person to be delivered by him to the grantee only upon fulfillment of a
condition.
EXPENDITURE — A sum of money paid out in return for some benefit or to
fulfill some obligation. The term includes binding contractual commitments
whether by development agreement or otherwise to make future
expenditures as well as any other substantial change in position.
EXTERNAL BUFFER — A naturally vegetated area or vegetated area along
the exterior boundaries of an entire development processed in accordance
with a multiphase or phased site plan application which is landscaped
and maintained, in order to eliminate or minimize conflicts between such
development and adjacent land uses.
FINAL APPROVAL — The official action of the Joint Zoning Board of
Appeals/Planning Commission taken on a preliminary approved major
subdivision or site plan, after all conditions, engineering plans, and other
requirements have been completed or fulfilled and the required
improvements have been installed, or guaranties properly posted for their
completion, or approval conditional upon the posting of such
guaranty.[Amended 11-8-2017 by L.L. No. 5-2017]
FINAL SUBDIVISION PLAT — The map of a subdivision to be recorded after
approval by the Joint Zoning Board of Appeals/Planning Commission and
any accompanying material as described in these regulations.[Amended
11-8-2017 by L.L. No. 5-2017]
FIRST FLUSH — The delivery of a disproportionately large load of
pollutants during the early part of storms due to the rapid runoff of
accumulated pollutants. The first flush in these guidelines is defined as the
runoff generated from a one-year twenty-four-hour storm event from land
which has been made more impervious from predevelopment conditions
through land grading and construction/development activities.
FLEXIBLE PAVEMENT — A pavement structure consisting of the subgrade,
subbase course, base course and surface course materials.
FLUSHING — The cleaning out of debris and sediment from pipes by force
of moving liquid, usually water.
FOREBAY — An extra storage area or treatment area, such as a sediment
pond or created wetland, near an inlet of a stormwater management facility
to trap incoming sediments or take up nutrients before they reach a
retention or extended detention pond.
FRONTAGE — That side of a lot abutting on a street or way and ordinarily
regarded as the front of the lot, but it shall not be considered as the
ordinary side of a corner lot.
GRADE — The slope of a road, street, or other public way, specified in
percentage (%) terms.
§ 155-14 ONEIDA CODE § 155-14
C:562
GROUND COVER — A planting of low-growing plants or sod that in time
forms a dense mat covering the area, preventing soil from being blown or
washed away and the growth of unwanted plants.
HARDY CROSS METHOD — Method of controlled trial and error by which
a water distribution system can be analyzed, first introduced in 1936 by
Hardy Cross, Professor of Civil Engineering, University of Illinois.
HEALTH, SAFETY, OR GENERAL WELFARE — The purpose for which
municipalities may adopt and enforce land use regulations for the
prevention of harm or promotion of public benefit to the community;
commonly referred to as police power.
HIGH DENSITY — Those residential zoning districts in which the density is
equal to or greater than one dwelling unit per 10,000 square feet.
HYDROLOGIC RESPONSE — The properties, distribution, and circulation
of water.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — A surface that has been compacted or covered
with a layer of material so that it is highly resistant to infiltration by water.
IMPOUNDMENT — A body of water, such as a pond, confined by a dam,
dike floodgate, or other barrier.
IMPROVEMENT — Any man-made, immovable item which becomes part of,
placed upon, or is affixed to, real estate.
INFILL DEVELOPMENT — Development designed to occupy scattered or
vacant parcels of land which remain after the majority of development has
occurred in an area.
ISLAND — In street design, a raised area, usually curbed, placed to guide
traffic and separate lines, or used for landscaping, signing, or lighting.
LANDSCAPING — Acting with the purpose of meeting specific criteria
regarding uses of outside space, including ground cover, buffers, and shade
trees.
LATERAL SEWERS — Pipes conducting sewage from individual buildings to
larger pipes called trunk or interceptor sewers that usually are located in
street rights-of-way.
LEVEL OF SERVICE — The six levels of service which are generally
described as follows for simple uninterrupted flows. More specific
descriptions for each highway element, including interrupted as well as
uninterrupted flow, are presented later appropriate headings.
LEVEL OF SERVICE A — A condition of free flow, accompanied by low
volumes and high speeds. Traffic density will be low, with uninterrupted
flow speeds controlled by driver desires, speed limits, and physical
roadway conditions. There is little or no restriction in maneuverability
due to the presence of other vehicles, and drivers can maintain their
desired speeds with little or no delay.
A.
§ 155-14 CHARTER § 155-14
C:563
LINKAGE — A program that requires developers constructing
nonresidential structures to either construct affordable housing units or pay
money in lieu of construction into a designated fund to provide housing for
the future employees of the site.
LOT FRONTAGE — That portion of a lot extending along a street line.
LOT IMPROVEMENT — Any building, structure, place, work of art, or other
object situated on a lot.
LOW DENSITY — Those residential zoning districts in which the density is
equal to or less than one dwelling unit per 40,000 square feet.
LEVEL OF SERVICE B — Occurs in the zone of stable flow, with
operating speeds beginning to be restricted somewhat by traffic
conditions. Drivers still have reasonable freedom to select their speed
and lane of operation. Reductions in speed are not unreasonable, with
a low probability of traffic flow being restricted. The lower limit (lowest
speed, highest volume) of this level of service has been used in the
design of rural highways.
B.
LEVEL OF SERVICE C — Still in the zone of stable flow, but speeds
and maneuverability are more closely controlled by the higher volumes.
Most of the drivers are restricted in their freedom to select their
own speed, change lanes, or pass. A relatively satisfactory operating
speed is still obtained, with service volumes suitable for urban design
practice.
C.
LEVEL OF SERVICE D — Level of service which approaches unstable
flow, with tolerable operating speeds being maintained, though
considerably affected by changes in operating conditions. Fluctuations
in volume and temporary restrictions to flow may cause substantial
drops in operating speeds. Drivers have little freedom to maneuver, and
comfort and convenience are low. These conditions can be tolerated,
however, for short periods of time.
D.
LEVEL OF SERVICE E — This cannot be described by speed alone,
but represents operations at lower operating speeds, typically, but not
always, in the neighborhood of 30 miles per hour, with volumes at or
near the capacity of the highway. Flow is unstable, and there may be
stoppages of momentary duration. This level of service is associated
with operation of a facility at capacity flows.
E.
LEVEL OF SERVICE F — Describes a forced-flow operation at low
speeds, where volumes are below capacity. In the extreme, both speed
and volume can drop to zero. These conditions usually result from
queues of vehicles backing up from a restriction downstream. The
section under study will be serving as a storage area during parts or
all of the peak hour. Speeds are reduced substantially and stoppages
may occur for short or long periods of time because of the downstream
congestion.
F.
§ 155-14 ONEIDA CODE § 155-14
C:564
MAIN — In any system of continuous piping, the principal artery of the
system to which branches may be connected.
MAINTENANCE GUARANTY — Any security which may be required and
accepted by a governmental agency to ensure that necessary improvements
will function as required for a specific period of time.
MAJOR SUBDIVISION — All subdivisions not classified as minor
subdivisions, including but not limited to subdivisions of five or more lots,
or any size subdivision requiring any new street or extension of the local
government facilities or the creation of any public improvements.
MANNING EQUATION — A method for calculating the hydraulic capacity of
a conduit or open channel to convey water.
MEDIAN — That portion of a divided highway separating lanes of traffic
proceeding in opposite directions.
MINOR SUBDIVISION — Any subdivision containing not more than four lots
fronting on an existing street, not involving any new street or road, or the
extension of municipal facilities or the creation of any public improvements,
and not adversely affecting the remainder of the parcel or adjoining
property, and not in conflict with any provision or portion of the
Comprehensive Plan, Official Map, Chapter 190, Zoning, or these
regulations.[Amended 5-3-2000 by Ord. No. 00-03]
MONEY IN LIEU OF LAND — Payment of money into a municipally
earmarked fund to do for acquisition of facilities off site in place of
dedicating land or providing such facility on site.
MULCH — A layer of wood chips, dry leaves, straw, hay, plastic, or other
materials placed on the surface of the soil around plants to retain moisture,
prevent weeds from growing, hold the soil in place, or aid plant growth.
OFFSET — The amount of the reduction of an impact fee designed to
fairly reflect the value of area-related facilities or other oversized facilities,
pursuant to rules herein established or administrative guidelines, provided
by a developer pursuant to the local government's subdivision or zoning
regulations or requirements.
OPEN SPACE — Any parcel or area of land or water essentially unimproved
and set aside, dedicated, designated, or reserved for the public or private
use or enjoyment or for the use and enjoyment of owners and occupants of
land adjoining or neighboring such open space.
PERC TEST (PERCOLATION TEST) — A test designed to determine the
ability of ground to absorb water, and used to determine the suitability of a
soil for drainage or for the use of a septic system.
PERFORMANCE CRITERIA — Regulation of development based on open
space ratio, impervious surface ratio, density, and floor area ratio.
PERFORMANCE GUARANTY — Any security that may be accepted by a
municipality as a guaranty that the improvements required as part of an
application for development are satisfactorily completed.
§ 155-14 CHARTER § 155-14
C:565
PERVIOUS SURFACE — A surface that permits full or partial absorption of
stormwater.
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT (PUD) — An area of a minimum
contiguous size, as specified by ordinance, to be planned, developed,
operated, and maintained as a single entity containing one or more
structures to accommodate commercial or office uses, or both, and
appurtenant common areas and other uses incidental to the predominant
uses.
PLAT — A map or maps of a subdivision.
POLICE POWER — Inherent, delegated, or authorized legislative power for
purposes of regulation to secure health, safety, and general welfare.
POTABLE WATER SUPPLY — Water that does not contain pollution,
contamination, objectionable minerals or infective agents and is considered
satisfactory for domestic consumption.
PREAPPLICATION CONFERENCE — An initial meeting between developers
and municipal representatives which affords developers the opportunity to
present their proposals informally.
PRELIMINARY APPROVAL — The conferral of certain rights prior to final
approval after specific elements of a development plan have been agreed
upon by the Joint Zoning Board of Appeals/Planning Commission and the
applicant.[Amended 11-8-2017 by L.L. No. 5-2017]
PRELIMINARY PLAT — The preliminary drawing or drawings, described
in these regulations, indicating the proposed manner or layout of the
subdivision to be submitted to the Joint Zoning Board of Appeals/Planning
Commission for approval.[Amended 11-8-2017 by L.L. No. 5-2017]
PUBLIC HEARING — A meeting of the Joint Zoning Board of Appeals/
Planning Commission or Common Council preceded by notice, open to the
public and at which the public may, at the discretion of the body holding the
public meeting, be heard.[Amended 11-8-2017 by L.L. No. 5-2017]
PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT — Any drainage ditch, roadway, parkway,
sidewalk, pedestrianway, tree, lawn, off-street parking area, lot
improvement, or other facility for which the City of Oneida may ultimately
assume the responsibility for maintenance and operation, or which may
effect an improvement for which City of Oneida responsibility is established.
RATIONAL METHOD — A method for estimating peak stormwater runoff
rates in the design of urban facilities which considers surface conditions
and/or characteristic, storm intensity and size of the drainage area.
Generally only used for drainage areas up to 100 acres in size.
RESIDENTIAL DENSITY — The number of dwelling units per gross acre of
residential land area including streets, easements and open space portions
of a development.
RESUBDIVISION — Any change in a map of an approved or recorded
subdivision plat that affects any street layout on the map or area reserved
§ 155-14 ONEIDA CODE § 155-14
C:566
thereon for public use or any lot line, or that affects any map or plan legally
recorded prior to the adoption of any regulations controlling subdivisions.
RETAINING WALL — A structure erected between lands of different
elevation to protect structures and/or to prevent the washing down or
erosion of earth from the upper slope level.
RETENTION BASIN — A facility designed to store stormwater runoff as a
permanent pool of water without release except by means of evaporation,
infiltration, or attenuated release when runoff volume exceeds the
permanent storage capacity of the permanent pool.
RIGHT-OF-WAY — A strip of land occupied or intended to be occupied
by a street, crosswalk, railroad, road, electric transmission line, oil or
gas pipeline, water main, sanitary or storm sewer main, shade trees, or
for any other special use. The usage of the term "right-of-way" for land
platting purposes shall mean that every right-of-way hereafter established
and shown on a final plat is to be separate and distinct from the lots
or parcels. Rights-of-way intended for streets, crosswalks, water mains,
sanitary sewers, storm drains, shade trees or any other use involving
maintenance by a public agency shall be dedicated to public use by the
maker of the plat on which such right-of-way is established.
ROAD CLASSIFICATION — For the purpose of providing for the
development of the streets, highways, roads and rights-of-way in the
governmental unit and for their future improvement, reconstruction,
realignment and necessary widening, including provision for curbs and
sidewalks, each existing street, highway, road, and right-of-way and those
located on approved and filed plats, have been designated on the Official
Map of the local government and classified therein. The classification of
each street, highway, road and right-of-way is based upon its location in
the respective zoning districts of the local government and its present and
estimated future traffic volume and its relative importance and function
as specified in the Comprehensive Plan of local government. The required
improvements shall be measured as set forth for each street classification
on the Official Map.
ROAD RIGHT-OF-WAY WIDTH — The distance between property lines
measured at right angles to the center line of the street.
SALE or LEASE — Any immediate or future transfer of ownership, or
any possessory interest in land, including contract of sale, lease, devise,
intestate succession or other transfer of an interest in a subdivision or part
thereof, whether by metes and bounds or lot and block description.
SCREENING — Either a strip at least 10 feet wide of densely planted (or
having equivalent natural growth) shrubs or trees at least four feet high at
the time of planting, of a type that will form a year-round dense screen at
least six feet high; or an opaque wall or barrier or uniformly painted fence
at least six feet high.
SECURITY — The letter of credit or cash escrow provided by the applicant
to secure its promises in the subdivision improvement agreement.
§ 155-14 CHARTER § 155-14
C:567
SEDIMENTATION — A deposit of soil that has been transported its site of
origin by water, ice, wind, gravity or other natural means as a product of
erosion.
SERVICE AREA — The area for a particular category of public facilities
within the jurisdiction of the City of Oneida and within which impact fees
for capital improvements will be collected for new development occurring
within such area and within which fees so collected will be expended for
those types of improvements for that category of public facility identified in
the public facility improvements program. Service areas may be subdivided
into subareas for purposes of assuring that impact fees collected and
expended therein reasonably benefit new development within such areas.
SETBACK — The distance between the street right-of-way line and the front
line of a building or any projection thereof, excluding uncovered steps.
SIGHT TRIANGLE — A triangular-shaped portion of land established at
street intersections in which nothing is erected, placed, planted, or allowed
to grow in such a manner as to limit or obstruct the sight distance of
motorists entering or leaving the intersection.
SKETCH PLAT — A sketch preparatory to the preliminary plat (or final plat
in the case of minor subdivisions) to enable the subdivider to save time
and expense in reaching general agreement with the Joint Zoning Board of
Appeals/Planning Commission as to the form of the plat and the objectives
of these regulations.[Amended 11-8-2017 by L.L. No. 5-2017]
SOIL CEMENT — A mixture of portland cement and locally available soil. It
serves as a soil stabilizer.
STABILIZED TURF OR EARTH — Turf, or earth (soil), strengthened usually
by the mixing of cement or lime with the original material to achieve
increased strength, thereby reducing shrinkage and movement.
STORMWATER DETENTION — A provision for storage of stormwater runoff
and the controlled release of such runoff during and after a flood or storm.
STORMWATER RETENTION — A provision for storage of stormwater
runoff.
STREET HIERARCHY — The conceptual arrangement of streets based upon
function. A hierarchal approach to street design classifies streets according
to function, from high-traffic arterial roads down to streets whose function
is residential access. Systematizing street design into a road hierarchy
promotes safety, efficient land use, and residential quality.
STRUCTURE — Anything constructed or erected.
STUB STREET — A portion of a street for which an extension has been
proposed and approved. May be permitted when development is phased
over a period of time, but only if the street in its entirety has been approved
in the preliminary plan.
SUBBASE — That portion of the flexible pavement structure between the
subgrade and the base course consisting of a compacted layer of granular
§ 155-14 ONEIDA CODE § 155-14
C:568
material. Distinguished from the base course material by less stringent
specification requirements for strength aggregate type and gradation.
SUBDIVIDER — Any person who:
SUBDIVISION — Any land, vacant or improved, which is divided or
proposed to be divided into two or more lots, parcels, sites, units, plots,
condominiums, tracts or interests for the purpose of offer, sale, lease, or
development whether immediate or future, either on the installment plan or
upon any and all other plans, terms and conditions. "Subdivision" includes
the division or development of residentially and nonresidentially zoned
land, whether by deed, metes and bounds description, devise, intestacy,
lease, map, plat or other recorded instrument. "Subdivision" includes
resubdivision and condominium creation or conversion.[Amended
5-3-2000 by Ord. No. 00-03]
SUBDIVISION IMPROVEMENT AGREEMENT — A contract entered into by
the applicant and the City of Oneida by which the applicant promises to
complete the required public improvements within the subdivision within a
specified time period following final subdivision plat approval.
SUBDIVISION PLAT — The final map or drawing, described in these
regulations, on which the subdivider's plan of subdivision is presented
to the Joint Zoning Board of Appeals/Planning Commission for approval
and which, if approved, may be submitted to the County Clerk for
filing.[Amended 11-8-2017 by L.L. No. 5-2017]
SURFACE COURSE — That portion of the flexible pavement designed to
resist abrasive forces of traffic, limit the amount of surface water that
penetrates into the pavement structure, provides a skid-resistant surface,
and provides a smooth uniform riding surface. Surface course is
constructed directly on the base course and consists of a mixture of mineral
aggregates and bituminous materials.
TEMPORARY IMPROVEMENT — Improvements built and maintained by a
subdivider during construction of the subdivision and prior to release of the
performance bond.
TR-55 — Stormwater runoff analysis method. A method for determining
predevelopment and post-development peak stormwater runoff rates and
Having an interest in land, causes it, directly or indirectly, to be divided
into a subdivision or who;
A.
Directly or indirectly, sells, leases or develops or offers to sell, lease or
develop or advertises to sell, lease, or develop, any interest, lot, parcel
site, unit or plat in a subdivision or who;
B.
Engages directly or through an agent in the business of selling, leasing,
developing or offering for sale, lease, or development a subdivision or
any interest, lot, parcel site, unit or plat in a subdivision and who;
C.
Is directly or indirectly controlled by, or under direct or indirect
common control with any of the foregoing.
D.
§ 155-14 CHARTER § 155-14
C:569
total volume as well as stormwater storage requirements. The TR-55
Method is based on Technical Release 55, Urban Hydrology for Small
Watersheds, published by the Soil Conservation Service of the United States
Department of Agriculture.
TRANSFER OF DEVELOPMENT RIGHTS — The conveyance of development
rights by deed, easement or other legal instrument, authorized by ordinance
or regulation, to another parcel of land and the recording of that
conveyance.
VARIANCE — A waiver from compliance with a specific provision of Chapter
190, Zoning, granted to a particular property owner because of the practical
difficulties or unnecessary hardship that would be imposed by the strict
application of that provision of the ordinance. The granting of variances
traditionally is the responsibility of the Joint Zoning Board of Appeals/
Planning Commission.[Amended 11-8-2017 by L.L. No. 5-2017]
§ 155-14 ONEIDA CODE § 155-14
C:570
ARTICLE III
Subdivision Application Procedure and Application Process
§ 155-15. General procedure.
§ 155-16. Sketch plat.
A. Classification of subdivisions. Before any land is subdivided the owner
of the property proposed to be subdivided, or his authorized agent,
shall apply for and secure approval of the proposed subdivision in
accordance with the following procedures, which include two principal
steps for a minor subdivision and three principal steps for a major
subdivision:
(1) Minor subdivision:
(a) Sketch plat.
(b) Final subdivision plat.
(2) Major subdivision:
(a) Sketch plat.
(b) Preliminary plat.
(c) Final subdivision plat.
B. Official submission dates. For the purpose of these regulations, for both
major and minor subdivisions, the date of the Joint Zoning Board of
Appeals/Planning Commission meeting at which the public meeting on
approval of a sketch, preliminary or final subdivision plat, is closed,
shall constitute the official submission date of the plat. [Amended
11-8-2017 by L.L. No. 5-2017]
A. Discussion of requirements/preapplication conference. Before
preparing the sketch plat for a subdivision, the applicant shall schedule
an appointment for a preapplication conference and meet with the
Director of Planning and other pertinent department heads to discuss
the procedure for approval of a subdivision plat and the requirements
as to general layout of streets and for reservations of land, street
improvements, drainage, sewerage, fire protection and similar matters,
as well as the availability of existing services, including schools.
B. Application procedure and requirements. Prior to subdividing land and
after meeting with the Director of Planning, the owner of the land or his
authorized agent shall file of an application for approval of a sketch plat
with the Joint Zoning Board of Appeals/Planning Commission. The
application shall: [Amended 6-17-2014 by Ord. No. 14-04;
11-8-2017 by L.L. No. 5-2017]
(1) Be made on forms available at the office of the Director of Planning;
§ 155-15 CHARTER § 155-16
C:571
(2) Include all contiguous holdings of the owner including land in
common ownership as defined in these regulations, with an
indication of the portion which is proposed to be subdivided,
accompanied by an affidavit of ownership, which shall include the
dates the respective holdings of land were acquired, together with
the book and page where each conveyance to the present owner is
recorded in the Madison County Clerk's Office. The affidavit shall
advise as to the legal owner of the property, the contract owner of
the property, the date the contract of sale was executed and if any
corporations are involved, a complete list of all directors, officers
and stockholders of each corporation owning more than 5% of any
class of stock;
(3) Be accompanied by minimum of 15 copies of the sketch plat as
described in these regulations and complying in all respects with
these regulations;
(4) Be accompanied by the fee as established from time to time by
Common Council resolution, also;
(5) The application shall include an address and telephone number of
an individual who shall be authorized to receive all notices required
by these regulations.
C. Classification and approval procedure. The Director of Planning shall
determine whether the sketch plat constitutes a minor or major
subdivision and notify the applicant of the classification within 30 days
from the date that the sketch plat is submitted to the Director of
Planning. [Amended 11-8-2017 by L.L. No. 5-2017]
(1) Minor subdivision. If the sketch plat constitutes a minor
subdivision, the Director of Planning shall place the matter on the
next available regular meeting agenda of the Joint Zoning Board of
Appeals/Planning Commission for formal approval, disapproval or
conditional approval of the sketch plat following a public hearing.
The Joint Zoning Board of Appeals/Planning Commission shall
approve, conditionally approve or disapprove the sketch plat within
30 days from the official submission date. Subsequent to an
approval or conditional approval by the Joint Zoning Board of
Appeals/Planning Commission, the applicant may proceed directly
to the filing of an application for approval of a final subdivision plat
as provided in these regulations. If the sketch plat of a minor
subdivision is disapproved by the Joint Zoning Board of Appeals/
Planning Commission, the applicant may have the decision
reviewed in the manner prescribed by Article 78 of the Civil
Practice Law and Rules. (See § 155-22 hereof.) The applicant shall
have six months from the date that the sketch plat is approved by
the Joint Zoning Board of Appeals/Planning Commission to submit a
final subdivision plat, after which time a new sketch plat must be
submitted for approval. No extension of sketch plat approval shall
be granted.
§ 155-16 ONEIDA CODE § 155-16
C:572
§ 155-17. Preliminary plat. [Amended 12-19-2000 by L.L. No.
6-2000; 6-17-2014 by Ord. No. 14-04; 11-8-2017 by L.L. No. 5-2017]
No sooner than 30 days and no later than 180 days after the date of the
notice of compliance, the applicant may apply for preliminary plat approval.
If the applicant fails to apply for preliminary plat approval within the
one-hundred-eighty-day period, a new sketch plat must be submitted. A
single one-hundred-eighty-day extension of preliminary plat approval may
be granted by the Joint Zoning Board of Appeals/Planning Commission.
(2) Major subdivision.
(a) Notice of compliance. If the sketch plat constitutes a major
subdivision, the Director of Planning shall issue a notice of
compliance only if the sketch plat complies with all applicable
laws governing the subdivision of land. The notice of
compliance shall include, as appropriate, recommended
changes in the sketch plat to be incorporated into the
preliminary plat to assist the applicant in obtaining preliminary
plat approval from the Joint Zoning Board of Appeals/Planning
Commission. If the Director of Planning determines that the
sketch plat does not comply with all applicable laws governing
the subdivision of land and the applicant refuses to modify the
sketch plat, the Director of Planning shall issue a notice of
noncompliance. The Director of Planning shall issue either the
notice of compliance or the notice of noncompliance not later
than 30 days after the date on which the sketch plat was
submitted to the Director of Planning. After receipt of a notice
of compliance, the applicant must first file an application for
approval of a preliminary plat, as provided in these
regulations, before filing for final subdivision plat approval.
(b) Referral of sketch plat. If the Director of Planning issues a
notice of compliance, the Director of Planning shall transmit
the sketch plat for review to other appropriate officials or
agencies of the local government. The Director of Planning
shall request that all officials and agencies to whom a request
for review has been made submit their reports to the Director
of Planning within 30 days after receipt of the request. The
Director of Planning will consider all the reports submitted by
the officials and agencies concerning the sketch plat and shall
submit a report to the Joint Zoning Board of Appeals/Planning
Commission upon the applicant's submission of a preliminary
plat.
A. Application procedure and requirements. Based on the notice of
compliance, the applicant shall file 15 copies with the Director of
Planning an application for approval of a preliminary plat if it elects to
proceed. The preliminary plat shall conform substantially with the
sketch plat submitted by the applicant and which formed the basis for
the notice of compliance. The application shall:
§ 155-16 CHARTER § 155-17
C:573
(1) Be made on forms available at the office of the Director of Planning,
together with the fee as established from time to time by resolution
of the Common Council.
(2) Includes all land which the applicant proposes to subdivide and all
land immediately adjacent extending 100 feet from the subject
property, or of that directly opposite the subject property,
extending 100 feet from the street frontage of opposite land, with
the names of owners as shown in the assessor's files. This
information may be shown on a separate current tax map
reproduction from the Assessor's office showing the subdivision
superimposed on the tax map.
(3) Be accompanied by a minimum of 15 copies of the preliminary plat
as described in these regulations.
(4) Be accompanied by a minimum of three copies of construction
plans as described in these regulations.
(5) Comply in all respects with the sketch plat.
(6) Be presented to the Director of Planning at least 15 days prior to
the scheduled meeting of the Joint Zoning Board of Appeals/
Planning Commission.
B. The Joint Zoning Board of Appeals/Planning Commission shall follow
the procedures of General City Law § 32, Subdivision 5, to approve,
approve with conditions or disapprove the preliminary plat.
C. Standards for approval of preliminary plats.
(1) No preliminary plat of a proposed subdivision shall be approved by
the Joint Zoning Board of Appeals/Planning Commission unless the
applicant proves by clear and convincing evidence that:
(a) Definite provision has been made for a water supply system
that is sufficient in terms of quantity, dependability and quality
to provide an appropriate supply of water for the type of
subdivision proposed.
(b) If a public sewage system is proposed, adequate provision has
been made for such a system and if other methods of sewage
disposal are proposed that such systems will comply with
federal, state and local laws and regulations.
(c) All areas of the proposed subdivision which may involve soil or
topographical conditions presenting hazards or requiring
special precautions have been identified by the subdivider and
that the proposed uses of these areas are compatible with such
conditions.
§ 155-17 ONEIDA CODE § 155-17
C:574
(d) The subdivider has the financial ability to complete the
proposed subdivision in accordance with all applicable federal,
state and local laws and regulations.
(e) The proposed subdivision will not result in the scattered
subdivision of land that leaves undeveloped parcels of land
lacking urban services between developed parcels.
(f) The subdivider has taken every effort to mitigate the impact of
the proposed subdivision on public health, safety, and welfare.
(2) The Joint Zoning Board of Appeals/Planning Commission is
authorized to disapprove the preliminary plat even though the land
proposed for subdivision is zoned for the use to which the proposed
subdivision will be put and the proposed use is consistent with the
Comprehensive Plan.
D. Public improvements. The Joint Zoning Board of Appeals/Planning
Commission may require that all public improvements be installed and
dedicated prior to the signing of the final subdivision plat by the
Chairman of the Joint Zoning Board of Appeals/Planning Commission. If
the Joint Zoning Board of Appeals/Planning Commission does not
require that all public improvements be installed and dedicated prior to
signing of the final subdivision plat by the Chairman of the Joint Zoning
Board of Appeals/Planning Commission, the Joint Zoning Board of
Appeals/Planning Commission shall require that the applicant execute a
subdivision improvement agreement and provide security for the
agreement as provided in § 155-24B. The Joint Zoning Board of
Appeals/Planning Commission shall require the applicant to indicate on
the plat all roads and public improvements to be dedicated, all special
districts for water, fire and utility improvements which shall be required
to be established or extended, and any other special requirements
deemed necessary by the Joint Zoning Board of Appeals/Planning
Commission in order to conform the subdivision plat to the Official Map
and the Comprehensive Plan of the local government.
E. Effective period of preliminary plat approval. The approval of a
preliminary plat shall be effective for a period of six months from the
date that the preliminary plat is approved by the Joint Zoning Board of
Appeals/Planning Commission or the Common Council, at the end of
which time the applicant must have submitted a final subdivision plat
for approval. A single six-month extension may be granted by the Joint
Zoning Board of Appeals/Planning Commission.
F. Zoning and subdivision regulations. Every preliminary plat shall
conform to existing zoning regulations and subdivision regulations
applicable at the time that the proposed preliminary plat is submitted
for the approval of the Joint Zoning Board of Appeals/Planning
Commission unless the Joint Zoning Board of Appeals/Planning
Commission or Common Council has taken official action toward
§ 155-17 CHARTER § 155-17
C:575
§ 155-18. Amendments to preliminary plat. [Amended 11-8-2017 by
L.L. No. 5-2017]
At any time after preliminary plat approval and before submission of a
final plat, the applicant may request of the Director of Planning that an
amendment be made in the approval or conditional approval of the
preliminary plat. Under regulations established by the Joint Zoning Board
of Appeals/Planning Commission, the Director of Planning may agree to
proposed amendments that are deemed to be minor. If the proposed
amendment is major, the Joint Zoning Board of Appeals/Planning
Commission shall hold a public hearing on the proposed major amendment
in accordance with the same requirements for preliminary plat approval
found in § 155-17. Any public hearing on a proposed major amendment shall
be limited to whether the proposed major amendment should or should
not be approved. The Joint Zoning Board of Appeals/Planning Commission
shall approve or disapprove any proposed major amendment and may make
any modifications in the terms and conditions of preliminary plat approval
reasonably related to the proposed amendment. If the applicant is unwilling
to accept the proposed major amendment under the terms and conditions
required by the Joint Zoning Board of Appeals/Planning Commission, the
applicant may withdraw the proposed major amendment. A major
amendment shall include, but is not limited to, any amendment that results
in or has the effect of decreasing open space in the subdivision by 10% or
more or increasing density in the subdivision by 10% or more. An applicant
may not propose more than two amendments whether major or minor to any
preliminary plat. The Joint Zoning Board of Appeals/Planning Commission
shall render a decision on the proposed major amendment within 30 days
after the meeting at which the public hearing was held, including any
adjourned session, was closed.
amending the applicable zoning and subdivision regulations and the
applicant has reason to know of that action.
G. Model homes. For the purpose of allowing the early construction of
model homes in a subdivision, the Joint Zoning Board of Appeals/
Planning Commission in its sole discretion may permit a portion of a
major subdivision involving no more than two lots to be created in
accordance with the procedures for minor subdivisions, provided that
the portion derives access from an existing city, township, county or
state highway, and provided that no future road or the improvement is
anticipated where the lots are proposed. The subdivision plat for the
"minor" portion shall be submitted to the Joint Zoning Board of Appeals/
Planning Commission simultaneously with the preliminary plat for the
entire major subdivision. Subsequent to preliminary approval, the
model homes may be constructed, subject to such additional
requirements as the Joint Zoning Board of Appeals/Planning
Commission may require.
§ 155-17 ONEIDA CODE § 155-19
C:576
§ 155-19. Final subdivision plat. [Amended 5-3-2000 by Ord. No.
00-03; 12-19-2000 by L.L. No. 6-2000; 6-17-2014 by Ord. No. 14-04;
11-8-2017 by L.L. No. 5-2017]
A. Application procedure and requirements. Following the approval of the
sketch plat in the case of a minor subdivision or of the preliminary plat
in the case of a major subdivision, the applicant, if he wishes to proceed
with the subdivision, shall file with the Joint Zoning Board of Appeals/
Planning Commission an application for final approval of a subdivision
plat. The application shall:
(1) Be made on forms available at the office of the Director of Planning.
(2) Includes the entire subdivision, or section thereof, which derives
access from an existing state, county, or local government highway.
(3) Be accompanied by a minimum of 15 copies of the subdivision plat
and the construction plans, as described in these regulations.
(4) Comply in all respects with the sketch plat or preliminary plat, as
approved, whichever is applicable, depending upon the
classification of the subdivision.
(5) Be presented to the Director of Planning at least 15 days prior to a
regular meeting of the Joint Zoning Board of Appeals/Planning
Commission in order that a public meeting may be scheduled.
(6) Be accompanied by all formal irrevocable offers of dedication to the
public of all streets, local government uses, utilities, parks, and
easements, in a form approved by the City Attorney:
(a) The subdivision plat shall be marked with a notation indicating
the formal offers of dedication as follows:
The owner, or his representative, hereby irrevocably offers
for dedication to the local government all the streets, local
government uses, easements, parks, and required utilities
shown on the subdivision plat and construction plans in
accordance with an irrevocable offer of dedication dated
___________________ and recorded in the Clerk's Office for
Madison County.
By
(owner or representative)
Date
(b) The applicant shall deliver a full covenant and warranty deed
to all dedicated lands and improvements in proper form for
recording, together with a title policy for the local government
in the sum not less than $25,000, which sum shall be
determined by the City Attorney before signing of the final
subdivision plat.
§ 155-19 CHARTER § 155-19
C:577
§ 155-20. Vested rights and development agreements.
(7) Be accompanied by an inspection fee in an amount to be
determined on the basis of the provisions of these regulations and
by written assurance from the public utility companies and
improvement districts that necessary utilities will be installed and
proof that the applicant has submitted petitions in writing for the
creation or extension of any improvement districts as required by
the Joint Zoning Board of Appeals/Planning Commission upon
preliminary plat approval.
(8) Be accompanied by a detailed timeline for construction of
infrastructure with beginning and ending of each phase. If the
schedule changes, notification of such change must be submitted in
writing to the City Engineer, with a copy to the Planning Director,
and accompanied by an updated schedule. The timeline will be
used to schedule in-progress reviews by appropriate City
Departments.
B. The Joint Zoning Board of Appeals/Planning Commission shall follow
the procedures of General City Law § 32, Subdivision 6, to approve,
approve with conditions or disapprove the final subdivision plat.
C. Notice to proceed. Immediately upon final plat approval, but before any
work commences, a pre-construction meeting will be held to review all
necessary approvals, agreements and documents. This meeting is to be
scheduled at or before the signing of the final plat. The Director of
Planning shall issue, to the applicant, a notice to proceed, pursuant to
the actual development of the approved final subdivision plat, upon
such time that the following documents and assurances have been
submitted:
(1) Executed subdivision agreement.
(2) New York State DEC approvals.
(3) Health Department approvals.
(4) Utility service provider agreements [gas/electric, telephone, cable
(if applicable)].
D. Appeal in the event of disapproval. If the Joint Zoning Board of Appeals/
Planning Commission disapproves the final plat, the applicant may have
the decision reviewed in the manner prescribed by Article 78 of the
Civil Practice Laws and Rules.
A. Effect of approval. Except as otherwise provided in this § 155-20, no
vested rights shall accrue to the owner or developer of any subdivision
by reason of preliminary or final plat approval until the actual signing of
the final plat by the Chairman of the Joint Zoning Board of Appeals/
Planning Commission. [Amended 11-8-2017 by L.L. No. 5-2017]
§ 155-19 ONEIDA CODE § 155-20
C:578
B. Effect of recordation. Except as otherwise provided in this § 155-20, no
vested rights shall accrue to the owner or developer of any subdivision
by virtue of the recordation of a final plat.
C. Applicable laws. To obtain final plat approval, the applicant shall be in
compliance with all federal and state laws applicable at the time that
the final plat is considered for approval by the Joint Zoning Board of
Appeals/Planning Commission. The applicant also shall be in
compliance with all local laws and regulations applicable at the time
that the preliminary plat was submitted to the Joint Zoning Board of
Appeals/Planning Commission in accordance with § 155-17F (or if a
minor subdivision, at the time the sketch plat was submitted to the
Director of Planning), except that the applicant shall comply with those
local laws and regulations in effect at the time that the final plat is
considered for approval by the Joint Zoning Board of Appeals/Planning
Commission if the Joint Zoning Board of Appeals/Planning Commission
makes a determination on the record that compliance with any of those
local laws and regulations is reasonably necessary to protect public
health and safety. If the Joint Zoning Board of Appeals/Planning
Commission required the applicant to complete public improvements in
the subdivision prior to final plat approval and the improvements have,
in fact, been completed, the applicant may be required to comply with
local laws and regulations in effect at the time that the final plat is
considered for approval only if the Joint Zoning Board of Appeals/
Planning Commission makes a finding on the record that such
compliance is necessary to prevent a substantial risk of injury to public
health, safety and general welfare. [Amended 11-8-2017 by L.L. No.
5-2017]
D. Development agreements. The municipality may, but under no
circumstances is it required to, enter into a development agreement:
(1) General. The development agreement shall constitute a binding
contract between the subdivider of the proposed subdivision and
the municipality (the "parties") and shall contain those terms and
conditions agreed to by the parties and those required by this
Subsection D. The City Attorney or designee is authorized to
negotiate development agreements on behalf of the City of Oneida.
(2) Covenants. Any covenant by the municipality contained in the
development agreement to refrain from exercising any legislative,
quasi-legislative, quasi-judicial or other discretionary power,
including rezoning or the adoption of any rule or regulation that
would affect the proposed subdivision, shall be limited to a period
of five years. The covenant shall also contain a proviso that the City
may, without incurring any liability, engage in action that otherwise
would constitute a breach of the covenant if it makes a
determination on the record that the action is necessary to avoid a
substantial risk of injury to public health, safety, and general
welfare. The covenant shall contain the additional proviso that the
City may, without incurring any liability, engage in action that
§ 155-20 CHARTER § 155-20
C:579
§ 155-21. Signing and recordation of subdivision plat.
otherwise would constitute a breach of the covenant if the action is
required by federal or state law.
E. Third party rights. Except as otherwise expressly provided in the
development agreement, the development agreement shall create no
rights enforceable by any party who/which is not a party to the
development agreement.
F. Limitation on liability. The development agreement shall contain a
clause that any breach of the development agreement by the
municipality shall give rise only to damages under state contract law
and shall not give rise to any liability for violation of the 5th and 14th
Amendments of the United States Constitution or similar state
constitutional provisions.
G. Developer's compliance. The development agreement shall include a
clause that the government's duties under the agreement are expressly
conditioned upon the subdivider's substantial compliance with each and
every term, condition, provision, and covenant of the agreement, all
applicable federal, state and local laws and regulations, and its
obligations under the subdivision improvement agreement.
H. Adoption. The development agreement shall be adopted by the
Common Council pursuant to applicable state and local laws and shall
be recorded in the Clerk's office of Madison County.
I. Incorporation as matter of law. All clauses, covenants and provisos
required by these regulations to be included in a development
agreement shall be incorporated into the development agreement as a
matter of law without respect to the intent of the parties.
A. Signing of plat. [Amended 11-8-2017 by L.L. No. 5-2017]
(1) When a subdivision improvement agreement and security are
required, the Chairman of the Joint Zoning Board of Appeals/
Planning Commission and the Director of Planning shall endorse
approval on the final plat after the agreement and security have
been approved by the Joint Zoning Board of Appeals/Planning
Commission, and all the conditions of the resolution pertaining to
the final plat have been satisfied.
(2) When installation of improvements is required prior to recordation
of the final plat, the Chairman of the Joint Zoning Board of Appeals/
Planning Commission and Director of Planning shall endorse
approval on the final plat after all conditions of the resolution have
been satisfied and all improvements satisfactorily completed. There
shall be written evidence that the required public facilities have
been installed in a manner satisfactory to the City as shown by a
certificate signed by the City Engineer and City Attorney, stating
§ 155-20 ONEIDA CODE § 155-21
C:580
that the necessary dedication of public lands and improvements
has been accomplished.
B. Recordation of plat.
(1) Subsequent to the resolution of the Joint Zoning Board of Appeals/
Planning Commission, three paper copies of the construction plans,
and one copy of the original of the subdivision plat on tracing cloth,
and/or reproduction Mylar and two copies of the subdivision plat on
sepia paper and two copies of the subdivision plat on paper shall be
submitted to the Director of Planning for final review. It is the
responsibility of the applicant to file the approved final plat with
the Madison County Clerk. No final approval shall be endorsed on
the plat until a review has indicated that all requirements of the
resolution have been met. [Amended 11-8-2017 by L.L. No.
5-2017]
(2) It shall be the responsibility of the applicant to file the final plat
with the Madison County Clerk's Office within 62 days of the date
of signature. [Amended 12-19-2000 by L.L. No. 6-2000]
(3) Sectionalizing major subdivision plats. Prior to granting final
approval of a major subdivision plat, the Joint Zoning Board of
Appeals/Planning Commission may permit the plat to be divided
into two or more sections and may impose such conditions upon the
filing of the sections as it may deem necessary to assure the orderly
development of the plat. The Joint Zoning Board of Appeals/
Planning Commission may require that the subdivision
improvement agreement and security be in such amount as is
commensurate with the section or sections of the plat to be filed
and may defer the remaining amount of the security until the
remaining sections of the plat are offered for filing. The developer
may also file irrevocable offers to dedicate streets and public
improvements in the sections offered to be filed and defer filing
offers of dedication for the remaining sections until those sections,
subject to any conditions imposed by the Joint Zoning Board of
Appeals/Planning Commission, shall be granted concurrently with
final approval of the plat. If sectionalizing is approved, the entire
approved subdivision plat including all sections shall be filed within
180 days after the date of final approval with the Madison County
Clerk's office. Such sections must contain at least 10% of the total
number of lots contained in the approved plat. The approval of all
remaining sections not filed with the Madison County Clerk's office
shall automatically expire unless such sections have been approved
for filing by the Joint Zoning Board of Appeals/Planning
Commission, all fees paid, all instruments and offers of dedication
submitted and subdivision improvement agreements, security and
performance bonds, if any, approved and actually filed with the
Madison County Clerk's office within three years of the date of final
subdivision approval of the subdivision plat. [Amended 11-8-2017
by L.L. No. 5-2017]
§ 155-21 CHARTER § 155-22
C:581
§ 155-22. Appeal process. [Amended 11-8-2017 by L.L. No. 5-2017]
The applicant aggrieved by any decision of the Joint Zoning Board of
Appeals/Planning Commission, Common Council or any of the elected,
appointed or paid officials of the City, may have the decision reviewed in
the manner prescribed by Article 78 of the Civil Practice Law and Rules,
provided that the proceeding is commenced within 30 days after the filing
of the decision in the appropriate office of the City.
§ 155-23. Suspension and invalidation of final plat.
If the City of Oneida suspends final plat approval for any subdivision plat
under these regulations, it shall record a document with the Clerk's office
for Madison County declaring that final approval for the subdivision is
suspended and that the further sale, lease or development of property
within the subdivision is prohibited except that this prohibition shall not
apply to persons or parties who have acquired property from the subdivider
unless the person or party acquiring property meets the definition of
"common ownership" in Article II. If any court of competent jurisdiction
invalidates final plat approval for any subdivision, the City of Oneida shall
record a document with the Clerk's office for Madison County declaring
that the final plat for the subdivision is no longer valid and that further
subdivision activity is prohibited.
§ 155-22 ONEIDA CODE § 155-23
C:582
ARTICLE IV
Assurance for Completion and Maintenance of Improvements
§ 155-24. Improvements and subdivision improvement agreement.
A. Completion of improvements. Before the final subdivision plat is signed
by the Chairman of the Joint Zoning Board of Appeals/Planning
Commission, all applicants shall be required to complete, in accordance
with the Joint Zoning Board of Appeals/Planning Commission's decision
and to the satisfaction of the City Engineer, all the street, sanitary and
other public improvements, including lot improvements on the
individual lots of the subdivision, as required in these regulations,
specified in the final subdivision plat and as approved by the Joint
Zoning Board of Appeals/Planning Commission and to dedicate those
public improvements to the City of Oneida free and clear of all liens and
encumbrances on the dedicated property and public improvements.
[Amended 11-8-2017 by L.L. No. 5-2017]
B. Subdivision improvement agreement and guaranty. [Amended
11-8-2017 by L.L. No. 5-2017]
(1) Agreement. The Joint Zoning Board of Appeals/Planning
Commission in its sole discretion may waive the requirement that
the applicant complete and dedicate all public improvements prior
to approval of the final subdivision plat and, as an alternative,
permit the applicant to enter into a subdivision improvement
agreement by which the subdivider covenants to complete all
required public improvements no later than three years following
the date on which the Chairman of the Joint Zoning Board of
Appeals/Planning Commission signs the final subdivision plat. The
applicant shall covenant to maintain each required public
improvement for a period of one year following the acceptance by
the Common Council of the dedication of that completed public
improvement and also shall warrant that all required public
improvements will be free from defect for a period of three years
following the acceptance by the Common Council of the dedication
of the last completed public improvement. The subdivision
improvement agreement shall contain such other terms and
conditions agreed to by the applicant and the Joint Zoning Board of
Appeals/Planning Commission.
(2) Covenants to run with land. The subdivision improvement
agreement shall provide the covenants contained in the agreement
shall run with the land and bind all successors, heirs, and assignees
of the subdivider. The subdivision improvement agreement will be
adopted by the Joint Zoning Board of Appeals/Planning Commission
and when necessary, the Common Council, pursuant to applicable
state and local laws and shall be recorded in the Clerk's office of
Madison County.
§ 155-24 CHARTER § 155-24
C:583
§ 155-25. Inspection of improvements.
(3) Security. Whenever the Joint Zoning Board of Appeals/Planning
Commission permits an applicant to enter into a subdivision
improvement agreement, it shall require the applicant to provide
an acceptable security deposit or performance bond, consistent
with the terms of General City Law, § 33.
C. Costs of improvements. All required improvements shall be made by the
developer, at its expense, without reimbursement by the Common
Council or any improvement district.
D. Failure to complete improvement. For subdivisions for which no
subdivision improvement agreement has been executed and no security
has been posted, if the improvements are not completed within the
period specified by the Joint Zoning Board of Appeals/Planning
Commission in the resolution approving the plat, the sketch or
preliminary plat approval shall be deemed to have expired. In those
cases where a subdivision improvement agreement has been executed
and security has been posted and required public improvements have
not been installed within the terms of the agreement, the Common
Council may then: [Amended 11-8-2017 by L.L. No. 5-2017]
(1) Declare the agreement to be in default and require that all the
improvements be installed regardless of the extent of the building
development at the time the agreement is declared to be in default.
(2) Suspend final subdivision plat approval until the improvements are
completed and record a document to that effect for the purpose of
public notice.
(3) Obtain funds under the security to any third party.
(4) Assign its right to receive funds under the security to any third
party, including a subsequent owner of the subdivision for which
improvements were not constructed, in whole or in part, in
exchange for that subsequent owner's promise to complete
improvements in the subdivision.
(5) Exercise any other rights available under the law.
E. Acceptance of dedication offers. Acceptance of formal offers of
dedication of streets, public areas, easements and parks shall be by
ordinance of the Common Council. The approval of a subdivision plat by
the Joint Zoning Board of Appeals/Planning Commission, whether
sketch, preliminary or final, shall not be deemed to constitute or imply
the acceptance by the municipality of any street, easement or park
shown on the plat. The Joint Zoning Board of Appeals/Planning
Commission may require the plat to be endorsed with appropriate notes
to this effect. [Amended 11-8-2017 by L.L. No. 5-2017]
§ 155-24 ONEIDA CODE § 155-25
C:584
A. General procedure and fees. The Joint Zoning Board of Appeals/
Planning Commission shall provide for inspection of required
improvements during construction and ensure their satisfactory
completion. The applicant shall pay to the City of Oneida an inspection
fee based on the estimated cost of inspection, and where the
improvements are completed prior to final plat approval, the
subdivision plat shall not be signed by the Chairman of the Joint Zoning
Board of Appeals/Planning Commission unless the inspection fee has
been paid at the time of application. These fees shall be due and
payable upon demand of the municipality and no building permits or
certificates of occupancy shall be issued until all fees are paid. If the
City Engineer finds upon inspection that any one or more of the
required improvements have not been constructed in accordance with
the municipality's construction standards and specifications, the
applicant shall be responsible for properly completing the
improvements. [Amended 11-8-2017 by L.L. No. 5-2017]
B. Release or reduction of security.
(1) Certificate of satisfactory completion.
(a) The Common Council will not accept dedication of required
improvements, nor release nor reduce the amount of any
security posted by the subdivider until the City Engineer has
submitted a certificate stating that all required improvements
have been satisfactorily completed and until:
[1] The applicant's engineer or surveyor has certified to the
City Engineer, through submission of a detailed as-built
survey plat of the subdivision, indicating location,
dimensions, materials, and other information required by
the Joint Zoning Board of Appeals/Planning Commission or
City Engineer, that the layout of the line and grade of all
public improvements is in accordance with construction
plans for the subdivision; and [Amended 11-8-2017 by
L.L. No. 5-2017]
[2] A title insurance policy has been furnished to and
approved by the City Attorney indicating that the
improvements have been completed, are ready for
dedication to the local government, and are free and clear
of any and all liens and encumbrances.
(b) Upon such approval and recommendation by the Joint Zoning
Board of Appeals/Planning Commission, City Engineer and City
Attorney, the Common Council shall thereafter accept the
improvements for dedication in accordance with the
established procedure. [Amended 11-8-2017 by L.L. No.
5-2017]
§ 155-25 CHARTER § 155-25
C:585
§ 155-26. Issuance of building permits and certificates of
occupancy.
(2) Reduction of escrowed funds and security. If the security posted by
the subdivider was a cash escrow, the amount of that escrow shall
be reduced upon actual acceptance of the dedication of public
improvements and then only to the ratio that the cost of the public
improvement for which dedication was accepted bears to the total
cost of public improvements for the subdivision. In no event shall a
cash escrow be reduced below 25% of the principal amount. Funds
held in the escrow account shall not be released to the subdivider,
in whole or in part, except upon express written instructions of the
City Attorney. At the end of the maintenance and warranty periods,
all escrowed funds, if any, shall be released to the subdivider. If the
security provided by the subdivider was a letter of credit or bond,
the City Attorney shall execute a release of the city's rights
thereunder upon actual acceptance of the dedication of public
improvements and then only to the ratio that the cost of the public
improvement for which dedication was accepted bears to the total
cost of public improvements for the subdivision. In no event shall
the release be executed that would reduce the security below 25%
of its original amount.
A. When a subdivision improvement agreement and security have been
required for a subdivision, no certificate of occupancy for any building
in the subdivision shall be issued prior to the completion of the required
public improvements and the acceptance of the dedication of those
improvements by the local government, as required in the Joint Zoning
Board of Appeals/Planning Commission's approval of the final
subdivision plat. [Amended 11-8-2017 by L.L. No. 5-2017]
B. The extent of street improvement shall be adequate for vehicular access
by the prospective occupant(s) and by police and fire equipment prior
to the issuance of an certificate of occupancy. The developer shall, at
the time of the offer of dedication, submit moneys in escrow to the local
government in a sum determined by the City Engineer for the necessary
final improvement of the street.
C. No building permit shall be issued for the final 10% of lots in a
subdivision, or if 10% be less than two, for the final two lots of a
subdivision, until all public improvements required by the Joint Zoning
Board of Appeals/Planning Commission for the subdivision have been
fully completed and the Common Council has accepted the developer's
offer(s) to dedicate the improvements. [Amended 11-8-2017 by L.L.
No. 5-2017]
§ 155-25 ONEIDA CODE § 155-26
C:586
ARTICLE V
Requirements for Improvements, Reservations and Design
§ 155-27. General improvements.
A. Conformance to applicable rules and regulations. In addition to the
requirements established in these regulations, all subdivision plats
shall comply with the following laws, rules, and regulations:
(1) All applicable statutory provisions.
(2) Chapter 190, Zoning, building and housing codes and all other
applicable laws of the appropriate jurisdictions.
(3) The Official Comprehensive Plan, Official Map, public utilities plan
and capital improvements program of the City of Oneida, including
all streets, drainage systems and parks shown on the Official Map
or Comprehensive Plan as adopted.
(4) The special requirements of these regulations and any rules of the
Madison County Health Department and/or appropriate state or
substate agencies.
(5) The rules of the New York State Department of Transportation if
the subdivision or any lot contained therein abuts a state highway
or connecting street.
(6) The standards and regulations adopted by the City Engineer and all
boards, commissions, agencies and officials of the City of Oneida.
(7) Plat approval may be withheld if a subdivision is not in conformity
with the above laws, regulations, guidelines, and policies as well as
the purposes of these regulations established in § 155-3 of these
regulations.
B. Adequate public facilities. No preliminary plat shall be approved unless
the Joint Zoning Board of Appeals/Planning Commission determines
that public facilities will be adequate to support and service the area of
the proposed subdivision. The applicant shall, at the request of the Joint
Zoning Board of Appeals/Planning Commission, submit sufficient
information and data on the proposed subdivision to demonstrate the
expected impact on and use of public facilities by possible uses of said
subdivision. Public facilities and services to be examined for adequacy
will include roads and public transportation facilities, sewerage, water
service, schools and health related facilities. [Amended 11-8-2017 by
L.L. No. 5-2017]
(1) Periodically the Common Council will establish by resolution, after
public hearing, guidelines for the determination of the adequacy of
public facilities and services. To provide the basis for the
guidelines, the Joint Zoning Board of Appeals/Planning Commission
must prepare an analysis of current growth and the amount of
§ 155-27 CHARTER § 155-27
C:587
additional growth that can be accommodated by future public
facilities and services. The Joint Zoning Board of Appeals/Planning
Commission must also recommend any changes in preliminary plat
approval criteria it finds appropriate in the light of its experience
in administering these regulations.
(2) The applicant for a preliminary plat must, at the request of the Joint
Zoning Board of Appeals/Planning Commission submit sufficient
information and data on the proposed subdivision to demonstrate
the expected impact on and use of public facilities and services by
possible uses of said subdivision.
(3) Comprehensive Plan consistency required. Proposed public
improvements shall conform to and be properly related to the City
of Oneida's Comprehensive Plan and all applicable capital
improvements plans.
(4) Water. All habitable buildings shall be connected to a well or public
water system.
(5) Wastewater. All habitable buildings shall be connected to a septic
system or public wastewater system.
(6) Stormwater management. Drainage improvements shall
accommodate potential runoff from the entire upstream drainage
area and shall be designed to prevent increases in downstream
flooding. The City of Oneida may require the use of control methods
such as retention or detention and/or the construction of off-site
drainage improvements to mitigate the impacts of the proposed
developments.
(7) Roads. Proposed roads shall provide a safe, convenient and
functional system for vehicular, pedestrian and bicycle circulation;
shall be properly related to the Comprehensive Plan; and shall be
appropriate for the particular traffic characteristics of each
proposed development; including contiguous developments.
(8) Extension policies. All public improvements and required
easements shall be extended through the parcel on which new
development is proposed. Streets, water lines, wastewater
systems, drainage facilities, electric lines and telecommunications
lines shall be constructed through new development to promote the
logical extension of public infrastructure. The City of Oneida may
require the applicant of a subdivision to extend off-site
improvements to reach the subdivision or oversize required public
facilities to serve anticipated future development as a condition of
plat approval.
C. Plats straddling municipal boundaries. Whenever access to the
subdivision is required across land in another local government, the
Joint Zoning Board of Appeals/Planning Commission may request
assurance from the City Attorney that access is legally established and
§ 155-27 ONEIDA CODE § 155-27
C:588
from the City Engineer that the access road is adequately improved, or
that a guaranty has been duly executed and is sufficient in amount to
assure the construction of the access road. In general, lot lines should
be laid out so as not to cross municipal boundary lines. [Amended
11-8-2017 by L.L. No. 5-2017]
D. Monuments. The applicant shall place permanent reference
monuments in the subdivision as required in these regulations and as
approved by a registered land surveyor.
(1) Monuments shall be located on street right-of-way lines, at street
intersections, angle points of curve and block corners. They shall
be spaced so as to be within sight of each other, the sight lines
being contained wholly within the street limits.
(2) The external boundaries of a subdivision shall be monumented in
the field by monuments of stone or concrete, not less than 30
inches in length, not less than four inches square or five inches in
diameter, and marked on top with a cross, brass plug, iron rod, or
other durable material securely embedded; or by iron rods or pipes
at least 30 inches long and two inches in diameter. These
monuments shall be placed not more than 1,400 feet apart in any
straight line and at all corners, at each end of all curves, at the
point where a curve changes its radius, at all angle points in any
line, and at all angle points along the meander line, those points to
be not less than 20 feet back from the bank of any stream, except
that when such corners or points fall within a street, or proposed
future street, the monuments shall be placed in the side line of the
street.
(3) All internal boundaries and those corners and points not referred to
in the preceding subsection shall be monumented in the field by
like monuments as described above. These monuments shall be
placed at all block corners, at each end of all curves, at a point
where a river changes its radius, and at all angle points in any line.
(4) The lines of lots that extend to streams shall be monumented in the
field by iron pipes at least 30 inches long and 7/8 inch in diameter
or by round or square iron bars at least 30 inches long. These
monuments shall be placed at the point of section of the stream lot
line, with a meander line established not less than 20 feet back
from the bank of the stream.
(5) All monuments required by these regulations shall be set flush with
the ground and planted in such a manner that they will not be
removed by frost.
(6) All monuments shall be properly set in the ground and approved by
a land surveyor prior to the time the Joint Zoning Board of Appeals/
Planning Commission recommends approval of the final plat.
[Amended 11-8-2017 by L.L. No. 5-2017]
§ 155-27 CHARTER § 155-27
C:589
§ 155-28. Lot improvements.
E. Character of the land. Land that the Joint Zoning Board of Appeals/
Planning Commission finds to be unsuitable for subdivision or
development due to flooding, improper drainage, steep slopes, rock
formations, adverse earth formations or topography, utility easements
or other features that will reasonably be harmful to the safety, health,
and general welfare of the present or future inhabitants of the
subdivision and/or its surrounding areas, shall not be subdivided or
developed unless adequate methods are formulated by the developer
and approved by the Joint Zoning Board of Appeals/Planning
Commission, upon recommendation of the City Engineer, to solve the
problems created by the unsuitable land conditions. Such land shall be
set aside for uses as shall not involve any danger to public health,
safety, and welfare. [Amended 11-8-2017 by L.L. No. 5-2017]
F. Subdivision name. The proposed name of the subdivision shall not
duplicate or too closely approximate phonetically, the name of any other
subdivision in the area covered by these regulations. The Joint Zoning
Board of Appeals/Planning Commission shall have final authority to
designate the name of the subdivision, which shall be determined at
sketch plat approval. [Amended 11-8-2017 by L.L. No. 5-2017]
A. Lot arrangement. The lot arrangement shall be such that there will be
no foreseeable difficulties, for reasons of topography or other
conditions, in securing building permits to build on all lots in
compliance with Chapter 190, Zoning, and county health regulations
and in providing driveway access to buildings on the lots from an
approved street.
B. Lot dimensions. Lot dimensions shall comply with the minimum
standards of Chapter 190, Zoning. Where lots are more than double the
minimum required area for the zoning district, the Joint Zoning Board
of Appeals/Planning Commission may require that those lots be
arranged so as to allow further subdivision and the opening of future
streets where they would be necessary to serve potential lots, all in
compliance with Chapter 190, Zoning, and these regulations. In
general, side lot lines shall be at right angles to street lines (or radial to
curving street lines) unless a variation from this rule will give a better
street or lot plan. Dimensions of corner lots shall be large enough to
allow for erection of buildings, observing the minimum front yard
setback from both streets. Depth and width of properties reserved or
laid out for business, commercial, or industrial purposes shall be
adequate to provide for the off-street parking and loading facilities
required for the type of use and development contemplated, as
established in Chapter 190, Zoning. [Amended 11-8-2017 by L.L. No.
5-2017]
C. Double frontage lots and access to lots.
§ 155-27 ONEIDA CODE § 155-28
C:590
(1) Double frontage lots. Double frontage and reversed frontage lots
shall be avoided except where necessary to provide separation of
residential development from traffic arterials or to overcome
specific disadvantages of topography and orientation.
(2) Access from major and secondary arterials. Lots shall not, in
general, derive access exclusively from a major or secondary
street. Where driveway access from a major or secondary street
may be necessary for several adjoining lots, the Joint Zoning Board
of Appeals/Planning Commission may require that such lots be
served by a combined access drive in order to limit possible traffic
hazards on the street. Where possible, driveways should be
designed and arranged so as to avoid requiring vehicles to back
into traffic on major and secondary arterials. [Amended
11-8-2017 by L.L. No. 5-2017]
D. Soil preservation, grading, and seeding.
(1) Soil preservation and final grading. No certificate of occupancy
shall be issued until final grading has been completed in
accordance with the approved final subdivision plat and the lot
precovered with soil with an average depth of at least six inches
which shall contain no particles more than two inches in diameter
over the entire area of the lot, except that portion covered by
buildings or included in streets, or where the grade has not been
changed or natural vegetation seriously damaged. A temporary
certificate of occupancy (of up to six months) may be issued if soil
preservation and final grading cannot be completed due to winter
weather. Topsoil shall not be removed from residential lots or used
as spoil, but shall be redistributed so as to provide at least six
inches of cover on the lots and at least four inches of cover between
the sidewalks and curbs, and shall be stabilized by seeding or
planting.
(2) Lot drainage. Lots shall be laid out so as to provide positive
drainage away from all buildings and individual lot drainage shall
be coordinated with the general storm drainage pattern for the
area. Drainage shall be designed so as to avoid concentration of
storm drainage water from each lot to adjacent lots.
E. Debris and waste. No cut trees, timber, debris, earth, rocks, stones, soil,
junk, rubbish, or other waste materials of any kind shall be buried in
any land or left or deposited on any lot or street at the time of the
issuance of a certificate of occupancy, and removal of those items and
materials shall be required prior to issuance of any certificate of
occupancy on a subdivision. No items and materials as described in the
preceding sentence shall be left or deposited in any area of the
subdivision at the time of expiration of any subdivision improvement
agreement or dedication of public improvements, whichever is sooner.
§ 155-28 CHARTER § 155-28
C:591
§ 155-29. Roads.
F. Water bodies and watercourses. The Joint Zoning Board of Appeals/
Planning Commission may approve a plan whereby the ownership of
and responsibility for safe maintenance of the water body is so placed
that it will not become a local government responsibility. No more than
25% of the minimum area of a lot required under Chapter 190, Zoning,
may be satisfied by land that is under water. Where a watercourse
separates the buildable area of a lot from the street by which it has
access, provisions shall be made for installation of a culvert or other
structure, of a design approved by the City Engineer. [Amended
11-8-2017 by L.L. No. 5-2017]
A. General requirements.
(1) Frontage on improved roads. No subdivision shall be approved
unless the area to be subdivided shall have frontage on and access
from an existing street on the Official Map unless such street is:
(a) An existing state, county, or city highway; or
(b) A street shown upon a plat approved by the Joint Zoning Board
of Appeals/Planning Commission and recorded in the Madison
County Clerk's office. Such street or highway must be suitably
improved as required by the highway rules, regulations,
specifications or orders or be secured by a performance bond
required under these subdivision regulations, with the width
and right-of-way required by these subdivision regulations or
the Official Map. Wherever the area to be subdivided is to
utilize existing road frontage, the road shall be suitably
improved as provided above. [Amended 11-8-2017 by L.L.
No. 5-2017]
(2) Level of service. No development shall be approved if such
development, at full occupancy, will result in or increase traffic on
an arterial or collector so that the street does not function at a level
of service of C or better (pursuant to NYSDOT standards). The
applicant may propose and construct approved traffic mitigation
measures to provide adequate roadway capacity for the proposed
development. The applicant for any development projected to
generate more than 1,000 vehicle trip ends per day shall submit a
traffic impact analysis. For definitions of levels of service, please
refer to Article II.
(3) Grading and improvement plan. Roads shall be graded and
improved and conform to the local government construction
standards and specifications and shall be approved as to design and
specifications by the City Engineer in accordance with the
construction plans required to be submitted prior to final plat
approval.
§ 155-28 ONEIDA CODE § 155-29
C:592
(4) Classification. All roads shall be classified as either major arterial,
minor arterial, collector, or local. In classifying roads, the City of
Oneida shall consider projected traffic demands after 20 years of
development.
(5) Topography and arrangement.
(a) Roads shall be related appropriately to the topography. Local
roads shall be curved wherever possible to avoid conformity of
lot appearance. All streets shall be arranged so as to obtain as
many building sites as possible at, or above, the grades of the
streets. Grades of streets shall conform as closely as possible
to the original topography. A combination of steep grades and
curves shall be avoided.
(b) All streets shall be properly integrated with the existing and
proposed system of thoroughfares and dedicated rights-of-way
as established on the Official Map and/or Comprehensive Plan.
(c) All thoroughfares shall be properly related to special traffic
generators such as industries, business districts, schools,
churches and shopping centers; to population densities; and to
the pattern of existing and proposed land uses.
(d) Minor or local streets shall be laid out to conform as much as
possible to the topography to discourage use by through
traffic, to permit efficient drainage and utility systems and to
require the minimum number of streets necessary to provide
convenient and safe access to property.
(e) Proposed streets shall be extended to the boundary lines of the
tract to be subdivided, unless prevented by topography or
other physical conditions or unless in the opinion of the Joint
Zoning Board of Appeals/Planning Commission such extension
is not necessary or desirable for the coordination of the layout
of the subdivision with the existing layout or the most
advantageous future development of adjacent tracks.
[Amended 11-8-2017 by L.L. No. 5-2017]
(f) In business and industrial developments, the streets and other
accessways shall be planned in connection with the grouping
of buildings, location of rail facilities and the provision of
alleys, truck loading and maneuvering areas, and walks and
parking areas so as to minimize conflict of movement between
the various types of traffic, including pedestrian.
(6) Blocks.
(a) Blocks shall have sufficient width to provide for two tiers of lots
of appropriate depths. Exceptions to this prescribed block
width shall be permitted in blocks adjacent to major streets,
railroads, or waterways.
§ 155-29 CHARTER § 155-29
C:593
(b) The lengths, widths, and shapes of blocks shall be such as are
appropriate for the locality and the type of development
contemplated, but block lengths in residential areas shall not
exceed 2,200 feet or 12 times the minimum lot width required
in the zoning district, nor be less than 400 feet in length.
Wherever practicable, blocks along major arterials and
collector streets shall be not less than 1,000 feet in length.
(c) Pedestrianways or crosswalks, not less than 10 feet wide, may
be required by the Joint Zoning Board of Appeals/Planning
Commission through the center of blocks more than 800 feet
long where deemed essential to provide circulation or access
to schools, playgrounds, shopping centers, transportation, or
other community facilities. [Amended 11-8-2017 by L.L. No.
5-2017]
(7) Right-of-way and pavement width. Street, rights-of-way and
pavement shall have the following widths:
Classification
Minimum Right-of-
Way
(in feet)
Minimum Travel
Surface
(in feet)
Arterial 100 48
Collector 70 36
Local
Inside district 60 26
Outside district 60 20
(8) Curbs.
(a) Curbing shall be required in the inside district for the purposes
of drainage, safety, and delineation and protection of pavement
edge.
(b) Curb requirements shall vary according to street hierarchy and
intensity of development. Curbing may also be required:
[1] For stormwater management;
[2] To stabilize pavement edge;
[3] Ten feet on each side of drainage inlets;
[4] At intersections;
[5] At corners; and
[6] At tight radii.
§ 155-29 ONEIDA CODE § 155-29
C:594
(c) Where curbing is not required, edge definition and
stabilization shall be finished for safety reasons and to prevent
pavement unraveling.
(d) Where curbing is required by the Joint Zoning Board of
Appeals/Planning Commission, this requirement may be
waived and shoulders and/or drainage swales used when it can
be shown that: [Amended 11-8-2017 by L.L. No. 5-2017]
[1] Shoulders are required by state regulations;
[2] Soil or topography makes the use of shoulders and/or
drainage swales preferable; or
[3] It is in the best interests of the community to preserve its
rural character by using shoulders and/or drainage swales
instead of curbs.
(e) Curbing shall be designed to provide a ramp for bicycles and/or
wheelchairs as required by state law.
(f) Curbing shall be constructed according to City of Oneida
specifications.
(9) Road names. The sketch plat as submitted shall not indicate any
names for proposed streets. The Joint Zoning Board of Appeals/
Planning Commission shall name all roads upon recommendation of
the Director of Planning at the time of preliminary approval. The
Director of Planning shall consult the local postmaster prior to
rendering his recommendation to the Joint Zoning Board of
Appeals/Planning Commission. Names shall be sufficiently different
in sound and spelling from other road names in the municipality so
as not to cause confusion. A road which is (or is planned as) a
continuation of an existing road shall bear the same name where
practicable. [Amended 11-8-2017 by L.L. No. 5-2017]
(10) Road regulatory signs. The applicant shall deposit with the local
government at the time of final subdivision approval the sum of
$100 for each road sign required by the City Engineer at all road
intersections. The city shall install the pole and the developer shall
install all road signs before issuance of certificates of occupancy for
any residence on the streets approved. Street name signs are to be
placed at all intersections within or abutting the subdivision, the
type and location of which to be approved by the City Engineer.
(11) Streetlights. Installation of streetlights shall be required in all
subdivisions and in accordance with design and specification
standards set by the electric utility service provider. [Amended
5-3-2000 by Ord. No. 00-03]
§ 155-29 CHARTER § 155-29
C:595
(12) Reserve strips. The creation of reserve strips shall not be permitted
adjacent to a proposed street in such a manner as to deny access
from adjacent property to the street.
(13) Construction of roads and dead-end roads. [Amended 11-8-2017
by L.L. No. 5-2017]
(a) Construction of roads. The arrangement of streets shall
provide for the continuation of principal streets between
adjacent properties when the continuation is necessary for
convenient movement of traffic, effective fire protection, for
efficient provision of utilities, and where the continuation is in
accordance with the city traffic plan. If the adjacent property is
undeveloped and the street must temporarily be a dead-end
street, the right-of-way shall be extended to the property line.
A temporary T- or L-shaped turnabout shall be provided on all
temporary dead-end streets, with the notation on the
subdivision plat that land outside the normal street right-ofway
shall revert to abutters whenever the street is continued.
The Joint Zoning Board of Appeals/Planning Commission may
limit the length of temporary dead-end streets in accordance
with the design standards of these regulations.
(b) Dead-end roads (permanent). Where a road does not extend
beyond the boundary of the subdivision and its continuation is
not required by the Joint Zoning Board of Appeals/Planning
Commission for access to adjoining property, its terminus shall
normally not be nearer to such boundary than 50 feet.
However, the Joint Zoning Board of Appeals/Planning
Commission may require the reservation of an appropriate
easement to accommodate drainage facilities, pedestrian
traffic or utilities. A cul-de-sac turnaround shall be provided at
the end of a permanent dead-end street in accordance with city
construction standards and specifications. For greater
convenience to traffic and more effective police and fire
protection, permanent dead-end streets shall, in general, be
limited in length in accordance with the design standards of
these regulations.
B. Design standards.
(1) General. Provision shall be made for roads of suitable location,
width, and improvement to accommodate prospective traffic and
afford satisfactory access to police, firefighting, snow removal,
sanitation and road-maintenance equipment and to coordinate
roads so as to compose a convenient system and avoid undue
hardships to adjoining properties.
(2) Road surfacing and improvements. After sewer and water utilities
have been installed by the developer, the developer shall construct
curbs and gutters and shall surface or cause to be surfaced
§ 155-29 ONEIDA CODE § 155-29
C:596
roadways to the widths prescribed in these regulations. All
surfacing shall be of a character as is suitable for the expected
traffic and in harmony with similar improvements in the
surrounding areas. The type of roadway surface shall be asphaltic
cement flexible pavement. Adequate provision shall be made for
culverts, drains and bridges. All road pavement, shoulders,
drainage improvements and structures, curbs, turnarounds, and
sidewalks shall conform to all construction standards and
specifications adopted by the Joint Zoning Board of Appeals/
Planning Commission, City Engineer, or Common Council and shall
be incorporated into the construction plans required to be
submitted by the developer for plat approval. [Amended
11-8-2017 by L.L. No. 5-2017]
(3) Excess right-of-way. Right-of-way widths in excess of the standards
designated in these regulations shall be required whenever, due to
topography, additional width is necessary to provide adequate
earth slopes. Such slopes shall not be in excess of three-to-one.
(4) Railroads and limited access highways. Railroad rights-of-way and
limited access highways where so located as to affect the
subdivision of adjoining lands shall be treated as follows:
(a) In residential districts a buffer strip at least 200 feet in depth
in addition to the normal depth of the lot required in the
district shall be provided adjacent to the railroad right-of-way
or limited access highway. This strip shall be part of the platted
lots and shall be designated on the plat: "This strip is reserved
for screening. The placement of structure on this land is
prohibited."
(b) In districts zoned for business, commercial, or industrial uses
the nearest street extending parallel or approximately parallel
to the railroad right-of-way shall, wherever practicable, be at a
sufficient distance (200 feet for residential; 500 to 800 feet for
light industrial/business/commercial; 2,000 feet for heavy
industrial) from the railroad right-of-way to ensure suitable
depth for commercial or industrial sites.
(c) When streets parallel to the railroad right-of-way intersect a
street which crosses the railroad right-of-way at grade, they
shall, to the extent practicable, be at a distance of at least 150
feet from the railroad right-of-way. Such distance shall be
determined with due consideration of the minimum distance
required for future separation of grades by means of
appropriate approach gradients.
(5) Intersections.
(a) Streets shall be laid out so as to intersect as nearly as possible
at right angles. A proposed intersection of two new streets at
§ 155-29 CHARTER § 155-29
C:597
an angle of less than 75º shall not be acceptable. An oblique
street should be curved approaching an intersection and
should be approximately at right angles for at least 100 feet
therefrom. Not more than two streets shall intersect at any one
point unless specifically approved by the Joint Zoning Board of
Appeals/Planning Commission. [Amended 11-8-2017 by L.L.
No. 5-2017]
(b) Proposed new intersections along one side of an existing street
shall, wherever practicable, coincide with any existing
intersections on the opposite side of such street. Street jogs
with center-line offsets of less than 150 feet shall not be
permitted, except where the intersected street has separated
dual drives without median breaks at either intersection.
Where streets intersect major streets, their alignment shall be
continuous. Intersection of major streets shall be at least 800
feet apart.
(c) Minimum curb radius at the intersection of two local streets
shall be at least 20 feet; and minimum curb radius at an
intersection involving a collector street shall be at least 25
feet.
(d) Intersections shall be designed with a flat grade wherever
practical. In hilly or rolling areas, at the approach to an
intersection, a leveling area shall be provided having not
greater than a 2% rate at a distance of 60 feet, measured from
the nearest right-of-way line of the intersecting street.
(e) Where any street intersection will involve earth banks or
existing vegetation inside any lot corner that would create a
traffic hazard by limiting visibility, the developer shall cut such
ground and/or vegetation (including trees) in connection with
the grading of the public right-of-way to the extent deemed
necessary to provide an adequate sight distance.
(f) Bridges. Bridges of primary benefit to the applicant, as
determined by the Joint Zoning Board of Appeals/Planning
Commission, shall be constructed at the full expense of the
applicant without reimbursement from the City. The sharing
expense for the construction of bridges not of primary benefit
to the applicant as determined by the Joint Zoning Board of
Appeals/Planning Commission, will be fixed by special
agreement between the City and the applicant. The cost of
bridges that do not solely benefit the developer shall be
charged to the developer pro rata based on the percentage
obtained by dividing the service area of the bridge into the
area of the land being developed by the subdivider. [Amended
11-8-2017 by L.L. No. 5-2017]
§ 155-29 ONEIDA CODE § 155-29
C:598
§ 155-30. Drainage and storm sewers.
(g) Slopes. Maximum slope shall not exceed 10% along the center
line. Cross slopes shall be 1/4 inch per foot.
C. Road dedications and reservations.
(1) New perimeter streets. Street systems in new subdivisions shall be
laid out so as to eliminate or avoid new perimeter half-streets.
Where an existing half-street is adjacent to a new subdivision, the
other half of the street shall be improved and dedicated by the
subdivider. The Joint Zoning Board of Appeals/Planning
Commission may authorize a new perimeter street where the
subdivider improves and dedicates the entire required street rightof-
way width within its own subdivision boundaries. [Amended
11-8-2017 by L.L. No. 5-2017]
(2) Widening and realignment of existing roads. Where a subdivision
borders an existing narrow road or when the Comprehensive Plan,
Official Map or zoning setback regulations indicate plans for
realignment or widening a road that would require use of some of
the land in the subdivision, the applicant shall be required to
improve and dedicate at its expense those areas for widening or
realignment of those roads. Frontage roads and streets as
described above shall be improved and dedicated by the applicant
at its own expense to the full width as required by these subdivision
regulations when the applicant's development activities contribute
to the need for the road expansion. Land reserved for any road
purposes may not be counted in satisfying yard or area
requirements of Chapter 190, Zoning, whether the land is to be
dedicated to the municipality in fee simple or an easement is
granted to the City of Oneida.
A. General requirements. The Joint Zoning Board of Appeals/Planning
Commission shall not approve any plat of subdivision that does not
make adequate provision for stormwater and floodwater runoff
channels or basins. The stormwater drainage system shall be separate
and independent of any sanitary sewer system. Storm sewers, where
required, shall be designed by the Rational Method, or other methods
as approved by the Joint Zoning Board of Appeals/Planning
Commission, and a copy of design computations shall be included in the
stormwater and erosion control management report. Inlets shall be
provided so that surface water is not carried across or around any
intersection. When calculations indicate that curb capacities are
exceeded at a point, no further allowance shall be made for flow beyond
that point and basins shall be used to intercept flow at that point.
Surface water drainage patterns shall be shown for each and every lot
and block. [Amended 11-8-2017 by L.L. No. 5-2017]
B. Nature of stormwater facilities.
§ 155-29 CHARTER § 155-30
C:599
(1) Location. The applicant may be required by the Joint Zoning Board
of Appeals/Planning Commission to carry away by pipe or open
ditch any spring or surface water that may exist either previously
to or as a result of the subdivision. Such drainage facilities shall be
located in the right-of-way where feasible or in perpetual
unobstructed easements of appropriate width, and shall be
constructed in accordance with the construction standards and
specifications. [Amended 11-8-2017 by L.L. No. 5-2017]
(2) Accessibility to public storm sewers. [Amended 11-8-2017 by
L.L. No. 5-2017]
(a) Where a public storm sewer is accessible, the applicant shall
install storm sewer facilities or if no outlets are within a
reasonable distance, developer shall propose a method(s) for
the disposal of stormwater which shall be subject to approval
by the Joint Zoning Board of Appeals/Planning Commission
upon the recommendation of the City Engineer. Inspection of
facilities shall be conducted by the City Engineer.
(b) If a connection to a public storm sewer will be provided
eventually, as determined by the City Engineer and the Joint
Zoning Board of Appeals/Planning Commission, the developer
shall make arrangements for future stormwater disposal by a
public utility system at the time the plat receives final
approval. Provision for such connection shall be incorporated
by inclusion in the subdivision improvement agreement
required for the subdivision plat.
(3) Accommodation of upstream drainage areas. A culvert or other
drainage facility shall in each case be large enough to
accommodate potential runoff from its entire upstream drainage
area, whether inside or outside the subdivision. The necessary size
of such facilities shall be determined during the analysis and
preparation of the stormwater management and erosion control
report and shall be subject to approval by the Joint Zoning Board of
Appeals/Planning Commission upon recommendation of the City
Engineer. [Amended 11-8-2017 by L.L. No. 5-2017]
(4) Effect on downstream drainage areas. The developer shall also be
responsible through a storm runoff analysis for insuring that
stormwater post construction peak discharges to any established
drainage course or public improvement shall not exceed the preconstruction
discharge to said drainage course or public
improvement. In the event stormwater runoff analysis determines
that the proposed subdivision would create a need to improve or
upgrade downstream drainage facilities such improvements shall
be designed by the developer, approved by the City Engineer,
constructed by the developer at his/her sole expense and dedicated
to the City as a public improvement. (See also § 155-30D which
§ 155-30 ONEIDA CODE § 155-30
C:600
prescribes the requirements for the preparation of a stormwater
management and erosion control plan.)
(5) Areas of poor drainage. Site plan proposals must comply with
Chapter 64, Flood Damage Prevention, of the Code of the City of
Oneida.
C. Dedication of drainage easements.
(1) General requirements. When a subdivision is traversed by a
watercourse, drainageway, channel or stream, there shall be
provided a stormwater easement or drainage right-of-way
conforming substantially to the lines of such watercourse and of
such width and construction as will be adequate for the purpose.
Wherever possible, it is desirable that the drainage be maintained
by an open channel with landscaped banks and adequate width for
maximum potential volume of flow.
(2) Drainage easements.
(a) Where topography or other conditions are such as to make
impractical the inclusion of drainage facilities within road
rights-of-way, perpetual, unobstructed easements at least 20
feet in width for drainage facilities shall be provided across
property outside the road lines and with satisfactory access to
the road. Easements shall be indicated on the plat. Drainage
easements shall extend from the road to a natural watercourse
or to other drainage facilities.
(b) When a proposed drainage system will carry water across
private land outside the subdivision, appropriate drainage
rights must be secured and indicated on the plat.
(c) The applicant shall provide a drainage or conservation
easement for land on both sides of existing watercourses to a
distance to be determined by the Joint Zoning Board of
Appeals/Planning Commission. Maintenance shall be provided
by the property owner. [Amended 11-8-2017 by L.L. No.
5-2017]
(d) Low-lying lands along watercourses subject to flooding or
overflowing during storm periods, whether or not included in
areas for dedication, shall be preserved and retained in their
natural state as drainageways. Such land or lands subject to
periodic flooding shall not be computed in determining the
number of lots to be utilized for average density procedures
nor for computing the area requirement of any lot.
D. Stormwater management and erosion control plan.
(1) References:
§ 155-30 CHARTER § 155-30
C:601
(a) "Urban Hydrology for Small Watersheds - Technical Release 55
(TR-55)," United States Department of Agriculture - Soil
Conservation Service, June 1986 (short title: "SCS TR-55").
[Note: In lieu of specifically SCS TR-55 worksheets where
subsequently required herein, the developer may propose to
use a computer-generated model which has been previously
approved by the City Engineer.]
(b) "Reducing the Impacts of Stormwater Runoff New
Development, 2nd Edition, "New York State Department of
Environmental Conservation, April 1983 (short title: "DEC
Stormwater Guide").
(c) "Soil Survey of Madison County, New York," United States
Department of Agriculture - Soil Conservation Service, 1974.
(d) "Dam Safety Regulations - 6 NYCRR 673," New York State
Department of Environmental Conservation, January 1986.
(e) "Guidelines for Urban Erosion and Sediment Control," Empire
State Chapter Soil and Water Conservation Society, 3rd
Printing, October 1991.
(2) General requirements. A stormwater management and erosion
control plan shall be prepared for all subdivisions by a professional
engineer licensed by the New York State Department of Education.
No person, corporation, organization, or public agency may, on or
after the effective date of these subdivision regulations: [Amended
11-8-2017 by L.L. No. 5-2017]
(a) Initiate any land clearing, land grading or earth moving
activities associated with a subdivision development without
first preparing a stormwater management and erosion control
plan and obtaining approval of said plan from the Joint Zoning
Board of Appeals/Planning Commission; or
(b) Alter any drainage system without first preparing a stormwater
management and erosion control plan and obtaining approval
of said plan from the Joint Zoning Board of Appeals/Planning
Commission.
(3) Contents of the stormwater management and erosion control plan.
(a) It is the responsibility of an applicant to include information in
the stormwater management and erosion control plan in
sufficient detail for the Joint Zoning Board of Appeals/Planning
Commission to evaluate the environmental characteristics of
the affected areas, the potential and predicted impacts of the
proposed activity on community waters, and the effectiveness
and acceptability of those measures proposed by the applicant
for reducing or mitigating adverse impacts. [Amended
11-8-2017 by L.L. No. 5-2017]
§ 155-30 ONEIDA CODE § 155-30
C:602
§ 155-31. Water facilities.
(b) The stormwater management and erosion control plan shall
contain the name, address, and telephone number of the owner
and developer. In addition, the legal description of the property
shall be provided, and its location with reference to such
landmarks as major water bodies, adjoining roads, railroads,
subdivisions, or towns shall be clearly identified on the plans.
(c) The structure and content of the stormwater management and
erosion control plan should be as recited in § 6 of Appendix B in
Chapter 143, Site Plan Review of the Code of the City of
Oneida. [Amended 12-19-2000 by L.L. No. 6-2000]
A. General requirements.
(1) When a public water main is accessible, the developer shall install
adequate water facilities (including fire hydrants) subject to the
specifications of state or local authorities. All water mains shall be
at least eight inches in diameter.
(2) Water main extensions shall be approved by the officially
designated agency of the state and local government.
(3) The location of all fire hydrants, all water supply improvements,
and the boundary lines of proposed districts, indicating all
improvements proposed to be served, shall be shown on the
preliminary plat and the cost of installing same shall be borne by
the developer and included in the subdivision improvement
agreement and security to be furnished by the developer.
B. Individual wells and central water systems. [Amended 11-8-2017 by
L.L. No. 5-2017]
(1) In zoning districts with a density of one unit per acre or less and
when a public water system is not available in the discretion of the
Joint Zoning Board of Appeals/Planning Commission, individual
wells may be used in a manner so that adequate supply of potable
water will be available to every lot in the subdivision. Water
samples shall be submitted to the Madison County Health
Department for its approval and individual wells shall be approved
by the appropriate health authorities. Approvals shall be submitted
to the Joint Zoning Board of Appeals/Planning Commission prior to
final subdivision plat approval.
(2) If the Joint Zoning Board of Appeals/Planning Commission requires
that a connection to a public water main be eventually provided as
a condition to approval of an individual well or central water
system the applicant shall make arrangements prior to receiving
final plat approval for future water service. Performance or cash
bonds may be required to ensure compliance.
§ 155-30 CHARTER § 155-31
C:603
§ 155-32. Sewerage facilities.
Sanitary sewerage facilities shall be designed, approved and constructed in
accordance with (IAW) with following references as may be appropriate for
public sanitary sewers or individual household disposal systems:
§ 155-33. Sidewalks.
C. Fire hydrants. Fire hydrants shall be required for all subdivisions
except those coming under Subsection B. Fire hydrants shall be located
no more than 700 feet apart and within 500 feet of any structure and
shall be approved by the applicable fire protection unit. To eliminate
future street openings, all underground utilities for fire hydrants,
together with the fire hydrants themselves and all other supply
improvements shall be installed before any final paving of a street
shown on the subdivision plat.
A. Chapter 139, Sewers, of the Code of the City of Oneida.
B. "Recommended Standards for Wastewater Facilities," as published by
the Great Lakes-Upper Mississippi River Board of State Public Health
and Environmental Managers (common title: "Ten State Standards"),
1990.
C. "Design Standards for Treatment Works", New York State Department
of Environmental Conservation, 1988.
D. "Wastewater Treatment Standards - Individual Household Systems,"
Appendix 75-A of Part 75 of the Administrative Rules and Regulations
contained in Chapter 11 of Title 10 (Health) of the Official Compilation
of Codes, Rules and Regulations of the State of New York.
A. Required improvements.
(1) Sidewalks shall be included within the dedicated nonpavement
right-of-way of all roads within approved subdivisions. [Amended
5-3-2000 by Ord. No. 00-03]
(2) Concrete curbs are required for all roads when sidewalks are
required by these regulations or when required in the discretion of
the Joint Zoning Board of Appeals/Planning Commission.
[Amended 11-8-2017 by L.L. No. 5-2017]
(3) Sidewalks shall be improved as required in § 155-29B(2) of these
regulations. A median strip of grassed or landscaped areas at least
two feet wide shall separate all sidewalks from adjacent curbs.
B. Pedestrian accesses. The Joint Zoning Board of Appeals/Planning
Commission may require, in order to facilitate pedestrian access from
the roads to schools, parks, playgrounds or other nearby roads,
perpetual unobstructed easements at least 20 feet in width. Easements
§ 155-31 ONEIDA CODE § 155-33
C:604
§ 155-34. Utilities.
§ 155-35. Parkland preservation. [Amended 5-3-2000 by Ord. No.
00-03]
shall be indicated on the plat. [Amended 11-8-2017 by L.L. No.
5-2017]
A. Location. All utility facilities, including but not limited to gas, electric
power, telephone and CATV cables, shall be located underground
throughout the subdivision. Whenever existing utility facilities are
located above ground, except when existing on public roads and rightsof-
way, they shall be removed and placed underground. All utility
facilities existing and proposed throughout the subdivision shall be
shown on the preliminary plat. Underground service connections to the
street property line of each platted lot shall be installed at the
subdivider's expense. At the discretion of the Joint Zoning Board of
Appeals/Planning Commission, the requirement for service connections
to each lot may be waived in the case of adjoining lots to be retained in
single ownership and intended to be developed for the same primary
use. [Amended 11-8-2017 by L.L. No. 5-2017]
B. Easements.
(1) Easements centered on rear lot lines shall be provided for utilities
(private and municipal) and such easements shall be at least 10 feet
wide. Proper coordination shall be established between the
subdivider and the applicable utility companies for the
establishment of utility easements established in adjoining
properties.
(2) When topographical or other conditions are such as to make
impractical the inclusion of utilities within the rear lot lines,
perpetual unobstructed easements at least 10 feet in width shall be
provided along side lot lines with satisfactory access to the road or
rear lot lines. Easements shall be indicated on the plat.49
A. Dedication of parkland required. It shall be required that a subdivider
of any residential subdivision within the City set aside and dedicate to
the public sufficient and suitable lands within, adjacent to, or in the
vicinity of the subdivision for the purpose of public parkland in
accordance with the provisions of this section, these regulations
generally, and subject to the provisions of the General City Law § 33.
Sufficiency and suitability of land will be determined by the Joint Zoning
Board of Appeals/Planning Commission upon recommendation by the
Planning Director and the Director of Recreation and Youth Services.
Land for park, playground or other recreational purposes may not be
required until the Joint Zoning Board of Appeals/Planning Commission
49.Note: Standard construction specifications and detail drawings are to be published by the
year 2001, pursuant to § 155-38, Utilities.
§ 155-33 CHARTER § 155-35
C:605
has made a finding that a proper circumstance exists for requiring that
park or parks be suitably located for playgrounds or other recreational
purposes within the City. Such finding shall include an evaluation of
the present and anticipated future needs for park and recreational
facilities in the City based upon projected population growth to which
the particular subdivision plat will contribute. Those subdivisions
having received preliminary plat approval prior to the effective date
of this section shall be exempt from the requirements of this section
except that the expiration of either the preliminary or final plat shall
void this exemption. [Amended 11-8-2017 by L.L. No. 5-2017]
B. Area of parkland required or cash-in-lieu of parkland required.
(1) The acreage to be contributed prior to final plat approval by the
Joint Zoning Board of Appeals/Planning Commission of any
residential subdivision plat shall be determined by the number of
lots as follows: [Amended 11-8-2017 by L.L. No. 5-2017]
(a) Two to 20 lots: cash payment equal to 2% of the current
average market value of an improved lot in the subdivision for
each improved lot at the time of subdivision approval as
determined by the City Assessor. This money will be used for
the purchase of parkland and/or recreational equipment in the
general vicinity of the subdivision as determined by the
Director of Parks and Recreation, and approved by the City of
Oneida Common Council.
(b) Twenty one to 30 lots: cash payment equal to 2% of the current
average market value of an improved lot in the subdivision for
each improved lot at the time of subdivision approval as
determined by the City Assessor. This money will be used for
the purchase of parkland and/or recreational equipment in the
general vicinity of the subdivision as determined by the
Director of Parks and Recreation, and approved by the City of
Oneida Common Council; or a minimum of 3 acres of land.
(c) Thirty-one or greater: cash payment equal to 2% of the current
average market value of an improved lot in the subdivision for
each improved lot at the time of subdivision approval as
determined by the City Assessor. This money would be used for
the purchase of parkland and/or recreational equipment in the
general vicinity of the subdivision as determined by the
Director of Recreation and Youth Services, and approved by
the City of Oneida Common Council; or a minimum of 3 acres
of land, or 10% of the total acreage of the subdivision,
whichever is greater.
(2) The determination as to whether the dedication of parkland or cash
in lieu of parkland will be required will be determined by the
Director of Planning, with recommendations from the Joint Zoning
Board of Appeals/Planning Commission and the Director of
§ 155-35 ONEIDA CODE § 155-35
C:606
Recreation and Youth Services. [Amended 11-8-2017 by L.L. No.
5-2017]
(3) For purposes of determining parkland requirements for
subdivisions which are going to be constructed in phases over an
extended period of time, the acreage of parkland or cash in lieu of
parkland to be contributed prior to final plat approval shall be
determined based upon the total number of lots which will
ultimately be created when all phases of the project are completed.
(4) The required cash in lieu of parkland shall be paid in the following
manner: upon the sale of each lot, within 20 days after closing, the
seller shall pay to the City a sum equal to 2% of the average market
value of said improved lot as determined at the time of the
subdivision approval. Final approval of the subdivision plat for the
initial phase of any such project shall not be granted until there has
been compliance with the parkland requirements set forth herein.
C. Subdivision changes. In the event a subdivider deviates from the
approved preliminary plat in final platting or rezones land within the
preliminary plat which has the effect of increasing the density of
population, or where the use of property is changed from a
nonresidential use to a residential use, the owner or subdivider shall be
obligated to provide additional land (or fee) to compensate for the
increase in population prior to the City issuing a building permit or
certificate of occupancy.
D. Design standards for parkland.
(1) The dedicated land should form a single parcel or tract of land at
least three acres in size unless it is determined that a smaller tract
would be in the public interest, or that additional contiguous land
will be reasonably available for dedication to or purchase by the
City.
(2) Public access to public parkland delineated on a preliminary plat
shall be ensured by provision of at least 50 feet of street frontage,
in a manner satisfactory to the City. At the time the land abutting
the delineated areas is developed, the subdivider of such abutting
land shall furnish and pay for paving all abutting street frontage
and shall provide water and sewer access to the boundary of one
side of the delineated area to meet minimum requirements of these
regulations.
(3) The land to be dedicated to meet the requirements of these
regulations should be suitable for public parks and recreation
activities. (In that regard 50% of the dedicated land area should not
exceed 5% grade.) The Comprehensive Plan for the City shall be
considered when evaluating land proposals for dedication.
(4) Any disturbed parkland shall be restored and the soil stabilized by
vegetative cover by the developer.
§ 155-35 CHARTER § 155-35
C:607
(5) Areas within the one-hundred-year floodplain may be dedicated in
fulfillment of the dedication requirement subject to the following
additional restrictions:
(a) The Joint Zoning Board of Appeals/Planning Commission may
permit the area within the one-hundred-year floodplain to
constitute up to 100% of the parkland dedication requirement
if, in its opinion, the dedication of the land furthers the goals
and objectives of the parks and open space portion of the
Comprehensive Plan. The Joint Zoning Board of Appeals/
Planning Commission shall specify findings justifying said
action. [Amended 11-8-2017 by L.L. No. 5-2017]
(b) That such area shall meet any additional standards specified in
the parkland design standards pertaining to the dedication of
the one-hundred-year floodplain.
(6) The location of parkland may be required at the edge of a
subdivision so that additional land may be added at such time as
adjacent land is subdivided or acquired for public use. Otherwise, a
centralized location is preferred.
(7) The location of parkland may be required at the edge of a
subdivision so that additional land may be added at such time as
adjacent land is subdivided or acquired for public land. Otherwise,
a centralized location is preferred. If the topography or other
aspects of the subdivision are unsuitable for parkland, the
developer may, with the approval of the Joint Zoning Board of
Appeals/Planning Commission, offer for dedication a parcel
adjacent to or in very close proximity to the proposed subdivision.
[Amended 11-8-2017 by L.L. No. 5-2017]
E. Private parkland credit. Where areas and facilities for park and
recreational purposes are to be provided in a proposed subdivision and
where such areas and facilities are to be privately owned and
maintained by the future residents of the subdivision, up to 50% credit
may, at the discretion of the City, be given against the requirement of
land dedication or payment of fees in lieu thereof if the following
standards are met:
(1) That yards, court areas, setbacks and other open areas required by
City regulations shall not be included in the computation of such
private open space.
(2) That the private ownership and maintenance of such areas and
facilities are adequately provided for by recorded written
agreement, conveyance or restrictions.
(3) That the use of such areas and facilities are restricted for park and
recreational purposes by a recorded covenant, which runs with the
land in favor of the future owners of property and which cannot be
§ 155-35 ONEIDA CODE § 155-35
C:608
§ 155-36. Preservation of natural features and amenities.
defeated or eliminated without the consent of the City or its
successor.
(4) That such areas and facilities are reasonably similar to what would
be required to meet public park and recreational needs, taking into
consideration such factors as size, shape, topography, geology,
access and location.
(5) That such areas and facilities for which credit is given shall include
improvements for the basic needs of a local park. These
improvements shall include one or more of the following: children's
play areas, picnic areas, game court areas, turf play fields,
swimming pools, recreational buildings, trails (walkways or bike
trails), and landscaped sitting areas.
F. Park Fund established. [Amended 5-3-2000 by Ord. No. 00-03]
(1) A separate fund to be deposited at the highest interest rate
permitted by law to be entitled "Park Fund" shall be and is hereby
created and the money paid by owners, subdividers, and applicants
at final approval of subdivision plats in lieu of the dedication of land
and interest thereon, shall be held in said fund in trust to be used
solely and exclusively for the purpose of purchasing public park
and recreational land and recreational equipment in the general
area in which the subdivision is located.
(2) At such time as the Common Council, based upon the
recommendations of the Recreation Commission determines that
there are sufficient funds derived from a certain area in the Park
Fund to purchase usable parkland, the Common Council shall
cause negotiations to be undertaken to purchase the site by mutual
agreement or by condemnation proceedings. In making such
determination for the purchase of said site, the conditions above
shall be taken into consideration. The principal and interest
deposited and kept in the Park Fund shall be used solely for the
purpose of purchasing or developing land and/or equipment for
public park and recreation uses.
G. Method of dedicating parkland. Land offered for dedication for park
purposes shall be delineated on the final plat as public parkland and,
once accepted for dedication by the Common Council, shall be
conveyed to the City by warranty deed, in fee simple. The subject land
must be free and clear of liens and encumbrances at the time of such
dedication and conveyance.
A. General. Existing features that would add value to residential
development or to the local government as a whole, such as trees, as
herein defined, watercourses and falls, historic spots and similar
irreplaceable assets, shall be preserved in the design of the subdivision.
§ 155-35 CHARTER § 155-36
C:609
§ 155-37. Nonresidential subdivisions.
No trees shall be removed from any subdivision nor any change of
grade of the land effected until approval of the preliminary plat has
been granted. All trees on the plat required to be retained shall be
preserved and all trees where required shall be welled and protected
against change of grade. The sketch plat shall show the number and
location of existing trees as required by these regulations and shall
further indicate all those marked for retention and the location of all
proposed shade trees required along the street side of each lot as
required by these regulations.
B. Shade trees planted by developer. [Amended 11-8-2017 by L.L. No.
5-2017]
(1) As a requirement of subdivision approval the applicant shall plant
shade trees on the property of the subdivision. Such trees are to be
planted within five feet of the right-of-way of the road or roads
within and abutting the subdivision or at the discretion of the Joint
Zoning Board of Appeals/Planning Commission, within the right-ofway
of such roads. One tree shall be planted for every 40 feet of
frontage along each road unless the Joint Zoning Board of Appeals/
Planning Commission, upon recommendation of the Director of
Planning, shall grant a waiver. The waiver shall be granted only if
there are trees growing along the right-of-way or on the abutting
property which, in the opinion of the Joint Zoning Board of Appeals/
Planning Commission, comply with these regulations.
(2) New trees to be provided pursuant to these regulations shall be
approved by the Director of Planning and shall be planted in
accordance with the regulations of the Director of Planning. The
trees shall have a minimum trunk diameter (measured 12 inches
above ground level) of not less than two inches. Only oak, honey
locust, hard maples, ash, or other long-lived shade trees,
acceptable to the Director of Planning and to the Joint Zoning
Board of Appeals/Planning Commission, shall be planted.
C. Shade tree easement and dedication. The preliminary plat and final plat
shall reserve an easement authorizing the City of Oneida to plant shade
trees within five feet of the required right-of-way of the City. No street
shall be accepted for dedication until the City Engineer shall inform the
Joint Zoning Board of Appeals/Planning Commission and the City that
compliance, where necessary, has been made with these regulations.
[Amended 11-8-2017 by L.L. No. 5-2017]
A. General. If a proposed subdivision includes land that is zoned for
commercial or industrial purposes the layout of the subdivision with
respect to the land shall make provision as the Joint Zoning Board of
Appeals/Planning Commission may require. A nonresidential
subdivision shall also be subject to all the requirements of site plan
approval set forth in Chapter 190, Zoning. Site plan approval and
§ 155-36 ONEIDA CODE § 155-37
C:610
nonresidential subdivision plat approval may proceed simultaneously
at the discretion of the Joint Zoning Board of Appeals/Planning
Commission. A nonresidential subdivision shall be subject to all the
requirements of these regulations, as well as such additional standards
required by the Joint Zoning Board of Appeals/Planning Commission
and shall conform to the proposed land use and standards established
in the Comprehensive Plan, Official Map and Chapter 190, Zoning.
[Amended 11-8-2017 by L.L. No. 5-2017]
B. Standards. In addition to the principles and standards in these
regulations, which are appropriate to the planning of all subdivisions,
the applicant shall demonstrate to the satisfaction of the board that the
street, parcel and block pattern proposed is specifically adapted to the
uses anticipated and takes into account other uses in the vicinity. The
following principles and standards shall be observed:
(1) Proposed industrial parcels shall be suitable in area and
dimensions to the types of industrial development anticipated.
(2) Street rights-of-way and pavement shall be adequate to
accommodate the type and volume of traffic anticipated to be
generated thereupon.
(3) Special requirements may be imposed by the City of Oneida with
respect to street, curb, gutter and sidewalk design and
construction.
(4) Special requirements may be imposed by the City of Oneida with
respect to the installation of public utilities, including water, sewer
and stormwater drainage.
(5) Every effort shall be made to protect adjacent residential areas
from potential nuisance from a proposed commercial or industrial
subdivision, including the provision of extra depth in parcels
backing up on existing or potential residential development and
provisions for a permanently landscaped buffer strip when
necessary.
(6) Streets carrying nonresidential traffic, especially truck traffic, shall
not normally be extended to the boundaries of adjacent existing or
potential areas.
§ 155-37 CHARTER § 155-37
C:611

ARTICLE VI
Land Readjustment
§ 155-38. Resubdivision of land.
A. Procedure for resubdivision. Whenever a developer desires to
resubdivide an already approved final subdivision plat, the developer
shall first obtain approval for the resubdivision by the same procedures
prescribed for the subdivision of land.
B. Resubdivision. Resubdivision includes:
(1) Any change in any street layout or any other public improvement.
(2) Any change in any lot line.
(3) Any change in the amount of land reserved for public use or the
common use of lot owners.
(4) Any change in any easements shown on the approved plat.
C. Waiver. [Amended 11-8-2017 by L.L. No. 5-2017]
(1) Whenever the Joint Zoning Board of Appeals/Planning Commission,
in its sole discretion, makes a finding on the record that the
purposes of these regulations may be served by permitting
resubdivision by the procedure established in this Subsection C,
the Joint Zoning Board of Appeals/Planning Commission may waive
the requirement of Subsection A. The Joint Zoning Board of
Appeals/Planning Commission after an application for
resubdivision that includes an expressed request for waiver, shall
publish notice of the application in a local newspaper of general
circulation and shall provide personal notice to property owners in
the subdivision. The notice shall include:
(a) The name and legal description of the subdivision affected by
the application;
(b) The proposed changes in the final subdivision plat;
(c) The place and time at which the application and any
accompanying documents may be reviewed by the public;
(d) The place and time at which written comments on the
proposed resubdivision may be submitted by the public; and
(e) The place and time of the public meeting at which the Joint
Zoning Board of Appeals/Planning Commission will consider
whether to approve, conditionally approve, or disapprove the
proposed resubdivision.
(2) No sooner than 30 days and no later than 45 days after notice is
published, the Joint Zoning Board of Appeals/Planning Commission
shall consider the application for resubdivision at a public meeting
§ 155-38 CHARTER § 155-38
C:613
§ 155-39. Plat vacation. [Amended 11-8-2017 by L.L. No. 5-2017]
and shall approve, conditionally approve or disapprove the
application.
D. Procedure for subdivisions when future resubdivision is indicated.
Whenever land is subdivided and the subdivision plat shows one or
more lots containing more than one acre of land and there is reason to
believe that such lots eventually will be resubdivided, the Joint Zoning
Board of Appeals/Planning Commission may require that the applicant
allow for the future opening of streets and the ultimate extension of
adjacent streets. Easements providing for the future opening and
extension of streets may be made a requirement of plat approval.
[Amended 11-8-2017 by L.L. No. 5-2017]
A. Owner-initiated plat vacation. The owner or owners of lots in any
approved subdivision, including the developer, may petition the Joint
Zoning Board of Appeals/Planning Commission to vacate the plat with
respect to their properties. The petition shall be filed on forms provided
by the Joint Zoning Board of Appeals/Planning Commission and one
copy shall be referred to the Common Council by the Joint Zoning Board
of Appeals/Planning Commission.
(1) Notice and hearing. The Joint Zoning Board of Appeals/Planning
Commission shall publish notice in a newspaper of general
circulation and provide personal notice of the petition for a
vacation to all owners of property within the affected subdivision
and shall state in the notice the time and place for a public hearing
on the vacation petition. The public hearing shall be no sooner than
30 and no later than 45 days after the published and personal
notice.
(2) Criteria. The Joint Zoning Board of Appeals/Planning Commission
shall approve the petition for vacation on such terms and
conditions as are reasonable to protect public health, safety and
welfare, but in no event may the Joint Zoning Board of Appeals/
Planning Commission approve a petition for vacation if it will
materially injure the rights of any nonconsenting property owner or
any public rights in public improvements unless expressly agreed
to by the governing body.
(3) Recordation of revised plat. Upon approval of any petition for
vacation, the Joint Zoning Board of Appeals/Planning Commission
shall direct the petitioners to prepare a revised final subdivision
plat in accordance with these regulations. The revised final
subdivision plat may be recorded only after having been signed by
the Chairman of the Joint Zoning Board of Appeals/Planning
Commission and the City Attorney.
(4) Developer initiated vacation. When the developer of the subdivision
or its successor, owns all of the lots in the subdivision, the
§ 155-38 ONEIDA CODE § 155-39
C:614
developer or successor may petition for vacation of the subdivision
plat and the petition may be approved, conditionally approved
or disapproved at a regular public meeting of the Joint Zoning
Board of Appeals/Planning Commission subject to the criteria in
Subsection A(1) of this section. The petition shall be made in
triplicate on forms provided by the Joint Zoning Board of Appeals/
Planning Commission at least 30 days prior to a regular Joint
Zoning Board of Appeals/Planning Commission public meeting and
the board shall refer one copy of the petition to the governing
body. Regardless of the Joint Zoning Board of Appeals/Planning
Commission's action on the petition, the developer or its successor
will have no right to a refund of any moneys, fees or charges
paid to the City of Oneida nor to the return of any property or
consideration dedicated or delivered to the municipality except as
may have previously been agreed to by the Joint Zoning Board
of Appeals/Planning Commission, the Common Council and the
developer.
B. Government-initiated plat vacation.
(1) General conditions. The Joint Zoning Board of Appeals/Planning
Commission, on its motion, may vacate the plat of an approved
subdivision when:
(a) No lots within the approved subdivision have been sold within
five years from the date that the plat was signed by the
Chairman of the Joint Zoning Board of Appeals/Planning
Commission.
(b) The developer has breached a subdivision improvement
agreement and the City of Oneida is unable to obtain funds
with which to complete construction of public improvements,
except that the vacation shall apply only to lots owned by the
developer or its successor.
(c) The plat has been of record for more than five years and the
Joint Zoning Board of Appeals/Planning Commission
determines that the further sale of lots within the subdivision
presents a threat to public health, safety and welfare, except
that the vacation shall apply only to lots owned by the
developer or its successor.
(2) Procedure. Upon any motion of the Joint Zoning Board of Appeals/
Planning Commission to vacate the plat of any previously approved
subdivision, in whole or in part, the Joint Zoning Board of Appeals/
Planning Commission shall publish notice in a newspaper of
general circulation and provide personal notice to all property
owners within the subdivision and shall also provide notice to the
Common Council. The notice shall state the time and place for a
public hearing on the motion to vacate the subdivision plat. The
public hearing shall be no sooner than 30 and no later than 45 days
§ 155-39 CHARTER § 155-39
C:615
from the date of the published and personal notice. The Joint
Zoning Board of Appeals/Planning Commission shall approve the
resolution effecting the vacation only if the criteria in Subsection
A(2) of this section are satisfied.
(3) Recordation of notice. If the Joint Zoning Board of Appeals/
Planning Commission adopts a resolution vacating a plat in whole,
it shall record a copy of the resolution in the Clerk's office of
Madison County. If the Joint Zoning Board of Appeals/Planning
Commission adopts a resolution vacating a plat in part, it shall
record a copy of the resolution as described above and cause a
revised final subdivision plat to be recorded which shows that
portion of the original subdivision plat that has been vacated and
that portion that has not been vacated.
§ 155-39 ONEIDA CODE § 155-39
C:616
ARTICLE VII
Document Specifications
§ 155-40. Sketch plat. [Amended 11-8-2017 by L.L. No. 5-2017]
Sketch plats submitted to the Joint Zoning Board of Appeals/Planning
Commission shall be drawn to a convenient scale of not more than 50 feet
to an inch and shall show the following information:
A. Name.
(1) Name of subdivision if property is within an existing subdivision.
(2) Proposed name if not within a previously platted subdivision. The
proposed name shall not duplicate the name of any plat previously
recorded.
(3) Name of property if no subdivision name has been chosen. (This is
commonly the name by which the property is locally known.)
B. Ownership.
(1) Name and address, including telephone number, of legal owner or
agent of property, and citation of last instrument conveying title to
each parcel of property involved in the proposed subdivision, giving
grantor, grantee, date and land records reference.
(2) Citation of any existing legal rights-of-way or easements affecting
the property.
(3) Existing covenants on the property, if any.
(4) Name and address, including telephone number, of the professional
person(s) responsible for subdivision design, for the design of
public improvements and for surveys.
C. Description.
(1) Location of property by government lot, section, municipality,
county, graphic scale, North arrow and date.
(2) Location of property lines, existing easements, burial grounds,
railroad rights-of-way, watercourses and existing wooded areas or
trees eight inches or more in diameter, measured four feet above
ground level; location, width, and names of all existing or platted
streets or other public ways within or immediately adjacent to the
tract; names of adjoining property owners from the latest
assessment rolls within 500 feet of any perimeter boundary of the
subdivision.
(3) Location, sizes, elevations, and slopes of existing sewers, water
mains, culverts, and other underground structures within the tract
and immediately adjacent thereto; existing permanent building and
§ 155-40 CHARTER § 155-40
C:617
§ 155-41. Preliminary plat.
utility poles on or immediately adjacent to the site and utility
rights-of-way.
(4) Approximate topography, at the same scale as the sketch plat.
(5) The approximate location and widths of proposed streets.
(6) Preliminary proposals for connection with existing water supply
and sanitary sewage systems or alternative means of providing
water supply and sanitary waste treatment and disposal;
preliminary provisions for collecting and discharging surface water
drainage.
(7) The approximate location, dimensions, and areas of all proposed or
existing lots.
(8) The approximate location, dimensions and area of all parcels of
land proposed to be set aside for park or playground use or other
public use, or for the use of property owners in the proposed
subdivision.
(9) The location of temporary stakes to enable the Joint Zoning Board
of Appeals/Planning Commission to find and appraise features of
the sketch plat in the field.
(10) Whenever the sketch plat covers only a part of an applicant's
contiguous holdings, the applicant shall submit, at the scale of no
more than 100 feet to the inch, a sketch in pen or pencil of the
proposed subdivision area, together with its proposed street
system and an indication of the probable future street system, and
an indication of the probable future street and drainage system of
the remaining portion of the tract.
(11) A vicinity map showing streets and other general development of
the surrounding area. The sketch plat shall show all school and
improvement district lines with the zones properly designated.
A. General. The preliminary plat shall be prepared by a professional
engineer or a licensed land surveyor at a convenient scale not more
than one inch equals 50 feet, may be prepared in pen or pencil and the
sheets shall be numbered in sequence if more than one sheet is used
and shall be of such size as is acceptable for filing in the Madison
County Clerk's office, but shall not be 34 x 44 inches or larger. The map
prepared for the preliminary plat may also be used for the final
subdivision plat and, therefore, should be drawn on tracing cloth or
reproducible Mylar.
B. Features. The preliminary plat shall show the following:
(1) The location of property with respect to surrounding property and
streets, the names of all adjoining property owners of record or the
§ 155-40 ONEIDA CODE § 155-41
C:618
names of all adjoining developments; the names of adjoining
streets.
(2) The location and dimensions of all boundary lines of the property to
be expressed in feet and decimals of a foot.
(3) The location of existing streets, easements, water bodies, streams
and other pertinent features such as swamps, railroads, buildings,
parks, cemeteries, drainage ditches and bridges, as determined by
the Joint Zoning Board of Appeals/Planning Commission.
[Amended 11-8-2017 by L.L. No. 5-2017]
(4) The location and width of all existing and proposed streets and
easements, alleys and other public ways and easement and
proposed street rights-of-way and building setback lines.
(5) The locations, dimensions and areas of all proposed or existing lots.
(6) The location and dimensions of all property proposed to be set
aside for park or playground use or other public or private
reservation, with designation of the purpose of those set asides,
and conditions, if any, of the dedication or reservation.
(7) The name and address of the owner or owners of land to be
subdivided, the name and address of the subdivider if other than
the owner and the name of the land surveyor or civil engineer.
(8) The date of the map, approximate true North point, scale and title
of the subdivision.
(9) Sufficient data acceptable to the City Engineer to determine readily
the location, bearing, and length of all lines and to reproduce such
lines upon the ground; the location of all proposed monuments.
(10) Names of the subdivision and all new streets as approved by the
Joint Zoning Board of Appeals/Planning Commission. [Amended
11-8-2017 by L.L. No. 5-2017]
(11) Indication of the use of any lot (single-family, two-family,
multifamily, townhouse) and all uses other than residential
proposed by the subdivider.
(12) Blocks shall be consecutively numbered or lettered in alphabetical
order. The blocks in numbered additions to subdivision bearing the
same name shall be numbered or lettered consecutively throughout
the several additions.
(13) All lots in each block shall be consecutively numbered. Outlots shall
be lettered in alphabetical order. If blocks are numbered or
lettered, outlots shall be lettered in alphabetical order within each
block.
§ 155-41 CHARTER § 155-41
C:619
§ 155-42. Construction plans.
(14) All information required on sketch plat should also be shown on the
preliminary plat and the following notation shall also be shown:
(a) Explanation of drainage easements, if any.
(b) Explanation of site easements, if any.
(c) Explanation of reservations, if any.
(d) Endorsement of owner, as follows:
Owner
Date
(15) Form for endorsements by Joint Zoning Board of Appeals/Planning
Commission Chairman as follows: [Amended 11-8-2017 by L.L.
No. 5-2017]
Approved by Resolution of the Joint Zoning Board of Appeals/
Planning Commission:
Chairman
Date
(16) The lack of information under any item specified herein or
improper information supplied by the applicant shall be cause for
disapproval of a preliminary plat.
A. General. Construction plans shall be prepared for all required
improvements. The following shall be shown:
(1) Profiles showing existing and proposed elevations along center
lines of roads. Where a proposed road intersects an existing road or
roads, the elevation along the center line of the existing road or
roads within 100 feet of the intersection, shall be shown.
Information for each vertical curve shall be shown which shall
include at a minimum stationing and elevations for each of the
following: the point of vertical curve (PVC), the point of vertical
intersection (PVI), the point of vertical tangent (PVT) and the high
or low point of the curve, as well as the length of curve (L), and the
distance between the PVI and the vertical curve (ym). Horizontal
scale shall not exceed one inch equals 50 feet; vertical scale shall
not exceed one inch equals five feet. At a minimum, vertical curves
shall be provided whenever a slope change greater than 2% is
proposed.
(2) The Joint Zoning Board of Appeals/Planning Commission may
require, where steep slopes exist, that cross sections of all
proposed streets at fifty-foot stations or any lesser interval as may
be recommended by the City Engineer, be shown as follows: on a
§ 155-41 ONEIDA CODE § 155-42
C:620
line at right angles to the center line of the street; said elevation
points shall be at the center line of the street; each property line;
and points 25 feet inside each property line. [Amended 11-8-2017
by L.L. No. 5-2017]
(3) Plans showing the locations of street pavements including curbs
and gutters, sidewalks, drainage easements, rights-of-way,
manholes and catch basins; the locations of street trees,
streetlighting standards, and street signs; the location, size, and
invert elevations of noting and proposed sanitary sewers,
stormwater drains, and fire hydrants, showing connection to any
existing or proposed utility systems; and exact location and size of
all water, gas, or other underground utilities or structures. Scale
shall not exceed one inch equals 50 feet. Roadway stationing shall
be shown at fifty-foot intervals. Information for each horizontal
curve shall be shown which shall include at a minimum stationing
for each of the following: the beginning point of curve (PC), the
point of intersection (PI), and the end point of curve (PT), as well as
the arc length of curve (L), the radius of the curve (R), and the
central angle for the curve (0). Each manhole and catch basin/
drainage inlet shall be assigned a reference number which shall
correspond to that shown on the profile drawings as well as show
the station, the invert(s) elevation and rim elevation of that
structure. Curve radii of shall be shown for the curbing at each
intersection.
(4) Profiles showing the stationing of sanitary and storm sewers as well
as manhole and catch basin/drainage inlet. Each structure shall be
assigned a reference number which shall correspond to the site
plan as well as reflect the elevations of the inlet, outlet and rim.
Pipe shall be drawn to scale between structures and the slopes of
pipes shall be shown as a percent grade. Each pipe between two
structures shall be assigned a reference number which shall
correspond to that shown in the respective stormwater
management report or sanitary sewer works engineering report.
Horizontal scale shall not exceed one inch equals 50 feet; vertical
scale shall not exceed one inch equals five feet.
(5) Standard construction details agreed upon by the developer and
the City Engineer, but which shall include as a minimum: roadway
cross sections showing the full depth pavement structure, standard
manholes, standard drop manholes, trench cross sections, sanitary
sewer lateral cross sections from main to structure, catch basin/
drainage inlets, manhole channel flows, sewer lateral clean outs,
water service connection from main to inside the building to the
meter, thrust blocks, water and sewer separation requirements,
hydrant details, waterline trench placement, sanitary sewer trench
placement, storm sewer trench placement, concrete encasement,
force main details, curbing, sidewalk, integral curb and sidewalk,
ADA approved curb and sidewalk cuts.
§ 155-42 CHARTER § 155-42
C:621
§ 155-43. Final subdivision plat.
(6) Location, size, elevation, and other appropriate descriptions of any
existing facilities or utilities, including, but not limited to, existing
streets, sewers, drains, water mains, easements, water bodies,
streams and other pertinent features such as swamps, railroads,
buildings, features noted on the Official Map or Comprehensive
Plan, at the point of connection to proposed facilities and utilities
within the subdivision, and each tree with a diameter of eight
inches or more, measured 12 inches above ground level. The water
elevations of adjoining lakes or streams at the date of the survey
and approximate high- and low- water elevations of such lakes or
streams. All elevations shall be referred to the USGS datum plane.
If the subdivision borders a lake, river or stream, the distances and
bearings of a meander line established not less than 20 feet back
from the ordinary high-water mark of such waterways.
(7) Topography at the same scale as the sketch plat with a contour
interval of two feet, referred to sea-level datum. The datum
provided shall be latest applicable United States Coast and
Geodetic Survey datum and should be so noted on the plat.
(8) All specifications and references required by the local governments
construction standards and specifications, including a site-grading
plan for the entire subdivision.
(9) Notation of approval as follows: [Amended 11-8-2017 by L.L.
No. 5-2017]
Owner
Date
Joint Zoning Board of Appeals/Planning
Commission Chairman
Date
(10) Title, name, address, and signature of professional Engineer and
Surveyor and date revision dates.
(11) Narrative construction notes as agreed upon between the
developer and the City Engineer.
(12) As built drawings reflecting the final construction of all
infrastructure.
A. General. The final subdivision plat shall be presented in India ink on
tracing cloth or reproducible Mylar at the same scale and contain the
same information, except for any changes or additions required by
resolution of the Joint Zoning Board of Appeals/Planning Commission,
as shown on the preliminary plat. The preliminary plat may be used as
the final subdivision plat if it meets these requirements and is revised in
§ 155-42 ONEIDA CODE § 155-43
C:622
accordance with the Joint Zoning Board of Appeals/Planning
Commission's resolution. All revision dates must be shown as well as
the following: [Amended 11-8-2017 by L.L. No. 5-2017]
(1) Notation of any self-imposed restrictions and locations of any
building lines proposed to be established in this manner, if required
by the Joint Zoning Board of Appeals/Planning Commission in
accordance with these regulations.
(2) Endorsement of the Madison County Health Department.
(3) Endorsement on the plat by every person having a security interest
in the subdivision property that they are subordinating their liens
to all covenants, servitudes, and easements imposed on the
property.
(4) Lots numbered as approved by the City Assessor.
(5) All monuments erected, corners, and other points established in
the field in their proper places. The material of which the
monuments, corners or other points are made shall be noted at the
representation thereof or by legend, except that lot corners need
not be shown. The legend for metal monuments shall indicate the
kind of metal, the diameter, length and weight per lineal foot of the
monuments.
B. Preparation. The final subdivision plat shall be prepared by a Land
Surveyor or a Civil Engineer licensed by the State of New York.
§ 155-43 CHARTER § 155-43
C:623
Chapter 159
SWIMMING POOLS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 34. Zoning — See Ch. 190.
§ 159-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
SWIMMING POOL — A receptacle for water or an artificial pool of water
having a depth at any point of more than two feet intended for the purpose
of immersion or partial immersion therein of human beings, and including
all appurtenant equipment.
§ 159-2. Responsibility for structural design.
The city, its officials and/or representatives shall not be responsible for the
structural design of a swimming pool or the adequacy of the appurtenances.
§ 159-3. Construction permit and certificate of approval; fee.
[Amended 12-17-1991 by Ord. No. 91-11; 7-15-2004 by Ord. No.
04-02]
It shall be unlawful to proceed with the construction, installation,
enlargement or alteration of any private residential swimming pool and
appurtenances within the City unless a permit therefor shall have been
first been obtained from the City Engineer. Such permits shall be obtained
by the contractor or the person responsible for the actual construction.
Said person must be prepared to show that he or she carries adequate
liability, property damage and workers' compensation insurance. The fee
for such a permit shall be $50, plus certificate of compliance fee, for any
inground and any metal-wall swimming pool that can contain more than
24 inches of water depth, or $5 plus certificate of compliance fee for any
seasonal, inflatable, inflatable ring, self-set or "kiddie" swimming pools that
can contain more than 24 inches of water depth. Fees shall be submitted
with the plans and specifications submitted with the application for permit.
The contractor obtaining a permit shall notify the City Engineer when the
work is in progress. Before the pool can be used, a certificate of approval
shall be obtained from the City Engineer.
§ 159-4. Fences.
A. All outdoor swimming pools shall be completely enclosed around a
rigid-wall pool or yard by a forty-eight-inch fence except where the top
of a rigid-wall pool is constructed at least 48 inches above the
§ 155-43 ONEIDA CODE § 159-4
C:624
§ 159-5. Penalties for offenses.
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor.
surrounding yard elevation and the means of access ladder or steps are
capable of being locked, secured or removed to prevent access, or they
must be surrounded by a forty-eight-inch-high barrier at the bottom of
the access, which shall be kept locked when the pool is not in use. The
space between the vertical supports of the railing shall be screened
with a one-and-three-fourths-inch No. 9 gauge wire mesh or other
material. [Amended 12-19-2000 by L.L. No. 6-2000; 7-15-2004 by
Ord. No. 04-02; 8-3-2010 by Ord. No. 10-04]
B. Fencing and gates shall be at least four feet but not more than six feet
in height above the elevation of the ground where the fence is to be
erected. The fabric shall be composed of individual wire pickets
helically wound and woven from No. 9 gauge wire to form a continuous
chain-link fabric having a two-inch mesh. The bottom edge shall have a
twisted and barbed finish and the top edge shall be knuckled. Line posts
shall be at least one-and-five-eighths-inch O.D. standard pipe, with a
weight of at least 2.27 pounds per foot, spaced approximately 10 feet
apart. The top rail shall be one-and-three-eighths-inch O.D. standard
pipe, with a weight of at least 1.68 pounds per foot. All end, corner and
gate posts shall be two-inch O.D. standard pipe, with a weight of at least
2.72 pounds per foot. All posts shall be set in concrete according to the
fence manufacturer's instructions. Gates shall be constructed of oneand-
three-eighths-inch O.D. standard pipe, with a weight of at least 1.68
pounds per foot, and with a welded frame filled with fabric to match the
fence. Gates shall be equipped with a latch which shall automatically
engage a pin welded in the gate frame and shall be the type that can be
readily locked with a padlock which shall be kept locked when the pool
is not in use. All pipe framework and other ferrous materials shall be
hot-galvanized.
C. Fence construction may also be wood construction or similar when
adequately supported by wooden posts properly treated to prevent
deterioration below the ground surface. The height requirements shall
be the same as specified for wire enclosures. The fence shall also be of
tight construction sufficient to prevent ingress and egress except
through a properly designed gate which shall be kept locked when not
in use. [Amended 8-3-2010 by Ord. No. 10-04]
D. Buildings contiguous to the area to be fenced may be used to form a
part of the enclosure if the fencing is constructed to a point where the
fence alignment intersects the adjacent building. Any door opening
from a dwelling, garage or shed-type structure to the pool area shall be
equipped with a self-closing device and passage alarm as per New York
State code requirements.50 [Amended 8-3-2010 by Ord. No. 10-04]
50.Editor's Note: See Ch. 33, Building Code Administration and Enforcement.
§ 159-4 CHARTER § 159-5
C:625
Chapter 165
TAXATION
§ 159-5 ONEIDA CODE § 159-5
C:626
ARTICLE I
Senior Citizen Exemption
[Adopted by L.L. No. 2-1972]
§ 165-1. Granted; computation; effect of death of spouse. [As last
amended 3-19-1991 by L.L. No. 2-1991]
§ 165-2. Conditions for exemption. [As last amended 9-21-1999 by
L.L. No. 3-1999]
No exemption shall be granted:
A. Real property owned by one or more persons, each of whom is 65 years
of age or over, or real property owned by husband and wife, one of
whom is 65 years of age or over, shall be exempt from taxation to the
extent not exceeding 50% of the assessed valuation thereof, subject to
the provisions of this article, and according to the schedule set forth in
§ 165-2A. Such exemption shall be computed after all other partial
exemptions allowed by law have been subtracted from the total amount
assessed.
B. The real property tax exemption on the real property owned by husband
and wife, one of whom is 65 years of age or over, once granted, shall not
be rescinded solely because of the death of the older spouse so long as
the surviving spouse is at least 62 years of age.
A. If the income of the owner or the combined income of the owners of the
property for the income tax year immediately preceding the date of
making application for exemption exceeds the sum of $22,500.
[Amended 9-4-2007 by L.L. No. 4-2007]
(1) Income in a lesser amount, subject to the provisions of this article,
shall entitle owner or owners to an exemption according to the
following schedule:
Annual Income
Percentage Assessed
Valuation Exempt from
Taxation
$15,000 and less 50%
$15,001 but less than $16,000 45%
$16,001 but less than $17,000 40%
$17,001 but less than $18,000 35%
$18,001 but less than $18,900 30%
$18,901 but less than $19,800 25%
$19,801 but less than $20,700 20%
$20,701 but less than $21,600 15%
$21,601 but less than $22,500 10%
§ 165-1 CHARTER § 165-2
C:627
(2) "Income tax year" shall mean the twelve-month period for which
the owner or owners filed a federal personal income tax return or, if
no such return is filed, the calendar year. Where title is vested in
either the husband or the wife, their combined income may not
exceed such sum. Such income shall include social security and
retirement benefits, interest, dividends, total gain from the sale or
exchange of a capital asset which may be offset by a loss from the
sale or exchange of a capital asset in the same income tax year, net
rental income, salary or earnings, and net income from selfemployment,
but shall not include a return of capital, gifts, or
inheritances. In computing net rental income and net income from
self-employment, no depreciation deduction shall be allowed for
the exhaustion or wear and tear of real or personal property held
for the production of income. There shall be excluded from income
all medical and prescription expenses which are not reimbursed or
paid by insurance.
B. Unless the title of the property shall have been vested in the owner or
one of the owners of the property for at least 12 consecutive months
prior to the date of making application for exemption; provided,
however, that in the event of the death of either a husband or wife in
whose name title of the property shall have been vested at the time of
death and then becomes vested solely in the survivor by virtue of devise
by or descent from the deceased husband or wife, the time of ownership
of the property by the deceased husband or wife shall be deemed also a
time of ownership by the survivor and such ownership shall be deemed
continuous for the purposes of computing such period of 12 consecutive
months. In the event of a transfer by either a husband or wife to the
other spouse of all or part of the title to the property, the time of
ownership of the property by the transferor spouse shall be deemed
also a time of ownership by the transferee spouse and such ownership
shall be deemed continuous for the purposes of computing such period
of 12 consecutive months. Where property of the owner or owners has
been acquired to replace property formerly owned by such owner or
owners and taken by eminent domain or other involuntary proceeding,
except a tax sale, the period of ownership of the former property shall
be combined with the period of ownership of the property for which
application is made for exemption and such periods of ownership shall
be deemed to be consecutive for purposes of this section. Where a
residence is sold and replaced with another within one year and both
residences are within the state, the period of ownership of both
properties shall be deemed consecutive for purposes of the exemption
from taxation by a municipality within the state granting such
exemption. [Amended 12-19-2000 by L.L. No. 6-2000]
C. Unless the property is used exclusively for residential purposes;
provided, however, that in the event any portion of such property is not
so used exclusively for residential purposes but is used for other
purposes, such portion shall be subject to taxation and the remaining
portion only shall be entitled to the exemption provided by this section.
§ 165-2 ONEIDA CODE § 165-2
C:628
§ 165-3. Application for exemption. [As last amended 3-19-1991 by
L.L. No. 2-1991]
Application for such exemption must be made by the owner or all of the
owners of the property, on forms prescribed by the City of Oneida pursuant
to law, and which shall furnish the information and be executed in the
manner required or prescribed in such forms, and shall be filed in such
Assessor's office on or before May 1 of each year. Any person otherwise
qualifying under this article shall not be denied the exemption under this
article if he or she becomes 65 years of age after the May 1 taxable status
date and on or before December 31 of the same year.
§ 165-4. Mailing of notice and application by City. [Amended by L.L.
No. 4-1974; 3-4-1987 by L.L. No. 2-1987]
At least 60 days prior to the taxable status date, May 1, the Assessor's
office shall mail to each person who is granted exemption pursuant to this
article on the latest completed assessment roll an application form and a
notice that such application must be filed on or before taxable status date
and be approved in order for the exemption to be granted. The Assessor's
office shall, within three days of the completion and filing of the tentative
assessment roll, notify by mail any applicant who has included with his
application at least one self-addressed, prepaid envelope, of the approval or
denial of the application; provided, however, that the Assessor's office shall,
upon the receipt and filing of the application, send by mail notification of
receipt to any applicant who has included two of such envelopes with the
application. Where an applicant is entitled to a notice of denial pursuant
to this section, such notice shall be on a form prescribed by the City of
Oneida pursuant to law and shall state the reasons for such denial and shall
further state that the applicant may have such determination reviewed in
the manner provided by law. Failure to mail any such application form or
notices or the failure of such person to receive any of the same shall not
prevent the levy, collection and enforcement of the payment of the taxes on
property owned by such person.
D. Unless the property is the legal residence of and is occupied in whole or
in part by the owner or by all of the owners of the property, provided
that an owner who is absent while receiving health-related care as an
inpatient of a residential health care facility, as defined in § 2801 of the
Public Health Law, shall be deemed to remain a legal resident and an
occupant of the property while so confined and income accruing to that
person shall be income only to the extent that it exceeds the amount
paid by such owner, spouse or co-owner for care in the facility; and
provided, further, that during such confinement such property is not
occupied by other than the spouse or co-owner of such owner.
§ 165-2 CHARTER § 165-5
C:629
§ 165-5. Late filing of application for exemption. [Added 11-8-1995
by L.L. No. 3-1995]
Notwithstanding §§ 165-3 and 165-4 hereof, an application for such
exemption may be filed with the Assessor after taxable status date but not
later than the last date on which a petition with respect to complaints of
assessment may be filed, where failure to file a timely application resulted
from a death of the applicant's spouse, child, parent, brother or sister; or an
illness of the applicant or of the applicant's spouse, child, parent, brother or
sister, which actually prevents the applicant from filing on a timely basis, as
certified by a licensed physician. The Assessor shall approve or deny such
application as if it had been filed on or before the taxable status date.
§ 165-6. False statements in application for exemption; penalties
for offenses. [As last amended 11-8-1995 by L.L. No. 3-1995]
Any conviction of having made any willful false statement in the application
for such exemption shall be punishable by a fine of not more than $100
and shall disqualify the applicant or applicants from further exemption for
a period of five years.
§ 165-5 ONEIDA CODE § 165-6
C:630
ARTICLE II
Exemption for the Physically Disabled
[Adopted 4-19-1988 by L.L. No. 2-1988]
§ 165-7. Granted; applicability.
An improvement to any real property used solely for residential purposes
as a one-, two- or three-family residence shall be exempt from taxation to
the extent of any increase in value attributable to such improvement if such
improvement is used for the purpose of facilitating and accommodating the
use and accessibility of such real property by a resident owner of the real
property who is physically disabled, or a member of the resident owner's
household who is physically disabled, if such member resides in the real
property.
§ 165-8. Qualification. [Amended 12-19-2000 by L.L. No. 6-2000]
To qualify as physically disabled for the purposes of this article, an
individual shall submit to the Assessor a certified statement from a
physician licensed to practice in the State of New York on a form prescribed
and made available by the State Board of Real Property Services which
states that the individual has a permanent physical impairment which
substantially limits one or more of such individual's major life activities,
except that an individual who has obtained a certificate from the State
Commission for the Blind and Visually Handicapped stating that such
individual is legally blind may submit such certificate in lieu of a physician's
certified statement.
§ 165-9. Application.
The exemptions set forth herein shall be granted only upon application by
the owner or all of the owners of the real property on a form prescribed
and made available by the State Board. The applicant shall furnish such
information as the Board shall require. The application shall be filed
together with the appropriate certified statement of physical disability or
certificate of blindness with the Assessor of the City of Oneida on or before
the date of taxable status.
§ 165-10. Approval.
If the Assessor is satisfied that the improvement is necessary to facilitate
and accommodate the use and accessibility by a resident who is physically
disabled and that the applicant is entitled to an exemption pursuant to this
article, the Assessor shall approve the application and enter the taxable
assessed value of the parcel for which an exemption has been granted
pursuant to this article on the assessment roll with the taxable property,
with the amount of the exemption as determined pursuant to § 165-7 of this
article in a separate column. Once granted the exemption shall continue on
the real property until the improvements cease to be necessary to facilitate
§ 165-7 CHARTER § 165-10
C:631
and accommodate the use and accessibility of the property by the resident
who is physically disabled.
§ 165-10 ONEIDA CODE § 165-10
C:632
ARTICLE III
Collection of Property Taxes
[Adopted 6-21-1994 by L.L. No. 2-1994]
§ 165-11. City tax enforcement provisions to remain in effect.
[Amended 12-19-2000 by L.L. No. 6-2000]
Pursuant to § 6 of Chapter 602 of the Laws of 1993, the City of Oneida
hereby acts by local law, not subject to referendum, to provide the collection
of property taxes shall continue to be enforced pursuant to the provisions
of the City Charter of the City of Oneida, as may from time to time be
amended.
§ 165-11 CHARTER § 165-11
C:633

ARTICLE IV
Partial Exemption for Persons With Income Limited by Disability
[Adopted 4-21-1998 by L.L. No. 2-1998]
§ 165-12. Conditions for exemption; penalties for offenses.
A. Pursuant to the provisions of § 459-c of the Real Property Tax Law of the
State of New York, real property located in the City of Oneida, owned by
one or more persons each of whom is disabled and whose income is
limited by reason of such disability, or real property owned by husband
and wife, or siblings, one of whom is disabled and whose income is
limited by reason of such disability, shall be partially exempt from
taxation by said City for the applicable taxes specified in § 459-c based
upon the income of the owner or combined income of the owners. Such
partial exemption shall be to the extent set forth in the schedule
following:
Annual Income of Owner or
Combined Annual Income of
Owner
Percentage Assessed Valuation
Exempt from Taxation
Less than $12,000 50%
Equal to or more than $12,000
but less than $13,000
45%
Equal to or more than $13,000
but less than $14,000
40%
Equal to or more than $14,000
but less than $15,000
35%
Equal to or more than $15,000
but less than $15,900
30%
Equal to or more than $15,900
but less than $16,800
25%
Equal to or more than $16,800
but less than $17,700
20%
Equal to or more than $17,700
but less than $18,600
15%
Equal to or more than $18,600
but less than $19,500
10%
Equal to or more than $19,500
but less than $20,400
5%
B. The partial exemption provided by this article shall, however, be limited
to such property and persons as meet the conditions, income and other
qualifications, exclusions and limitations set forth in § 459-c of the Real
Property Tax Law of the State of New York. This article shall be
administered in accordance with said sections of the Real Property Tax
Law, as now adopted, and as they may be amended from time to time,
§ 165-12 CHARTER § 165-12
C:635
and the provisions of said statute as provided in § 459-c shall be
applicable to the effectuation of the exemption provided for in this
article.
C. Title to that portion of real property owned by a cooperative apartment
corporation in which a tenant-stockholder of such corporation resides,
and which is represented by his share or shares of stock in such
corporation as determined by its or their proportional relationship to
the total outstanding stock of the corporation, including that owned by
the corporation, shall be deemed to be vested in such tenantstockholder.
D. Application for such exemption must be made by the owner or all of the
owners of the property on forms prescribed by the State Board of Real
Property Services furnished by the City of Oneida Assessment Office
and shall furnish the information and be executed in the manner
required or prescribed in such forms, and shall be filed in the
Assessment Office on or before the appropriate taxable status date.
[Amended 12-19-2000 by L.L. No. 6-2000]
E. A conviction for having made a willful false statement on the application
for such exemption shall be punishable by a fine of not more than $250
and shall disqualify the applicant or applicants from further exemption
for a period of five years.
§ 165-12 ONEIDA CODE § 165-12
C:636
ARTICLE V
Capital Improvements to Residential Buildings
[Adopted 10-6-1998 by L.L. No. 4-1998]
§ 165-13. Conditions for exemption.
A. Residential buildings reconstructed, altered or improved, with proper
building permits and inspections, subsequent to the enactment of this
article shall be exempt from taxation to the extent and for the duration
provided for in § 421-f of the Real Property Tax Law, as follows:
Year Exemption Percentage
1 100%
2 87.5%
3 75%
4 62.5%
5 50%
6 37.5%
7 25%
8 12.5%
B. Such exemption shall be limited to $80,000 in increased market value of
the property attributable to such reconstruction, alteration and
improvement.
C. To be eligible, no such reconstruction, alteration or improvement shall
commence without the prior issuance of a building permit by the City of
Oneida Code Enforcement Officer for said capital improvements.
D. Such exemption shall be granted only upon application by the owner of
such building on a form prescribed by the State Board of Real Property
Services. The original of such application shall be filed with the
Assessor's office on or before taxable status date. [Amended
12-19-2000 by L.L. No. 6-2000]
E. For purposes of computing eligibility for this exemption, separate
projects may be combined and deemed to be a single project, so long as
each individual project meets the capital improvements requirements
hereof and all such projects are completed within a single annual period
commencing on May 1 of any year and ending on April 30 of the
following year.
F. For purposes of this exemption, the terms "reconstruction," "alteration"
and "improvement" shall not include ordinary maintenance and repairs.
G. The term "residential building" shall mean any building or structure
designed and occupied exclusively for residential purposes by not more
than two families.
§ 165-13 CHARTER § 165-13
C:637
H. In the event that a building granted an exemption pursuant to this
provision ceases to be used primarily for residential purposes or title
thereto is transferred to other than the heirs or distributees of the
owner, the exemption granted pursuant to this article shall cease.
§ 165-13 ONEIDA CODE § 165-13
C:638
ARTICLE VI
Alternative Veterans Exemption.
[Adopted 6-1-1999 by L.L. No. 1-1999]
§ 165-14. Exemption granted. [Amended 9-4-2007 by L.L. No.
3-2007]
A. An alternative veterans exemption is hereby provided for and ordained
on real property taxes in the City of Oneida pursuant to § 458-a of the
Real Property Tax Law, but subject to the qualifications, limitations and
application procedures stated in said section.
B. The maximum exemption allowable under Paragraphs (a), (b) and (c) of
Subdivision 2 of said statute is hereby stated to be $9,000, $6,000, and
$30,000, respectively, as authorized by Paragraph (d)(ii) of said
subdivision, and said monetary limits shall not be varied unless
changed by amendment to this article.
§ 165-14 CHARTER § 165-14
C:639

ARTICLE VII
Exemption for First-Time Homeowners of Newly Constructed or
Improved Homes
[Adopted 8-6-2002 by L.L. No. 2-2002]
§ 165-15. Grant of exemption.
Newly constructed primary residential property purchased by one or more
persons, each of whom is a first time homebuyer, meeting the application,
ownership, residency, income, use and other pertinent requirements of
§ 457 of the Real Property Tax Law, shall receive an exemption from City
property taxed in accordance with the following schedule:
Year of Exemption
Percentage Assessed Valuation
Exempt From Tax
1 50%
2 40%
3 30%
4 20%
5 10%
6 or more 0%
§ 165-16. Definitions.
For purposes of this exemption:
FIRST-TIME HOMEBUYER — A person who has not owned a primary
residential property and is not married to a person who has owned a
primary residential property during the three-year period prior to his or her
purchase of primary residential property, and who does not own a vacation
or investment home.
NEWLY CONSTRUCTED — An improvement to real property which was
constructed as a primary residential property, and which has never been
occupied and was after November 28, 2001, and shall also mean that
a portion of a primary residential property that is altered, improved or
reconstructed.
PRIMARY RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY — Any one- or two-family house,
townhouse or condominium located in this state which is owner occupied by
such homebuyer.
§ 165-17. Applicability of exemption.
A first-time homebuyer who either as part of the written contract for sale
of the primary residential property, or who enters into a written contract
within 90 days after closing of the sale of the primary residence for
reconstruction, alteration or improvements, the value of which exceeds
$3,000, to the primary residential property shall be exempt from taxation
to the extent provided above. However, such exemption shall apply solely
§ 165-15 CHARTER § 165-17
C:641
to the increase in assessed value attributable to such reconstruction,
alteration or improvement, provided that the assessed value after
reconstruction, alteration, or improvements does not exceed 15% more
than the purchase price limits defined in § 457(2)(a) of the Real Property
Tax Law. The terms reconstruction, alteration and improvement shall not
include ordinary maintenance and repairs.
§ 165-18. Application for exemption required.
Such exemption shall be granted only upon application by the owner of
such building on a form prescribed by the New York Board of Real Property
Services and filed in the assessor's office on or before May 1.
§ 165-19. Income limits.
A first-time homebuyer shall not qualify for this exemption if the household
income exceeds income limits as defined on January 1, 2002, by the State
of New York Mortgage Agency low-interest-rate mortgage program in the
nontarget, one- and two-person household category for Madison County.
§ 165-20. Eligibility for exemption.
A. Any newly constructed primary residential real property within the
purchase price limits as defined January 1, 2002, by the State of New
York Mortgage Agency low-interest-rate mortgage program in the
nontarget, one-family new category for Madison County shall be
eligible for this exemption. Furthermore, if such property is purchased
at a sales price greater than the maximum eligible sales price, but not
more than 15% above the maximum eligible sales price, it shall qualify
for the exemption for that portion of the sales price equal to the
maximum eligible sales price.
B. No exemption shall be allowed for any newly constructed primary
residential property purchased on or after December 31, 2002, unless
such purchase is pursuant to a binding written contract entered into
prior such date.
§ 165-17 ONEIDA CODE § 165-20
C:642
ARTICLE VIII
Exemption for Mixed-Use Properties
[Adopted 5-3-2005 by L.L. No. 1-2005]
§ 165-21. Conditions for exemption; amount.
A. Nonresidential real property that is converted to the structure used for
both residential and commercial purposes is eligible for partial
exemption from taxation and special ad valorem levies, provided the
cost of conversion exceeds $10,000.
B. The amount of the exemption is calculated as a percentage of the
exemption base, which is the increase in assessed value of the property
attributable to conversion to a mixed-use property. This base should be
determined for each year in which there is an increase in assessed
value attributable to conversion from that of the previous year's
assessed value. The exemption is computed as indicated below:
Year of Exemption Percentage of Exemption Base
1 through 8 100%
9 80%
10 60%
11 40%
12 20%
C. The property receiving said exemption may not currently receive any
other exemption, except where during the period of any such prior
exemption, payments in lieu of taxes or other payments were made to
the local government in an amount that would have been equal to or
greater than the amount of real property taxes that would have been
paid on the improvements had the property received this exemption.
D. The facility must be owned or operated by a private or public individual
or organization. The portion devoted to residential construction work
may not include dwelling units in a hotel. The cost of conversion must
be at least $10,000. Such conversion costs may not include ordinary
maintenance and repairs.
E. Said exemption applies only to construction that commenced
subsequent to the date on which this article takes effect.
F. To be eligible, no such construction shall commence without the prior
issuance of a building permit by the City of Oneida Codes Enforcement
Officer.
G. Such exemption shall be granted only upon application by the owner of
such building on a form prescribed by the State Board. The original of
such application shall be filed with the Assessor's office on or before the
taxable status date.
§ 165-21 CHARTER § 165-21
C:643
H. Progress on said construction shall be reviewed by the Assessor and/or
Codes Officer on a six-month basis until construction is complete.
I. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the provisions of this article will not
result in exemption from special assessments.
§ 165-21 ONEIDA CODE § 165-21
C:644
ARTICLE IX
Exemption for Residential Subdivision Infrastructure
[Adopted 5-3-2005 by L.L. No. 2-2005]
§ 165-22. Conditions for exemption; amount.
A. Residential building lots which are part of a subdivision plat for
residential development which includes infrastructure intended to be
dedicated to the City are exempt from taxation to the extent of the
increased assessed value of such lots resulting from the addition of
such infrastructure.
B. The duration of the exemption extends from the time the exemption is
granted until the issuance of the certificate of occupancy, but in no
event longer than three years following the granting of the exemption.
C. To be eligible, the property must be owned by a private individual or
organization.
D. The property must be used as infrastructure on residential building lots
as described above. For purposes of this exemption, infrastructure is
comprised of the following public facilities which are intended to be
dedicated to the City: streets, storm and sanitary sewers, drainage
facilities and any other facilities required by the municipality to be
installed in such residential subdivisions as noted on the filed plat plan
for such residential subdivision.
E. The owner of the subdivision must file a subdivision plat which shows
the facilities which comprise the infrastructure eligible for this
exemption.
F. The exemption applies to the increase in assessed value of the eligible
property resulting from the addition of the infrastructure and
proportionately applied to each lot in the subdivision. No exemption
should be applied to any such lot on which a certificate of occupancy
has been issued.
G. The exemption available upon satisfaction of the provisions of the
article does not exempt the property from ad valorem levies and special
assessments.
H. Such exemption shall be granted only upon application by the owner of
the property on a form prescribed by the State Board. The original of
such application shall be filed with the Assessor's office on or before the
taxable status date and not later than one year from the date of
completion of the infrastructure construction, installation or
improvement.
§ 165-22 CHARTER § 165-22
C:645
Chapter 169
TAXICABS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 180.
§ 165-22 ONEIDA CODE § 165-22
C:646
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 169-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
TAXICAB — Includes any vehicle used to carry passengers for hire but not
operating on a fixed route. Medical transport services are not considered a
taxicab for the purpose of this chapter.[Amended 5-1-2012 by Ord. No.
12-02]
§ 169-2. Duty to give efficient service.
It shall be the duty of the driver of any taxicab to accept as a passenger any
person who seeks to so use the taxicab, provided that such person conducts
himself in an orderly manner. No person shall be admitted to a taxicab
occupied by a passenger without the consent of the passenger. The driver
shall take his passenger to his destination by the most direct, available
route from the place where the passenger enters the cab.
§ 169-3. Rates and charges. [Amended 5-1-2012 by Ord. No. 12-02]
A taxicab shall post conspicuously upon the inside of the driver's side rear
window its rates. Such posting shall be in clear and concise language and
visible to those entering the cab and shall indicate the amount to be charged
or the formula for calculating the fare in terms of amounts to be charged
within a certain area or based upon mileage.
§ 169-4. Penalties for offenses.
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor.
§ 169-1 CHARTER § 169-4
C:647

ARTICLE II
Business License
§ 169-5. Required.
No person shall engage in the business of operating a taxicab without a
license issued by the City Clerk.
§ 169-6. Application.
Applications for a taxicab business license shall be made in writing to the
City Clerk on forms provided by the Clerk, which shall state thereon the
name of the applicant, the intended place of business and the number of
cabs to be operated and such other information as the City Clerk may deem
necessary. If the applicant is a corporation, the names and addresses of the
President and Secretary thereof shall be given.
§ 169-7. Persons eligible. [Amended 5-1-2012 by Ord. No. 12-02]
No taxicab business license shall be issued to or held by any persons that
have been convicted of a violent felony as outlined in § 70.02 of the New
York State Penal Law, a felony related to narcotics, or a registered sex
offender, nor shall such license be issued to or held by any corporation if
any officer thereof would be ineligible for a license under the foregoing
conditions.
§ 169-8. Fee. [Amended 9-1-1987 by Ord. No. 87-10]
§ 169-9. Term.
A taxicab business license shall expire at the end of the calendar year for
which it was issued.
§ 169-10. Revocation or suspension.
After a hearing affording due process, the Mayor may suspend or revoke
any license issued pursuant to the provisions of this article if its holder
has violated any of the provisions of this chapter. A person whose license
has been suspended or revoked may appeal such decision to the Common
A. The annual fee, payable in advance, for such license shall be
established by resolution of the Common Council. A fee for each taxicab
operated shall be established by resolution of the Common Council.
Such fees may thereafter be amended from time to time by like
resolutions. Whenever the number of cabs so operated shall be
increased during the license year, the licensee shall notify the City
Clerk of such change and shall pay the additional fee. [Amended
11-20-2012 by Ord. No. 12-09]
B. The licensee shall notify the Clerk of the motor number and state
license number of each cab operated.
§ 169-5 CHARTER § 169-10
C:649
Council by requesting a hearing before the Council. Such requests shall be
made within 10 days. After receipt of notice of the action of the Mayor, the
Council shall then hear and decide the matter within a reasonable time.
§ 169-10 ONEIDA CODE § 169-10
C:650
ARTICLE III
Drivers
§ 169-11. Chauffeur's license required.
No person shall drive a taxicab or be hired or permitted to do so unless he
is duly licensed as a chauffeur.
§ 169-12. Certain persons prohibited. [Amended 5-1-2012 by Ord.
No. 12-02]
No persons that have been convicted of a violent felony as outlined in
§ 70.02 of the New York State Penal Law, a felony related to narcotics, or a
registered sex offender shall be permitted to drive a taxicab.
§ 169-13. Conduct generally.
It shall be unlawful for the driver of a taxicab while on duty to:
§ 169-14. License required.
No person shall drive a taxicab or be hired or permitted to do so unless he
is duly licensed as a taxicab driver by the city.
§ 169-15. Application and issuance. [Amended 5-1-2012 by Ord. No.
12-02]
Each applicant will complete an application form with the City Clerk's
office. Any false statement made on the application will disqualify and bar
the applicant from applying for a period of one year. Each application for
an original taxicab driver's license will be checked by a local police record
check and driver's license check, and the City Clerk shall issue no taxicab
driver's license until the applicant meets the requirements as determined
by the local record check.
§ 169-16. Fee, term and renewal. [Amended 9-1-1987 by Ord. No.
87-11; 6-17-2014 by Ord. No. 14-05]
An original license fee as established from time to time by Common Council
resolution shall be paid for a taxicab driver's license, which license shall be
A. Drink any intoxicating liquor or use any illegal drug or drug that
impairs the driver's ability; [Amended 5-1-2012 by Ord. No. 12-02]
B. Use any profane or obscene language;
C. Shout or call to prospective passengers; or
D. Disturb the peace in any way.
E. Commit any crime. [Added 5-1-2012 by Ord. No. 12-02]
§ 169-11 CHARTER § 169-16
C:651
renewable every year thereafter upon payment of the established fee and
approval of the Chief of Police endorsed on the expiring license.
§ 169-17. Suspension or revocation.
A taxicab driver's license or permit may at any time be suspended or
revoked for cause after a hearing by the Commissioner of Public Safety.
When the license or permit is suspended or revoked, a note of the
revocation or suspension shall be forthwith entered in a permanent record
to be kept and maintained for such purpose by the Chief of Police. A second
suspension for the same reason or, in any case, a third suspension of a
driver's license shall revoke the license.
§ 169-18. Records.
A record of taxicab drivers' licenses and permits shall be kept in the office
of the Chief of Police. A complete record of each license or permit issued to
a driver and of all renewals, suspensions and revocations thereof shall be
kept on file with the original application of the driver for a license.
§ 169-16 ONEIDA CODE § 169-18
C:652
ARTICLE IV
Vehicles
§ 169-19. (Reserved)51
§ 169-20. Condition and equipment.
No taxicab shall be operated unless it bears a state license duly executed;
and no taxicab shall be operated unless it is equipped with proper brakes,
lights, tires, horn, muffler, rear-vision mirror and windshield wipers in
good condition. Said vehicle should be clean, fit, of good appearance and
thoroughly safe for the transportation of passengers.
§ 169-21. Identification. [Amended 5-1-2012 by Ord. No. 12-02]
Each taxicab while operated as such shall have posted conspicuously inside
the vehicle the name of the licensee operating it. If more than one taxicab
is operated by a licensee, each vehicle shall be designated by a different
number, and such number also shall so appear on each side of the vehicle.
§ 169-22. Use for criminal purposes.
It shall be unlawful to knowingly permit any taxicab to be used in the
perpetration of any crime or misdemeanor.
§ 169-23. Vehicle license required.
No person shall operate a taxicab unless such vehicle has been licensed by
the City Clerk.
§ 169-24. Application.
A person desiring a taxicab vehicle license shall make written application
to the City Clerk giving the motor number and state license number of the
vehicle to be licensed.
§ 169-25. Fee. [Amended 9-1-1987 by Ord. No. 87-12; 11-20-2012 by
Ord. No. 12-09]
A person desiring the issuance of renewal of a taxicab vehicle license shall
pay a fee established by resolution of the Common Council to the City Clerk.
Such fee may thereafter be amended from time to time by like resolution.
§ 169-26. (Reserved)52
§ 169-27. (Reserved)53
51.Editor’s Note: Former § 169-19, Inspections, as amended, was repealed 6-17-2014 by Ord.
No. 14-05.
52.Editor's Note: Former § 169-26, Maximum number, was repealed 11-18-2014 by L.L. No.
8-2014.
§ 169-19 CHARTER § 169-28
C:653
§ 169-28. Term.
A taxicab vehicle license shall expire at the end of the calendar year.
§ 169-29. Records.
The City Clerk shall keep a register of the name of each person owning or
operating a taxicab licensed under this article, together with the license
number and the description and make of such vehicle with the date and
complete record of inspection made. Such record shall be open to the
inspection of the public at all reasonable times.
§ 169-30. Revocation.
After a hearing affording due process, the Mayor may revoke any license
issued pursuant to the provisions of this article if the vehicle is found to be
in violation of the provisions of this article. A person whose vehicle license
permit has been revoked may appeal such decision to the Common Council
by requesting a hearing before the Council. Such request shall be made
within 10 days after receipt of notice of the action of the Mayor. The Council
shall then hear and decide the matter within a reasonable time.
53.Editor’s Note: Former § 169-27, Issuance, was repealed 6-17-2014 by Ord. No. 14-05.
§ 169-28 ONEIDA CODE § 169-30
C:654
Chapter 172
TRAFFIC SAFETY BOARD
GENERAL REFERENCES
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 180.
§ 172-1. Purpose.
The Common Council of the City of Oneida finds that the reduction of
fatal and serious personal injury motor vehicle accidents occurring on the
streets, roadways, highways, sidewalks or otherwise within the City of
Oneida is vital to the preservation and improvement of the health and safety
of the City's residents as well as those who visit and do business in the City.
The City finds that the establishment of a Traffic Safety Board is essential
to promoting, overseeing and ensuring the safety and security of its streets,
roadways, highways, sidewalks, visitors, businesses and residents. A Traffic
Safety Board can achieve these goals by engaging in a variety of community
outreach efforts including but not limited to educating the public about
safe driving, bicycling and walking habits, supporting law enforcement
agencies to reduce the number of accidents and to increase compliance with
New York State's seatbelt law, and fostering cooperation and partnerships
between all public and private stakeholders including law enforcement,
educators, business leaders and community members.
§ 172-2. Traffic Safety Board established.
§ 172-3. Organization and reports by the Traffic Safety Board.
The City of Oneida Traffic Safety Board shall:
A. There is hereby established the City of Oneida Traffic Safety Board to
be comprised of 10 members interested in traffic safety and traffic
problems within the City of Oneida.
B. Each Traffic Safety Board member shall be appointed by at least the
majority affirmative vote of the total voting power of the City of Oneida
Common Council.
C. Each member shall be a resident of the City of Oneida and a qualified
elector of the City. Each member shall be appointed from the City at
large.
D. The term of office of each member shall be three years, except that
members first appointed shall be appointed as follows: three for a term
of one year; three for a term of two years; and four for a term of three
years. Upon the expiration of the term of office of any member, his/her
successor shall be appointed to membership for a term of three years.
§ 169-30 CHARTER § 172-3
C:655
§ 172-4. Function of Traffic Safety Board.
The City of Oneida Traffic Safety Board is authorized to:
§ 172-5. Severability.
If any section, subsection, paragraph, clause, sentence or phrase of this
chapter is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any Court of
competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct,
and independent provision and such holding shall not affect the validity of
the remaining portion hereof.
Chapter 174
A. Elect annually a chairman, vice chairman and a secretary from its
members and appoint an executive secretary who shall be the executive
and administrative officer of the Board.
B. Adopt rules for the conduct of business.
C. Render annually to the City of Oneida Common Council, and from time
to time as required, a verified account of all moneys received and
expended by it or under its direction and an account of its proceedings
and of other pertinent matters in such form and manner as may be
required by such Board.
A. Promote and encourage street and highway traffic safety.
B. Formulate City-wide highway safety programs and coordinate efforts of
interested parties and agencies engaged in traffic safety education.
C. Cooperate with local officials within the City in the formulation and
execution of traffic safety programs and activities.
D. Study traffic conditions on streets and highways within the City and
analyze reports of accidents and causes thereof, and recommend to the
appropriate legislative bodies, departments or commissions such
changes in rules, orders, regulations and existing law as the Board may
deem advisable.
E. Conduct meetings within the City whenever and wherever the Traffic
Safety Board shall deem it advisable and to invite to such meetings
parties and agencies, public and private, interested in traffic regulation,
control and safety education.
F. Promote safety education for drivers and pedestrians.
G. Obtain and assemble motor vehicle accident data, and to analyze, study
and consolidate such data for educational and informational purposes.
H. Coordinate and direct all local activities related to the implementation
of the state highway safety program, as approved by the Governor or
his designee.
§ 172-3 ONEIDA CODE § 172-5
C:656
TREES
§ 172-5 CHARTER § 172-5
C:657

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 174-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Municipal Tree
Ordinance of the Municipality of Oneida, County of Madison, State of New
York."
§ 174-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
respectively ascribed to them below:
CITY ENGINEER — The designated official of the city assigned to carry out
the enforcement of this chapter.
LARGE TREE — Any tree which has attained a height of 45 feet or more.
MEDIUM TREE — A tree which has attained a height of 30 to 45 feet.
PARK — Includes all public parks having individual names.
PARK AND STREET TREES DEPARTMENT — The designated department of
the city under whose jurisdiction park and/or street trees fall.
PRINCIPAL THOROUGHFARE — Any street upon which trucks are not
prohibited.
PROPERTY LINE — The outer edge of a street or highway right-of-way.
PROPERTY OWNER — The person owning such property as shown by the
County Auditor's plat of the county.
PUBLIC PLACES — Includes all other grounds owned by the city.
PUBLIC TREES — Includes all shade and ornamental trees now or hereafter
growing on any street or any public areas where otherwise indicated.
SMALL TREE — A tree which has attained a height of 20 to 30 feet.
STREET or HIGHWAY — The entire width of every public way or right-ofway
when any part thereof is open to the use of the public, as a matter of
right, for purposes of vehicular and pedestrian traffic.
TREE LAWN — That part of a street or highway, not covered by sidewalk or
other paving, lying between the property line and that portion of the street
or highway usually used for vehicular traffic.
§ 174-3. Compliance required.
All work on public trees shall comply with this chapter. The Arboricultural
Specifications and Standards of Practice shall be adhered to at all times, but
may be amended at any time that experience, new research or laws indicate
improved methods, or whenever circumstances make it advisable, with the
approval of the Shade Tree Commission.
§ 174-1 CHARTER § 174-4
C:659
§ 174-4. Duties of enforcing officer.
The City Engineer shall have the authority to promulgate the rules and
regulations of the Arboricultural Specifications and Standards of Practice
governing the planting, maintenance, removal, fertilization, pruning and
bracing of trees on the streets or other public sites in the municipality and
shall direct, regulate and control the planting, maintenance and removal
of all trees growing now or hereafter in any public area of the city. He
shall cause the provisions of this chapter to be enforced and shall perform
such other duties as required herein. In his absence, his duties shall be the
responsibility of a qualified alternate designated by the city.
§ 174-5. Removal, replanting and replacement.
§ 174-6. Pruning of trees.
A. Wherever it is necessary to remove a tree from a tree lawn in
connection with the paving of a sidewalk or the paving or widening of
the portion of a street or highway used for vehicular traffic, the city
shall replant such tree or replace it, provided that if conditions prevent
planting on tree lawns, this requirement will be satisfied if any
equivalent number of trees of the same size and species as provided for
in the Arboricultural Specifications are planted in an attractive manner
on the adjoining property.
B. No person or property owner shall remove a tree from the tree lawn for
the purpose of construction or for any other reasons without procuring
the required permit and replacing the removed tree in accordance with
the adopted Arboricultural Specifications. Such replacement shall meet
the standards of size, species and placement as provided for in the
required permit. The person or property owner shall bear the cost of
removal and replacement of all trees removed.
C. Whenever any tree shall be planted or set out without, or in violation of,
the required permit, the City Engineer may remove or cause removal of
the same, and the exact cost thereof shall be assessed to the owner as
provided by law in the case of special assessments.
D. Except as provided in Subsection C, no trees shall be removed from
public places unless they constitute a hazard to life or property or a
public nuisance or because a revision of planting standards
necessitates.
A. It shall be the duty of any person or persons owning or occupying real
property bordering on any street upon which property there may be
trees to prune such trees in such manner that they will not obstruct or
shade the streetlights, obstruct the passage of pedestrians on
sidewalks, obstruct vision of traffic signs or obstruct view of any street
or alley intersection. The minimum clearance of any overhanging
portion thereof shall be 10 feet over sidewalks and 12 feet over all
§ 174-4 ONEIDA CODE § 174-6
C:660
§ 174-7. Abuse or mutilation of public trees.
Unless specifically authorized by the City Engineer, no person shall
intentionally damage, cut, carve, transplant or remove any trees, attach any
rope, wire, nails, advertising paper or other contrivance to any tree, allow
any gaseous liquid or solid substance which is harmful to such trees to come
in contact with them or set fire or permit any fire to burn when such fire or
the heat thereof will injure any portion of any tree.
§ 174-8. Miscellaneous measures for protection of trees.
§ 174-9. Penalties for offenses.
Any person violating or failing to comply with any of the provisions of this
chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
streets except truck thoroughfares, which shall have a clearance of 16
feet.
B. Should any person or persons owning real property bordering on any
street fail to prune trees as herein provided, the City Engineer shall
order such person or persons, within three days after receipt of written
notice, to so prune such trees. Such order shall be served by mailing a
copy of the order to the last known address of the property owner, by
certified mail. When a person to whom an order is directed shall fail to
comply within the specified time, the city may prune such trees, and the
exact cost thereof shall be assessed to the owner as provided by law in
the case of special assessments.
A. All trees on any street or other publicly owned property near any
excavation or construction of any building, structure or street work
shall be guarded with a good substantial fence, frame or box not less
than four feet high and eight feet square, or at a distance in feet from
the tree equal to the diameter of the trunk in inches D.B.H., whichever
is greater, and all building material, dirt or other debris shall be kept
outside the barrier.
B. No person shall excavate any ditches, tunnels, trenches or lay any drive
within a radius of 10 feet from any public tree without first obtaining a
written permit from the City Engineer.
C. No person shall deposit, place, store or maintain upon any public place
of the city any stone, brick, sand, concrete or other materials which may
impede the free passage of water, air and fertilizer to the roots of any
tree growing therein, except by written permit of the City Engineer.
§ 174-6 CHARTER § 174-9
C:661

ARTICLE II
Shade Tree Commission
§ 174-10. Established.
There is hereby established a Shade Tree Commission.
§ 174-11. Members.
The Shade Tree Commission shall be composed of one person from each
ward of the city appointed by the Mayor.
§ 174-12. Meetings, organization and rules.
Upon call of the Mayor, the Shade Tree Commission shall meet and organize
by the election of a Chairman and the appointment of a Secretary. The
Commission shall then provide for the adoption of rules and procedures and
for the holding of regular and special meetings as said Commission shall
deem advisable and necessary in order to perform its duties.
§ 174-13. Policy.
The policy of the Shade Tree Commission shall be one of cooperating with
the public, property owners, city departments and appropriate not-for-profit
organizations at all times.
§ 174-14. Duties.
The duties of the Shade Tree Commission shall be as follows:
A. To study the problems and determine the needs of the city in connection
with its tree planting program.
B. To recommend to the proper authority the type and kind of trees to be
planted upon such city streets or parts of city streets or in parks as is
designated.
C. To assist the properly constituted officials of the city, as well as the
Common Council and citizens of the city, in the dissemination of news
and information regarding the selection, planting and maintenance of
trees within the corporate limits, whether the same is on private or
public property and to make such recommendations from time to time
to the Common Council as to desirable legislation concerning the tree
program and activities for the city.
D. To provide regular and special meetings which the subject of trees
insofar as it relates to the city may be discussed by the members of the
Commission.
§ 174-10 CHARTER § 174-14
C:663

ARTICLE III
Permit for Tree Planting and Removal
§ 174-15. Required.
No person shall plant, remove, cut above ground or otherwise disturb
any tree on any street or municipal-owned property without first filing an
application and procuring a permit from the City Engineer's office or other
specified municipal authority.
§ 174-16. Application.
An application for a permit required by the provisions of this article shall be
made at the office of the City Engineer not less than 48 hours in advance of
the time the work is to be done. The application required herein shall state:
§ 174-17. Standards for issuance of permit.
The City Engineer shall issue the permit provided for herein if, in his
judgment, the proposed work is desirable and the proposed method and
workmanship thereof are of a satisfactory nature. Any permit granted shall
contain a definite date of expiration and the work shall be completed in the
time allowed on the permit and in the manner as therein described. The City
Engineer shall have the authority to affix reasonable conditions as to the
granting of a permit. A permit shall be void if any of its terms or conditions
are violated.
§ 174-18. Compliance with certain standards.
A person issued a permit pursuant to the provisions of this article shall
abide by the Arboricultural Specifications of Practice adopted by the City
Engineer.
§ 174-19. Inspections.
The City Engineer shall supervise or inspect all work done under a permit
issued pursuant to this article.
§ 174-20. Notice of completion of work.
A person performing work under a permit issued pursuant to the provisions
of this article shall give notice of completion of such work to the City
Engineer within five days of the same.
A. The number of trees to be set out;
B. The location, grade, species, cultivar or variety of each tree;
C. The method of planting; and
D. Such other information as the City Engineer shall find reasonably
necessary to a fair determination of whether a permit should be issued.
§ 174-15 CHARTER § 174-20
C:665

ARTICLE IV
Planting
§ 174-21. Species, cultivars or varieties.
§ 174-22. Size and grade.
Unless otherwise specified by the City Engineer, all medium to large
deciduous tree species and their cultivars and varieties shall conform to
American Association of Nurserymen Standards and be at least 1 1/4 inches
to 1 1/2 inches in diameter six inches above ground level, and at least eight
feet to 10 feet in height when planted. The crown shall be in good balance
with the trunk.
§ 174-23. Grade.
A. The City Engineer shall prepare lists of trees acceptable for planting in
the public sites of the city. Undesirable trees shall not be recommended
for general planting and their use, if any, shall be restricted to special
locations where, because of certain characteristics of adaptability or
landscape effect, they can be used to advantage.
B. Only desirable, long-lived trees of good appearance, beauty,
adaptability and generally free from injurious insect or disease shall be
planted in public sites. The Shade Tree Commission, in conjunction with
the City Engineer, shall review at least every two years the species,
cultivars and varieties included on the approved list to determine if any
should be removed for any reason or if certain new species, cultivars or
varieties of proven dependability and value should be added.
A. Unless otherwise allowed for specific reason, all trees shall have
comparatively straight trunks, well-developed leaders and tops and
roots characteristic of the species, cultivar or variety showing evidence
of proper nursery pruning. All trees must be free of insects, diseases,
mechanical injuries and other objectionable features at the time of
planting.
B. Where there is a tree lawn less than three feet in width, legal steps
should be taken to obtain easement rights to plant beyond the sidewalk
on private property. Such easements should contain provisions granting
the city permission to select and plant such trees under the direction of
the City Engineer and also include a provision whereby the property
owner assumes full responsibility for the maintenance, removal of and
liability for said tree.
C. Trees shall be planted at least 30 feet from street intersections and at
least 15 feet from driveways and alleys.
D. No tree shall be planted closer than 10 feet of a utility pole.
E. Spacing of trees should be determined by the City Engineer according
to local conditions, the species, cultivars, or varieties used, their
§ 174-21 CHARTER § 174-23
C:667
§ 174-24. Methods of planting and support.
mature height, spread and form. Generally, all large trees shall be
planted 40 feet to 60 feet on center; all medium-sized trees shall be
planted a minimum of 25 feet on center.
F. All planting on unpaved streets without curbs must have the special
permission of the City Engineer who shall determine the tree's location
so it will not be injured or destroyed when the street is curbed and
paved.
A. Most small deciduous trees may be moved bare-rooted unless otherwise
indicated. Roots of bare-rooted trees should be protected against
drying out.
B. All coniferous trees shall be moved balled and burlapped. Balled roots
should be prevented from drying out at the surface of the ball and
protected against injurious freezing.
C. Pits dug for planting of bare-root plants shall be a minimum of 12 inches
larger in diameter than the diameter of the root system so as to be of
sufficient size to accommodate the roots without crowding. For balled
trees, the pits shall be a minimum of 12 inches larger in diameter than
the diameter of the ball of soil to allow proper backfill.
D. Plants shall be planted no deeper than previously grown, with due
allowance for settling.
E. In poorly drained soil, artificial drainage shall be provided to properly
drain the soil about the plant roots or tolerant species selected.
F. Acceptable topsoil, compost, peat moss or other acceptable soil mixture
shall be placed about the roots or in the backfill around the ball. When
the planting is completed, the entire root area shall be thoroughly
saturated with water.
G. Excessive pruning at the time of transplanting should be avoided. The
extent of top pruning should be based on the ability of the plant roots to
function.
H. Trees shall be suitably wrapped and guyed, or supported in an upright
position, according to accepted arboricultural practices. The guys or
supports shall be fastened.
§ 174-23 ONEIDA CODE § 174-24
C:668
Chapter 180
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
GENERAL REFERENCES
Bicycles and skateboards — See Ch. 26.
Junkyards — See Ch. 85.
Noise — See Ch. 98.
Taxicabs — See Ch. 169.
§ 174-24 CHARTER § 174-24
C:669

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 180-1. Definitions.
§ 180-2. Traffic Violations Bureau.
§ 180-3. Applicability to public officers and employees.
A. The terms used in this chapter shall be defined to include those
meanings specifically set forth in the Vehicle and Traffic Law of the
State of New York.
B. The following additional definitions shall have the meanings
respectively ascribed to them in this section:
CONGESTED DISTRICT — That part of the City within the following
boundaries:
Main Street from Stone Street to the Penn-Central Railroad Tracks; all
of Phelps Street; all of Madison Street; all of Vanderbilt Avenue; James
Street from Phelps Street to Elm Street; Central Avenue from Main
Street to the west side of West Street; West Street with Lenox Avenue
to Central Avenue; Lenox Avenue from Main Street to the west side
of West Street; Washington Avenue from Main Street to Broad Street;
Stone Street from Broad Street to Elizabeth Street; all of Cedar Street;
William Street from Madison Street to Sherman Street; Sconondoa
Street from Lake Street to the Ontario and Western Railroad; North
Main Street from the Penn-Central Railroad Tracks north to Monahan
Street.
A. A Traffic Violations Bureau of the City is hereby created and shall be
administered by the City Chamberlain's office during the regular hours
of said office.
B. The Traffic Violations Bureau shall have the jurisdiction and power
prescribed by Article 14-B of the General Municipal Law.
A. The provisions of this chapter applicable to the drivers of vehicles upon
the highways shall apply to drivers of all vehicles owned or operated by
the United States, this state or any county, city, town, district or any
other political subdivision of the state, except as provided in this
section and subject to such specific exceptions as are set forth in the
Vehicle and Traffic Law with reference to authorized emergency
vehicles.
B. Unless specifically made applicable, the provisions of this chapter shall
not apply to persons, teams, motor vehicles and other equipment while
actually engaged in work on a highway.
C. The provisions of this section shall not relieve any person or team or
any operator of a motor vehicle or other equipment while actually
§ 180-1 CHARTER § 180-3
C:671
§ 180-4. Authorized emergency vehicles.
§ 180-5. Applicability to persons riding animals or driving animaldrawn
vehicles.
Every person riding an animal or driving an animal-drawn vehicle upon
a roadway shall be granted all of the rights and shall be subject to all
of the duties applicable to the driver of a vehicle by this chapter, except
those provisions of this chapter which by their very nature can have no
application.
engaged in work on a highway from the duty to proceed at all times
during all phases of such work with due regard for the safety of all
persons nor shall this section protect such persons or teams or such
operators of motor vehicles or other equipment from the consequences
of their reckless disregard for the safety of others.
A. The driver of an authorized emergency vehicle, when involved in an
emergency operation, may exercise the privileges set forth in this
section, but subject to the conditions herein stated.
B. The driver of an authorized emergency vehicle may:
(1) Stop, stand or park irrespective of the provisions of this chapter.
(2) Proceed past a steady red signal, a flashing red signal or a stop
sign, but only after slowing down as may be necessary for safe
operation.
(3) Exceed the maximum speed limits so long as he does not endanger
life or property.
(4) Disregard regulations governing directions of movement or turning
in specified directions.
C. Except for an authorized emergency vehicle operated as a police
vehicle, the exemptions herein granted to an authorized emergency
vehicle shall apply only when audible signals are sounded from any said
vehicle while in motion by bell, horn, siren, electronic device or exhaust
whistle as may be reasonably necessary, and when the vehicle is
equipped with at least one light lamp so that from any direction, under
normal atmospheric conditions from a distance of 500 feet from such
vehicle, at least one red light will be displayed and visible.
D. An authorized emergency vehicle operated as a police, sheriff or deputy
sheriff vehicle may exceed the maximum speed limits for the purpose of
calibrating such vehicle's speedometer.
E. The foregoing provisions shall not relieve the driver of an authorized
emergency vehicle from the duty to drive with due regard for the safety
of all persons, nor shall such provisions protect the driver from the
consequences of his reckless disregard for the safety of others.
§ 180-3 ONEIDA CODE § 180-6
C:672
§ 180-6. Marking of traffic lanes.
The Commissioner of Public Safety is authorized to mark lanes for traffic on
street pavements at such places as he may deem advisable, consistent with
the provisions of this chapter.
§ 180-7. Designation of crosswalks.
The Commissioner of Public Safety is hereby authorized to establish and
to designate and shall hereafter maintain or cause to be maintained, by
appropriate devices, marks or lines upon the surface of the roadway,
crosswalks at all intersections where, in his opinion, there is particular
danger to pedestrians crossing the roadway and at such other places as he
deems necessary.
§ 180-8. Other rules and regulations authorized.
§ 180-9. Speed limits. [As last amended amended 12-1-1992 by Ord.
No. 92-06]
A. The Commissioner of Public Safety shall make, promulgate and enforce,
in the interests of public safety and convenience, rules and regulations,
not inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter, governing and
designating parking, parking spaces, loading zones, safety zones, oneway
traffic streets and through traffic streets. Any such rules and
regulations shall be indicated on signs conspicuously placed or posted
in or along the streets, highways and public squares or parts thereof to
which the same are applicable.
B. The Commissioner of Public Safety is authorized to promulgate rules
and regulations governing the movement of traffic at intersections and
requiring vehicles to stop, slow down or yield right-of-way and shall
cause to be erected appropriate signs or traffic signals evidencing such
rules and regulations. Such rules and regulations hereafter made by the
Commissioner shall become effective upon his filing the same with the
City Clerk and the erection of the aforesaid signs.
C. The Commissioner of Public Safety is hereby empowered to make and
enforce regulations necessary to make effective the provisions of this
chapter and to make temporary regulations, effective for not to exceed
48 hours, to cover emergencies or special conditions provided any such
regulations are not inconsistent with the provisions of the law or this
chapter.
D. All rules and regulations promulgated pursuant to this section shall be
effective upon filing with the City Clerk and the posting of appropriate
signs.
A. No vehicle, except an authorized emergency vehicle, shall be driven at
a rate of speed greater than 55 miles per hour on the public highways in
the city.
§ 180-6 CHARTER § 180-9
C:673
B. No vehicle, except an authorized emergency vehicle, shall be driven at
a rate of speed greater than 30 miles per hour within the inside district,
except those streets listed below:
(1) Lenox Avenue, from a point 684 feet west of Sayles Street to
corporation tax district, 55 miles per hour.
(2) New York State Route No. 5 from the easterly City line west to a
point 1,300 feet east of the intersection of said Route 5 and Sayles
Street, 35 miles per hour; and from a point 1,300 feet east of the
intersection of Route 5 and Sayles Street to a point 200 feet west of
said intersection, 45 miles per hour, from a point 200 feet west of
the intersection of Sayles and Route 5 to the corporation line, 55
miles per hour.
(3) Cobb Street, from the intersection of North Main Street westerly to
the corporation line, 55 miles per hour.
(4) Sturm Road, 55 miles per hour.
(5) North Lake Street, from a point 700 feet north of Gladwell Avenue
to the corporation line, 45 miles per hour.
(6) North Main Street, from a point 100 feet north of Conrail to the
corporation line, 55 miles per hour.
(7) Williams Street, from the dead end at the Thruway to the
corporation line, 55 miles per hour.
(8) Glenwood Avenue, also known as "Route 46," from the southerly
side of New York State Route 5 to the corporation tax district line,
35 miles per hour.
(9) Allen Park Place, from Broad Street to Broadway, 25 miles per hour.
[Added 6-21-2001]
(10) Broadway, from Allen Park Place to Summit Avenue, 25 miles per
hour. [Added 6-21-2001]
(11) Summit Avenue, from Broadway to Seneca Street, 25 miles per
hour. [Added 6-21-2001]
C. The following streets in the outside district are hereby designated for
lower speed limits as follows:
(1) Fitch Street, from the corporation line to its intersection with West
Elm Street, 30 miles per hour.
(2) Grand Street, from the corporation line to its dead end at the
railroad tracks, 30 miles per hour.
(3) Sweatman Avenue, 30 miles per hour.
§ 180-9 ONEIDA CODE § 180-9
C:674
(4) Lake Road, from the intersection with North Main Street westerly
to a point 1800 feet north of the Erie Canal crossing, 40 miles per
hour.
(5) Doran Road, 30 miles per hour. [Amended 8-7-2012 by Ord. No.
12-04]
(6) Tanner Road, 30 miles per hour. [Amended 8-7-2012 by Ord. No.
12-04]
(7) Old North Main Street, 30 miles per hour. [Amended 8-7-2012 by
Ord. No. 12-04]
(8) Palmer Drive and Oatman Circle, 30 miles per hour.
(9) Glenwood Avenue, also known as "Route 46," from the corporation
tax district line to a point 0.2 mile south of the intersection of
Fairview Avenue, 45 miles per hour.
(10) Hubbard Place, between Route 5 and West Elm Street, 30 miles per
hour.
(11) Lake Street, between the corporation tax district line and the
intersection of Route 46, 30 miles per hour.
(12) Upper Lenox Avenue (Merrillsville Road), between Route 5 and a
point 0.6 mile south of Route 5, 30 miles per hour.
(13) Upper Lenox Avenue (Merrillsville Road), between a point 0.6 mile
south of Route 5 and the southerly City line, 40 miles per hour.
(14) Brewer Road, between Mount Hope Avenue and a point 4200 feet
south of Mount Hope Avenue, 25 miles per hour.
(15) Fairview Avenue. [Amended 2-4-2003]
(a) Between Route 46 and a point 0.35 mile west of Route 46, 35
miles per hour.
(b) From a point 0.35 miles west of Route 46 west to the City line,
45 miles per hour.
(16) Mount Hope Avenue, westerly to a point 0.7 mile from its
intersection with Route 46, 30 miles per hour. [Amended
12-6-2000; 8-16-2011 by L.L. No. 6-2011]
(17) Schoolheimer Road, 40 miles per hour.
(18) Middle Road. [Added 12-6-2000]
(a) From the northern City line on Middle Road to a point 5/10ths
of a mile north of the intersection of Middle Road and Chapel
Street, 45 miles per hour; and
§ 180-9 CHARTER § 180-9
C:675
(b) From a point 5/10ths of a mile north of the intersection of
Middle Road and Chapel Street to the southern City line on
Middle Road, 30 miles per hour.
D. The following area in the outside district is hereby declared to be an
area speed zone of 30 miles per hour, bounded as follows:
Starting at the intersection of Oneida Creek with the southerly
boundary line of the city; thence westerly along the southerly
boundary line of the City to the point at which it intersects the
northerly edge of Peterboro Road; thence along the northerly
boundary of Peterboro Road to the intersection of the westerly
boundary of Middle Road; thence northerly along the westerly
boundary of Middle Road to the intersection of the southerly boundary
of Union Street; thence westerly along the southerly boundary of
Union Street a distance of 3/4 of a mile to a point; thence northerly
and crossing Union Street at right angles to its center line to a point;
thence northerly in a straight line to a point in the westerly boundary
of the Middle Road located 6/10 of a mile north of Union Street; thence
easterly at a right angle to Oneida Creek; thence southerly along
Oneida Creek to the southerly boundary of the city.
E. School speed zones. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this
article, no vehicle, except an authorized emergency vehicle, shall be
driven at a rate of speed greater than 20 miles per hour along the
following streets, which are hereby declared to be school speed zones:
[Amended 12-6-2000]
(1) Along a portion of Seneca Street from a point just south of the
southerly intersection of Maple Drive and Seneca Street north to a
point just south of the intersection of Summit Avenue and Seneca
Street.
(2) Along a portion of Seneca Street, from a point at the northerly
boundary of Belmont Avenue (at the northwest corner of its
intersection with Seneca Street) to a point at the northerly
boundary of Bates Avenue.
(3) Along a portion of Franklin Street at the northern boundary of
Belmont Avenue north to a point 1/10th of a mile south of the
intersection of Cleveland Avenue and Franklin Street.
(4) All along East Avenue from the intersection of East Avenue and
Elizabeth Street east to the east end of East Avenue.
(5) Along a portion of Elizabeth Street from the intersection of
Elizabeth Street and Walnut Street north to a point 1/10th of a mile
south of the intersection of the Main Street and Elizabeth Street at
the north end of Main and Elizabeth Streets.
(6) Along a portion of East Walnut Street from a point just east of the
intersection of Main Street and East Walnut Street east to a point
§ 180-9 ONEIDA CODE § 180-9
C:676
§ 180-10. Through streets.
Stop signs shall be erected so as to designate the following streets as
through streets:
Broad Street
Elm Street from James Street to Warner Street
Lenox Avenue from City limits to Broad Street
Main Street
Madison Street
Sconondoa Street
Seneca Turnpike from Broad Street to New York, Ontario and Western
Railroad tracks
Warner Street
Williams Street
§ 180-11. Turning in street.
No vehicle shall be operated in making a turn in any street so as to obstruct
or interfere with other vehicles. No vehicles shall make a complete or Uturn
on any street in the congested district.54
§ 180-12. Noisy vehicles.
No person shall operate an automobile, motorcycle, bus or vehicle so out
of repair or so loaded or in any manner as to create loud or unnecessary
grating, grinding, rattling or other noise in the city. Noise of such character,
intensity or duration as to endanger public comfort, peace or repose is
declared to be a nuisance and prohibited.
§ 180-13. Repairing vehicles in street.
Repairs to vehicles shall not be made in any street or public place, except in
case of an emergency.
§ 180-14. Railroads obstructing street crossings.
on East Walnut Street 1/10th of a mile west of the intersection of
East Walnut Street and Wilbur Street.
(7) Along a portion of North Broad Street just north of the intersection
of North Broad Street and West Elm Street north to the intersection
of North Broad Street and St. Joseph's Place.
54.Editor's Note: Original Sec. 4-16-11, Special regulations for City hospital and related
facilities, which immediately followed this section, was deleted 12-19-2000 by L.L. No.
6-2000.
§ 180-9 CHARTER § 180-14
C:677
§ 180-15. Abandoned or junked vehicles on private property.
[Amended 11-8-1995 by Ord. No. 95-04]
A. It shall be unlawful for the directing officer or the operator of any
railroad locomotive train or car to direct the operation at or to operate
the same in such a manner as to prevent the use of any street for
purposes of travel for a period of time longer than five minutes.
B. Notwithstanding the provisions of Subsection A, no owner, officer or
employee of a railroad corporation who obstructs, or causes to be
obstructed, any highway crossing shall be subject to any penalty where
such person has no control over the situation causing the obstruction or
where the locomotive, train or car cannot be moved without
endangering the safety of the passengers, the public or freight.
A. No person shall place, deposit, store or allow to remain upon any
private property or land in the City of Oneida any abandoned motor
vehicle or junked vehicle except when sheltered in a garage or other
similar enclosure away from public view. Anyone who violates this
section may be issued an appearance ticket with a court date scheduled
at least two weeks from the date of occurrence. A verification of
removal form will also be issued that allows the violator to, within 10
days of receipt of the appearance ticket, remove the vehicle(s) in
violation and have the removal verified and the verification of removal
form signed and returned to the court prior to their appearance date to
have the charge dismissed and not have to appear in court. The form
can be returned via mail, but must be postmarked four days prior to the
court appearance date, otherwise the form must be hand delivered to
the Police Department. [Amended 11-7-2001; 1-5-2005 by Ord. No.
05-01]
B. The provisions of Subsection A shall not apply to commercial garages
and new or used car dealers at their place of business. Any person
wishing to display for sale, on their property, an unregistered motor
vehicle will first obtain a permit from City Hall. The permit will allow a
person to display for sale a vehicle, for up to 30 days, with no more than
two sales per calendar year. The permit will be posted in the vehicle's
front windshield. Any unregistered vehicle for sale without a permit or
for longer than 30 days will be considered in violation of Subsection A
above. Anyone wishing to store an unregistered seasonal use vehicle
will also obtain a permit from City Hall. To store an unregistered
seasonal use vehicle outside of a garage, the vehicle must be kept
covered with a fitted cover, tarpaulin or similar opaque covering during
the season or part of the year it is not licensed or intended for on-road
operation The person having control of the vehicle must, upon request,
show a valid registration for the vehicle showing the vehicle was
registered within the previous 12 months. The vehicle must also be in
operating condition. [Amended 11-7-2001; 1-5-2005 by Ord. No.
05-01]
§ 180-14 ONEIDA CODE § 180-15
C:678
§ 180-16. Storage of vehicles in public places. [Amended 1-5-2005
by Ord. No. 05-01]
It shall be unlawful for any person or corporation to permit or keep, pile
or store any motor vehicles or vehicle, or part thereof, unregistered, upon
C. It shall be conclusively presumed that the person having control of the
real property upon which the abandoned motor vehicle or junked car is
placed, located or stored, whether as owner, occupant, lessee, agent or
tenant, is the person who has permitted such abandoned motor vehicle
or junked car to remain upon the premises.
D. Definitions.
(1) As used in this section, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ABANDONED MOTOR VEHICLE — Any motor vehicle which is not
operable or which has been abandoned, junked or discarded or
stored in such a manner that the vehicle is not readily operable.
JUNKED CAR — Any remnant of a stripped motor vehicle which is
not readily operable.
(2) Any motor vehicle which is older than seven model years and
unlicensed shall also be deemed to be an abandoned motor vehicle
or junked car.
E. It is a violation for anyone to display license plates on an unregistered
vehicle when the vehicle is not registered and meets the criteria of an
abandoned or junked vehicle. [Amended 12-19-2000 by L.L. No.
6-2000; 1-5-2005 by Ord. No. 05-01]
F. Penalties for offenses. Failure to comply with this section shall be
deemed a violation, punishable by fine of not less than $150 nor more
than $250 for a first offense; for a second conviction by a fine of not less
than $250 nor more than $400; and for a third conviction by a fine of not
less than $400 nor more than $600 and/or 15 days imprisonment. Every
day a violation of this section shall continue shall constitute a separate
and punishable offense. [Amended 12-19-2000 by L.L. No. 6-2000;
11-7-2001]
G. Any vehicle that is in violation of this section and in which the
responsible person has been ticketed, appeared in court, a fine or
penalty was assessed and the vehicle remains on the property, or the
person responsible for the violation cannot be located or identified, the
Chief of Police may send a certified letter to the property owner where
the vehicle is located, advising the property owner to have the vehicle
removed within 10 days or the vehicle may be towed at the property
owner's expense. Failure to pay for the tow bill may result in the cost
being added to the property owner's tax bill. [Added 1-5-2005 by Ord.
No. 05-01]
§ 180-15 CHARTER § 180-16
C:679
any municipal parking lot, street or public place within the City without
authorization. Any vehicle owner that violates this section will be
considered to be in violation of the Junk Vehicle Ordinance and the
procedure in § 180-15A will be followed with the exception on the time for
removal allowed to avoid a court appearance and have the case dismissed.
The vehicle in violation will need to be removed within 24 hours of receipt
of an appearance ticket. In addition, after 24 hours the vehicle will be
considered a nuisance, and the Chief of Police or an agent thereof, is
authorized to abate any such nuisance.
§ 180-17. Truck route. [Added 8-5-1986 by Ord. No. 86-03]
A. Through freight motor truck routes.
(1) Those routes including streets and parts of streets as may be
periodically designated by regulation of the Commissioner and filed
with the City Clerk, are hereby declared to be through freight
motor truck routes.
(2) No through freight motor truck having a gross weight of vehicle
plus load in excess of five tons or 10,000 pounds, said weight to be
ascertained by computing the entire weight of a vehicle or truck
plus load or, in the event that said vehicle is a tractor-trailer, then
by computing the entire weight of the tractor and trailer plus load,
shall be permitted, driven or operated on any public streets of the
inside corporate district of the City of Oneida other than those
established by ordinance as through freight motor truck routes;
provided, however, that adequate visible signs shall be posted at
intersections marking the street so designated. In the case of the
existing railroad bridges on South Main Street and Lenox Avenue, a
sign shall be placed on the respective bridges to indicate that
trucks over the allowed height shall find an alternative route
around the bridge. Such sign shall state "Trucks over (specified
height) in height use Alternate Route." This sign shall exist until
such time as the bridges are removed.
(3) The provisions hereof shall not be construed to prevent deliveries
of merchandise or other property along any public street from
which such vehicles are excluded; provided, however, that freight
motor trucks (in excess of 10,000 pounds) must use the most direct
route to and from the through truck route nearest their destination
unless, in the interest of safety, a variation is approved by the
Public Safety Commission and the Chief of Police after cause is
shown for the variation. The provisions hereof shall not be
construed to prevent the normal operation of trash and garbage
pickup, nor shall it apply to emergency, fire, police, rescue or public
utility vehicles. [Amended 12-19-2000 by L.L. No. 6-2000]
B. Motor trucks not to be parked. No motor truck or tractor-trailer in
excess of 35 feet in length shall be parked or left standing on any street
§ 180-16 ONEIDA CODE § 180-17
C:680
§ 180-18. Parking of trucks on private property; penalties for
offenses. [Added 7-15-1988 by Ord. No. 88-07]
of the inside corporate district of this City for any purpose except in
case of emergency or when otherwise directed by a police officer.
C. Trailers not to be disconnected. No trailer section of a tractor-trailer
vehicle or any other trailer shall be parked or left standing on any street
or public place of the inside corporate district of this City unless
connected to a tractor section or towing vehicle and in condition to be
moved at any time.
D. Through freight motor truck routes.
(1) North Main Street, Main Street, Glenwood Avenue (Rt. 46) from the
Thruway bridge on the north, to Fairview Avenue on the south.
(2) Genesee Street (Rt. 5) from Stoneleigh Drive to the east City line.
(3) Lenox Avenue (Rt. 365A) from its intersection with Stone Street to
the east City line.
E. Violations. Failure to comply with any of the provisions of this article
shall be deemed an offense, punishable as follows: [Amended
12-19-2000 by L.L. No. 6-2000]
(1) For the first or second offense committed within five years, not less
than $25, nor more than $100.
(2) For the third or subsequent offense committed within five years,
not less than $50, nor more than $150.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to park any truck weighing in excess
of 2 1/2 tons or 5,000 pounds, exclusive of load, in any mapped,
residential district of the City except when sheltered in a garage or
other similar closed building and the truck is concealed from public
view. Any such building shall conform to all zoning requirements for
that district. This provision shall not apply to trucks otherwise lawfully
and actually engaged in pickup, delivery or provision of service, to onduty
or on-call towing, emergency, fire, police or rescue vehicles or to
recreational vehicles.
B. Failure to comply with the provisions of Subsection A hereof shall be
deemed a violation, punishable by fine of not less than $10 nor more
than $100. Each day the truck is so parked shall be deemed a separate
and punishable offense.
§ 180-17 CHARTER § 180-18
C:681

ARTICLE II
Stopping, Standing and Parking
§ 180-19. Parking with reference to curb.
Any vehicle when stopped parallel to the curb within the congested district
shall be parked wholly within the lines drawn upon the pavement, such
lines not to be over 7 1/2 feet from the curb. The Commissioner of Public
Safety may provide for head-to-curb parking wherever he deems advisable,
provided that such parking sections are properly marked.
§ 180-20. Loading zones.
§ 180-21. All-night parking. [Amended 9-20-1983; 8-20-1996 by
Ord. No. 96-09]
A. It shall be unlawful for the operator of a vehicle to stop, stand or park
said vehicle for a period of time longer than is necessary for the
expeditious loading or unloading of passengers or for the unloading and
delivery or pickup and loading of materials in any place marked as a
loading zone. In no case shall the stop for loading or unloading of
materials exceed 30 minutes.
B. The provisions of Subsection A shall not be applicable between the
hours of 6:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.
A. It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to park said vehicle
on any street or public parking lot or field for a period of time longer
than 30 minutes between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. of any
day.
B. Any vehicle found in violation of this section may be towed away, and
the expense thereof shall become a lien upon said vehicle.
C. (Reserved)55
D. Specific locations. [Amended 12-6-2000]
(1) Anything in this section to the contrary notwithstanding, overnight
parking shall be permitted on curbed and uncurbed streets in the
City during the period from April 15 to October 15, inclusive, with
the exception of Main Street between Washington Avenue and
Furnace Avenue, in areas where parking is legally permitted, and in
the City-owned parking lot located at the northwest corner of
Lenox Avenue and Cedar Street, the Kallet Parking Lot and the
Higinbotham Parking Lot, to wit: [Amended 7-20-2010 by Ord.
No. 10-03;7-3-2018 by Ord. No. 18-02]
55.Editor’s Note: Former Subsection C, providing penalties for violations of Subsection A, as
amended, was repealed 6-18-2004 by Ord. No. 04-01.
§ 180-19 CHARTER § 180-21
C:683
§ 180-22. Total prohibition for certain places.
(a) City-owned parking lot located at the northwest corner of
Lenox Avenue and Cedar Street (entire lot).
(b) (Reserved)56
(c) Kallet Parking Lot (back-to-back angular parking lanes only):
[1] Mondays, Wednesdays, Fridays and Sundays, south lane.
[2] Tuesdays, Thursdays and Saturdays, north lane.
(2) For purposes of this section, any block on a street that is only
partially curbed shall be deemed to be an "uncurbed" street for that
particular block.
(3) All-night parking will be allowed year-round on an alternating
schedule: [Added 3-18-2008 by Ord. No. 08-02]
(a) North side of Freight House Alley:
[1] Mondays, Tuesdays, Fridays and Sundays.
(b) Higinbotham Parking Lot: [Added 6-1-2010 by Ord. No.
10-02]
[1] Mondays, Wednesdays, Fridays and Sundays, west two
lanes.
[2] Tuesdays, Thursdays and Saturdays, east two lanes.
(c) South side of Oneida Street between Main Street and Williams
Street:
[1] Tuesdays, Thursdays and Saturdays.
E. Any vehicle found in violation of this section may be towed away at the
expense of the owner thereof, and the expense shall become a lien upon
said vehicle.
A. It shall be unlawful for any operator to stop, stand or park any vehicle
upon a street, other than an alley, in such a manner or under such
conditions as to leave available less than 10 feet of the width of the
roadway for free movement of vehicular traffic, except that an operator
may stop temporarily during the actual loading or unloading of
passengers or when necessary in obedience to traffic regulations or
traffic signs or signals or a police officer.
B. It shall be unlawful for any operator to park a vehicle within an alley in
such a manner or under such conditions as to leave available less than
56.Editor's Note: Former Subsection D(1)(b), regarding the Lincoln Bank Parking Lot, was
repealed 6-1-2010 by Ord. No. 10-02.
§ 180-21 ONEIDA CODE § 180-22
C:684
10 feet of the width of the roadway for the free movement of vehicular
traffic.
C. It shall be unlawful for any person to park a motor vehicle on the
southerly side of Stone Street between its intersection with Main Street
on the east and Sayles Street on the west.
D. It shall be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle on any portion of
the space between the curb or, if there is no curb, then the edge of
pavement and the edge of the sidewalk farthest from the street or, if
there is no sidewalk, then a point 10 feet from the edge of curb or
pavement. [Added 6-2-1999 by Ord. No. 99-01]
E. Regulations for Oneida health-care-center facilities. [Added
5-20-2008 by Ord. No. 08-03]
(1) It shall be unlawful for any operator to park in:
(a) Any handicapped parking spaces that are signed for
handicapped parking at 321 Genesee Street Acute Care
Facility, 323 Genesee Street Extended Care Facility, 125 Fields
Drive, 139 Fields Drive and 221 Broad Street, Oneida, unless a
valid handicapped parking permit is displayed in the vehicle.
(b) Standing zones designated for patient dropoff and pickup at
321 Genesee Street Acute Care Facility, 323 Genesee Street
Extended Care Facility and 221 Broad Street, Oneida.
(c) The following described areas, each of which is hereby
designated as a fire lane:
[1] All that area of land being 24 feet eight inches in width and
lying immediately north of and adjacent to the sidewalk in
front of the Bess Chapman Entrance in the Oneida
Healthcare Center Acute Care Facility, 321 Genesee
Street, Oneida, New York.
[2] All that area of land being 24 feet eight inches in width and
lying immediately south of and adjacent to the sidewalk in
front of the entrance to the Extended Care Facility, 323
Genesee Street, Oneida, New York.
[3] All that area of land included in the Broad Street and
Washington Street entrances and exists of the parking lot
and the driveway of the Oneida Healthcare Facility located
at 221 Broad Street, Oneida, New York.
[4] All that area of land included in the driveway portion of the
parking lot and located west of the Oneida Healthcare
Facility building at 139 Fields Drive, Oneida, New York,
which is used to enter and exit the facility parking lot.
§ 180-22 CHARTER § 180-22
C:685
§ 180-23. Fire lanes in shopping centers. [Amended 1-5-1988 by
Ord. No. 88-01; 9-4-1990 by Ord. No. 90-07; 8-20-1996 by Ord. No.
96-09]
(2) Notwithstanding the foregoing, standing in an authorized standing
zone for patient pickup or dropoff is not prohibited by this
regulation.
A. Fire lanes.
(1) The following described area located in the Oneida Shopping
Center, North Main Street, Oneida, New York, is hereby designated
a fire lane and parking or standing therein at any time is hereby
prohibited: All that area of land being 24 feet eight inches in width
and lying immediately east of and adjacent to the sidewalk in front
of the 11 continuous buildings in the Oneida Shopping Center,
North Main Street, Oneida, New York.
(2) The following described area located in the Tops Plaza Shopping
Center, Genesee Street, Oneida, New York, is hereby designated a
fire lane and parking or standing therein at any time is hereby
prohibited: All that area of land being 24 feet eight inches in width
and lying immediately south of and adjacent to the sidewalk in front
of the continuous buildings in the Tops Plaza Shopping Center,
Genesee Street, Oneida, New York.
(3) The following described area located in the Glenwood Plaza,
Glenwood Avenue, Oneida, New York, is hereby designated a fire
lane and parking or standing therein at any time is hereby
prohibited: All that area of land being 24 feet eight inches in width
and lying immediately east and north of and adjacent to the
sidewalk in front of the buildings in the Glenwood Plaza Shopping
Center, Glenwood Avenue, Oneida, New York.
(4) The following described area located in the Ames Plaza, Genesee
Street, Oneida, New York, is hereby designated a fire lane and
parking or standing therein at any time is hereby prohibited: All
that area of land being 24 feet eight inches in width and lying
immediately north and east of and adjacent to the sidewalk in front
of the buildings in the Ames Plaza Shopping Center, Genesee
Street, Oneida, New York.
(5) The following described area located in the Wal Mart Shopping
Center, Upper Lenox Avenue, Oneida, New York, is hereby
designated a fire lane and parking or standing therein at any time
is hereby prohibited: All that area of land being 24 feet eight inches
in width and lying immediately south of and adjacent to the
sidewalk in front of the buildings in the Wal Mart Shopping Center,
Upper Lenox Avenue, Oneida, New York. [Added 1-19-2000]
§ 180-22 ONEIDA CODE § 180-23
C:686
§ 180-24. Special regulations for Oneida Towers. [Amended
4-21-1987 by Ord. No. 87-04; 8-20-1996 by Ord. No. 96-09]
§ 180-24.1. Permit parking areas. [Added 6-21-2011 by L.L. No.
5-2011]
B. All vehicles found in violation of this section may be towed and stored at
the exclusive expense of the owner and/or operator thereof in addition
to the penalty provided for violations of this code.57
A. Pursuant to the request by the Board of Commissioners of the City of
Oneida Housing Authority, the parking at the Oneida Towers I and
Oneida Towers II shall only be in the areas designated and marked
therefor and then only in the manner hereinafter set forth.
B. Parking within the boundaries of the authority shall be unassigned and
only for the residents thereof and their visitors and shall be only within
the designated parking spaces; said areas shall be marked by striping
upon the parking areas and be designated by appropriate signs. There
shall be no parking other than in such designated areas.
C. There shall be 29 unassigned handicapped parking spaces which shall
be marked and designated as such for use only by handicapped drivers.
[Amended 8-20-2013 by Ord. No. 13-01]
D. There shall be staff parking for authorized staff only in areas marked
therefor.
E. All persons parking or standing in areas other than those marked for
parking and consistent with the nature of the parking permitted will be
in violation of this section and the vehicles may be towed therefrom,
with the cost thereof being the responsibility of the operator and/or
owner thereof.
F. (Reserved)58
G. Pursuant to § 1809-b of the Vehicles and Traffic Law of the State of New
York, a mandatory surcharge of $30 shall be imposed upon the
conviction of a violation pursuant to this section. [Added 12-19-2000
by L.L. No. 6-2000]
A. The Commissioner of Public Safety, upon the adoption from time to time
of a resolution of the Common Council directing same, shall designate
zones in streets or public parking areas to be designated as “permit
parking only” areas, and shall cause appropriate signage to be erected
and such lines or markings to be applied to the pavement surface for
the purpose of delineating such restricted permit parking only zones.
57.Editor’s Note: Former Subsection C, establishing penalties for violating this section,
which immediately followed this subsection, as amended, was repealed 6-18-2004 by Ord.
No. 04-01.
58.Editor’s Note: Former Subsection F, providing penalties for violations of this section, as
amended, was repealed 6-18-2004 by Ord. No. 04-01.
§ 180-23 CHARTER § 180-24.1
C:687
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to cause, allow, permit or suffer any
vehicle registered in the name of, or operated by any such person to be
parked wholly or partially in any zone designated as “permit parking
only” unless there is a clearly visible permit duly issued by the City
Clerk displayed on or in such vehicle authorizing such parking in said
zone.
§ 180-24.1 ONEIDA CODE § 180-24.1
C:688
ARTICLE III
Special Provisions for Congested District
§ 180-25. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings assigned
to them in this section:
CONGESTED DISTRICT — Same meaning as provided in § 180-1B, and
includes the same streets or parts of streets therein named, and such
other streets or parts of streets as the Common Council shall hereafter by
resolution designate to include among the streets designated as being in
the congested district, all that portion of Broad Street from the New York
Central Railroad property south to Stone Street and MacArthur Parkway
from Cedar Street to Stone Street.
DAY — That period of time between 9:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m.
PARKING SPACE — Such spaces, areas or zones as are designated pursuant
to the provisions of this article.
§ 180-26. Commissioner of Public Safety to designate, mark and
sign parking spaces.
A. The Commissioner of Public Safety is hereby authorized to establish
immediately and from time to time hereafter as traffic conditions
require, or as the Common Council by resolution shall hereafter direct,
zones to be known as "parking spaces" upon such streets in the
congested district as are selected by the Commissioner of Public Safety
or by resolution of the Common Council for the location of such zones.
The Commissioner of Public Safety shall cause parking spaces to be
designated as herein provided. The parking spaces and/or other
parking regulations or orders of the Commissioner of Public Safety
heretofore filed and effective are hereby confirmed.
B. In any of such parking spaces or in any part or portion of said
separately designated parking spaces, the Commissioner of Public
Safety may cause such spaces to be marked or indicated and shall erect
appropriate signs indicating the time limitation during which said
parking spaces may be occupied, as such time limitations shall be fixed
and determined from time to time by ordinance.
C. The Commissioner of Public Safety may have lines or markings painted
or placed upon the curb or upon the street for the purpose of
designating the parking space to be used.
D. Parking signs shall be erected longitudinally at the ends of the zone and
at advantageous intermediate locations at intervals not to exceed 200
feet. Signs shall be erected in accordance with state regulations as set
forth in New York State Manual of Traffic Control Devices as to height,
lateral placement, mounting and shall be erected on the side of the
roadway on which the regulation is applicable.59
§ 180-25 CHARTER § 180-27
C:689
§ 180-27. Overtime parking.
It shall be unlawful for any person to cause, allow, permit or suffer any
vehicle registered in the name of or operated by any such person to be
parked overtime or beyond the period of legal parking time established for
any parking zone or space as herein described.
§ 180-28. Manner of parking.
§ 180-29. Exemptions.
The provisions of this article shall not apply to motor vehicles, trucks, etc.,
while they are engaged in the business of loading or unloading their cargo
or passengers in the parking zones.
§ 180-30. Violations; penalties for offenses. [Amended 11-7-2001;
6-18-2004 by Ord. No. 04-01]
A. When a parking space in any parking space is parallel with the adjacent
curb or sidewalk, any vehicle occupying such parking space shall be
placed so that the foremost part of such vehicle shall be nearest to the
forward end of said space as indicated by the permitted direction of
traffic. When a parking space is diagonal to the curb and the sidewalk,
any vehicle occupying space in such parking shall be placed in the
parking space with the foremost part of such vehicle nearest to such
curb or sidewalk.
B. It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle across any line or marking
painted or placed upon the curb or upon the street for the purpose of
designating the parking spaces to be used, that the same shall not be
entirely within the area so designated by such lines and markings.
A. It shall be the duty of the police officers of the City to report:
(1) The number of violations of any of the provisions of this article.
(2) The state license number of such vehicle.
(3) Any other facts, a knowledge of which is necessary to a thorough
understanding of the circumstances attending such violation.
(4) Each such police officer shall also attach to such vehicle a notice to
the owner or operator thereof that such vehicle has been parked in
violation of a provision of this article.
59.Editor's Note: Former Sec. 4-16-58, Time limits, which immediately followed this
subsection, was deleted 7-5-1988 by Ord. No. 88-08.
§ 180-27 ONEIDA CODE § 180-30
C:690
B. Penalties for any violations of Article II or Article III of this chapter shall
be as follows: [Amended 12-29-2009 by Ord. No. 09-0560;
10-19-2010 by Ord. No. 10-0661; 3-15-2011 by L.L. No. 2-2011]
(1) All handicapped parking violations: Fine will be the same as the
New York State Vehicle and Traffic Law fine for handicapped
parking violations, which at this time is $50, with a surcharge of
$30; and over 10 days, $100, with a surcharge of $30.
(2) All fire lane and fire hydrant violations: $35; over 10 days, $50;
over 30 days, $100; over 60 days, $200.
(3) Double parking: $10; over 10 days, $50; over 30 days, $100; over
60 days, $200.
(4) All other parking violations: $25; over 10 days, $50; over 30 days,
$100; over 60 days, $200.
60.Editor’s Note: This ordinance also repealed former Subsection C, regarding a grace period
for payment of overdue parking fines, which immediately followed this subsection.
Ordinance No. 09-05 also provided for an effective date of 1-1-2010.
61.Editor's Note: This ordinance provided an effective date of 11-1-2010.
§ 180-30 CHARTER § 180-30
C:691

ARTICLE IV
Obstruction to View
§ 180-31. Vegetation.
§ 180-32. Piled snow. [Amended 2-16-1988 by Ord. No. 88-03]
A. All owner, tenants and/or occupants of premises of any corner formed
by the intersection of highways or streets in the City shall, within 20
days of the receipt from the City Clerk of written notice so to do, so
trim, prune and if necessary remove all hedges, bushes, shrubs and
overhanging limbs of trees upon such part of the premises, to the end
that persons driving vehicles upon either of such intersecting highways
shall have an unobstructed view across some part of said premises to
the other of said highways or streets for a distance of at least 20 feet
measured along such highway or streets on which such vehicle is
traveling in default thereof.
B. The City may do such trimming, pruning or removal and assess the
expense thereof upon the land, the owner of which is in default, and
place said expense upon the next assessment roll if it remains unpaid
when said assessment roll is adopted.
A. Placing, pushing, shoveling or depositing in any way or causing to be
pushed, placed, shoveled or deposited or suffering to be pushed,
placed, shoveled or deposited of any snow, slush or other form of
precipitation in such a manner as to obstruct the view at the
intersections of public streets or highways of persons driving vehicles
upon either of such intersecting streets for a distance of 20 feet
measured along the curbline or edge of the pavement of every
intersection within the City, said 20 feet to be measured from the point
of intersection of said curblines or edges of the paved portions on both
the intersecting and intersected streets, is hereby prohibited.
B. Placing, pushing, shoveling or depositing in any way or causing to be
pushed, placed, shoveled or deposited or the suffering to be pushed,
placed, shoveled or deposited of any snow, slush or other form of
precipitation onto a sidewalk or public street or any part thereof within
the City of Oneida by any person, persons, firm, association or
corporation, individually or by agents, servants, employees or
independent contractors, is hereby prohibited unless written
permission is obtained from the City Engineer; nor shall any person,
persons, firm, association or corporation, individually or by agents,
servants, employees or independent contractors, place, push, shovel or
deposit any snow, slush or other form of precipitation from their
property or a public sidewalk adjacent to their property onto the
property of another person. The owner of the property from which the
snow, slush or other form of precipitation is removed may be found
liable for the acts of his or her servants, employees, agents or
§ 180-31 CHARTER § 180-32
C:693
contractors who violate this section. [Amended 3-5-2019 by L.L. No.
1-2019]
C. Obstruction of fire hydrants is prohibited. [Added 12-19-2000 by L.L.
No. 6-2000]
D. In addition, but not by way of substitution therefor or limitation thereof,
the City may cause the removal of said obstructions and assess the
expense thereof upon the landowner or person responsible and place
said expense upon the assessment roll for the next ensuing year if it
remains unpaid when said assessment roll is adopted.
E. A person found in violation of any part of this section shall be guilty of a
violation punishable by a fine of not less than $25, nor more than $250,
or by imprisonment for a term not to exceed 15 days, or both such fine
and penalty.
§ 180-32 ONEIDA CODE § 180-32
C:694
ARTICLE V
Off-Road Recreational Vehicles
§ 180-33. Title.
This article shall be known as the "Off-Road Recreational Vehicle Regulation
Ordinance of the City of Oneida."
§ 180-34. Statement of policy.
It is hereby declared to be the policy of the City to prevent excessive,
unnecessary or unusually loud noise and unlawful acts of trespass upon
private lands by off-road recreational vehicles. It is further declared that the
provisions and prohibitions herein contained and enacted are in pursuance
of and for the purpose of preserving, protecting and promoting the public
health, comfort, convenience, safety, welfare and the peace and quiet of the
City and its inhabitants.
§ 180-35. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings assigned
to them below:
A-WEIGHTED SOUND LEVEL — The sound pressure level measured by
the use of an instrument with the metering characteristics and A-weighting
frequency response prescribed for sound level meters.
COMMISSIONER — The Commissioner of Public Safety of the city.
DRIVER — Every person who operates or drives or is in actual physical
control of an off-road recreational vehicle, whether or not such vehicle is
actually in motion.
MUFFLER — A device consisting of a series of chambers or baffle plates
or other mechanical design for the purpose of receiving exhaust gas from a
sound source and effective in reducing noise.
OFF-ROAD RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — Any vehicle which is propelled by
any power other than muscular power that is designed for or capable of
cross-country travel, such as a motorcycle, trailbike or minibike, but not a
snowmobile.
OWNER — The owner shall be the person having title to the off-road
recreational vehicle.[Amended 6-17-2014 by Ord. No. 14-06]
§ 180-36. (Reserved)62
§ 180-37. Compliance with state law.
No person shall operate or permit or suffer to be operated an off-road
recreational vehicle on a public highway unless such vehicle meets the
62.Editor’s Note: Former § 180-36, Registration; fee, was repealed 6-17-2014 by Ord. No.
14-06.
§ 180-33 CHARTER § 180-37
C:695
equipment and licensing requirements contained in the New York Vehicle
and Traffic Law.
§ 180-38. Mufflers and exhaust systems.
§ 180-39. Noise level.
No person shall operate or permit or suffer to be operated an off-road
recreational vehicle if the vehicle exceeds a sound level of 105 dB(A). The
limit shall apply at a distance of 1/2 meter from the exhaust in accordance
with the stationary test method of the Motorcycle Industry Council.
§ 180-40. Operation of another's vehicles. [Amended 2-20-2007 by
Ord. No. 07-01]
No person shall operate or suffer to be operated an off-road recreational
vehicle on private property other than that of the owner/operator, or within
125 feet of a dwelling other than that of owner/operator, unless a written
permission slip from the owner of the property is in the immediate
possession of the operator.
§ 180-41. Racing vehicles and racing permits.
No person shall operate an off-road recreational vehicle designed for racing
except at a facility used for racing events. The City may, by specific action
of the Common Council, issue a permit authorizing a specific competition
event, which excepts a person from these restrictions for that specific event.
§ 180-42. Creating nuisances.
Notwithstanding any other provisions of this article, a person shall not
operate any off-road recreational vehicle so as to create a nuisance.
§ 180-43. Violations; penalties for offenses.
A. No person shall operate or permit or suffer to be operated an off-road
recreational vehicle unless such vehicle shall at all times be equipped
with an adequate muffler and exhaust system in constant operation and
properly maintained to prevent any unnecessary noise; no such muffler
or exhaust system shall be equipped with a cut-out, bypass or similar
device.
B. No person shall modify or cause to be modified the muffler, exhaust
system or other noise control device on an off-road recreational vehicle
in a manner which will increase the noise emitted by such vehicle above
that emitted by the vehicle when newly manufactured, regardless of the
date of manufacture. No person shall operate or permit or suffer to be
operated an off-road recreational vehicle so modified.
A. Any person operating an off-road recreational vehicle in violation of this
article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. Any owner who shall knowingly
§ 180-37 ONEIDA CODE § 180-43
C:696
permit or suffer or authorize an off-road recreational vehicle to be
driven in violation of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. Any
parent of any child and any guardian of any ward under the age of 16
years or any person with whom said child resides who shall knowingly
suffer or permit any such child or ward to violate any provisions of this
article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
B. Every person convicted of a misdemeanor for a violation of any
provisions of this article shall be punished by a fine of not less than $25,
nor more than a fine of $100, or imprisonment of not more than 30 days,
or both such fine and imprisonment.
§ 180-43 CHARTER § 180-43
C:697

ARTICLE VI
Snowmobiles
§ 180-44. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to protect the public health, welfare and
safety by regulating the operation of snowmobiles on public highways and
places in the City in a manner which will be compatible with the use of
such highways and places for vehicular and pedestrian travel and other
uses and which will promote the safe and proper use of snowmobiles for
recreation and commerce and minimize detrimental effects of such use on
the environment.
§ 180-45. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings assigned
to them below:
BANK — A mound, pile or ridge of snow on the edge of a highway
accumulated from natural snowfall or by snowplowing operations.
HIGHWAY — The entire width between the boundary lines of any way or
place when any part thereof is open to the use of the public, as a matter of
right, for the purpose of vehicular traffic.
INSIDE BANK — The portion of a snowbank immediately adjacent to the
shoulder of the roadway.
OPERATE — To ride in or on, other than as a passenger, or use or control the
operation of a snowmobile in any manner, whether or not said snowmobile
is under way.
OPERATOR — Every person who operates or is in actual physical control of
a snowmobile.
OUTSIDE BANK — The portion of a snowbank outside the crest thereof and
farthest removed from the roadway.
OWNER — Any person having title to a snowmobile. If a snowmobile is sold
under a contract of conditional sale whereby the title remains in the vendor,
such vendor or his assignee shall not, after delivery of such snowmobile,
be deemed an owner within the provisions of this section, but the vendee
or his assignee, upon receipt of possession thereof, shall be deemed such
owner notwithstanding the terms of such contract, until the vendor or his
assignee shall retake possession. A person holding only a security interest
in a snowmobile shall not be deemed an owner unless such person also has
possession of such snowmobile.
ROADWAY — That portion of a highway improved, designed or ordinarily
used for vehicular travel, exclusive of the shoulder.
SHOULDER — That portion of a highway which lies outside the paved or
unpaved roadway immediately adjacent to the portion of the roadway which
may be used by motor vehicles.
§ 180-44 CHARTER § 180-45
C:699
SNOWMOBILE — A self-propelled vehicle designed for travel on snow or
ice, steered by skis or runners and supported in whole or in part by one or
more skis, belts or cleats.
§ 180-46. Operation in parks and playgrounds.
The operation of snowmobiles within any public park or playground is
hereby prohibited, except where posted for snowmobile use.
§ 180-47. Operation on highways generally. [Amended 12-21-2010
by L.L. No. 4-2010]
Snowmobiles shall not be operated on state, county or City highways except
as specifically authorized under this article, and as provided in the Parks,
Recreation and Historic Preservation Law of the State of New York.
§ 180-48. City streets and highways. [Amended 2-19-1985;
12-19-2000 by L.L. No. 6-2000; 6-21-2001; 12-21-2010 by L.L. No.
4-2010]
The operation of snowmobiles on public streets within the City shall be
subject to all other provisions of this article, and to the following specific
restrictions:
A. In addition to the crossing of streets at approximately right angles to
gain access to other streets and other property upon which operation is
lawful, snowmobiles may be operated only upon designated trails as
provided in § 180-58 of this article, and also upon the streets listed in
Subsection B hereafter solely for the purpose of gaining access to
authorized and designated snowmobile trails both within and outside
the City of Oneida.
B. The following streets within the City of Oneida are hereby designated
for the use and operation of snowmobiles on the shoulder and inside
bank thereof as authorized by the Parks, Recreation and Historic
Preservation Law of the State of New York:
(1) North Lake Street, between Verona Street and North Main Street
(Route 46).
(2) Williams Street, between the Penn-Central main line and the
northerly City limits.
(3) Cobb Street, between Williams Street and Canal Road.
(4) Canal Road, between Schoolheimer Road and Cobb Street.
(5) Dump Road, from Route 5 to a point 2,700 feet south of Route 5.
(6) Stephen Street, between Lenox Avenue and East Walnut Street.
(7) Lake Road (Route 316) between North Main Street (Route 46) and
Canal Road.
§ 180-45 ONEIDA CODE § 180-49
C:700
§ 180-49. Prohibited operation. [Amended 2-19-1985; 2-20-2007 by
Ord. No. 07-02; 12-21-2010 by L.L. No. 4-2010]
No person shall operate a snowmobile within 125 feet of a dwelling, unless
traveling in a location specifically authorized under this article. No
snowmobile shall be operated within the Inside District of the City of Oneida
between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.
§ 180-50. Financial security.
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a snowmobile on any public
lands or places of the City unless the owner or operator of such snowmobile
is insured against public liability and carries with him proof of financial
responsibility in the manner prescribed by the Office of Parks and
Recreation and of the minimum amount as provided in the Parks, Recreation
and Historic Preservation Law of the State of New York. Such proof shall
be displayed by the owner or operator of any snowmobile upon request to
any law enforcement officer or to any person who has suffered or claims to
have suffered either personal injury or damage to property as a result of
the operation of such snowmobile by any such owner or operator. Failure to
produce such proof of financial responsibility shall be presumptive evidence
of operating a snowmobile without insurance against public liability. Upon
the production of such proof of financial security, such presumption is
removed.
§ 180-51. Direction of operation.
No person shall operate a snowmobiles within the streets or highway rightof-
way of the City except on the right side of such right-of-way and in the
same direction as the traffic. Operation on other public places shall be only
in the direction, if any, marked by appropriate route direction markers.
§ 180-52. Unattended snowmobiles.
It shall be unlawful for any owner or operator to leave or allow a
snowmobile to be left unattended on any City highway or public place, while
the motor is running, or with any key for starting the same left in the
ignition or elsewhere in said snowmobile. It shall be unlawful for any person
to allow the motor of a halted snowmobile to remain in a running position
for more than five minutes.
§ 180-53. Obedience to traffic controls.
Each person operating a snowmobile on any City highway or street shall
observe strictly all vehicular traffic signs and signals and all other rules
and regulations applicable to vehicular traffic and shall obey the orders
and directions of any state or local police officer or other law enforcement
officer authorized to direct or regulate traffic.
§ 180-49 CHARTER § 180-54
C:701
§ 180-54. Operation by minors.
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a snowmobile on the public
streets or highways who is under the age of 16 years unless accompanied
by and under the control and supervision of a parent or legal guardian
and in such event such youthful operator shall possess a New York state
snowmobile safety certificate.
§ 180-55. Stopping at certain intersections.
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a snowmobile into or through
an intersection of streets or highways which is not controlled by a traffic
control device, without first bringing it to a complete stop and granting the
right-of-way to pedestrians and all other traffic.
§ 180-56. Operation on sidewalks.
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a snowmobile upon any
sidewalk or right-of-way reserved only to pedestrians except to cross it at
approximately right angles to gain access to property upon which operation
is lawful. The right-of-way, during such a crossing, is granted to pedestrians.
§ 180-57. Speed. [Amended 12-21-2010 by L.L. No. 4-2010]
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a snowmobile at a speed
greater than 20 miles per hour within the Inside District of the City of
Oneida.
§ 180-58. Designated snowmobile trails. [Added 12-21-2010 by L.L.
No. 4-201063]
Other than the operation upon the portions of streets authorized under
§ 180-48 of this article, snowmobiles may be operated within the Inside
District of the City only upon trails designated for such operation by the
Common Council and authorized for such use by the owners of the
properties over which the trail(s) may cross. Such authorized and
designated trail(s) shall be depicted on a map to be designated and titled
as the “City of Oneida Inside District Snowmobile Trail Map,” which map
shall be approved, and from time to time amended, by resolution of the
Common Council, and as so approved and amended, filed in the office of
the City Clerk. Prior to approving or amending said map, the Common
Council shall determine that there is on file in the City Clerk’s office a
written consent form, signed and acknowledged on behalf of each and all
owners of property over which the authorized and designated trail(s) may
cross, granting permission for such trail(s) to cross over their properties.
In the event a property owner revokes the permission granted for the trail
to cross over his property, neither the City nor the Common Council shall
be responsible for amending the map, or correcting any City signage placed
63.Editor’s Note: Former § 180-58, Operator’s position, was deleted pursuant to L.L. No.
4-2010.
§ 180-54 ONEIDA CODE § 180-58
C:702
in relation to the map, for a period of 45 days following the date of filing
of a signed and acknowledged instrument documenting such revocation of
permission in the office of the City Clerk.
§ 180-59. Lights.
It shall be unlawful for anyone to operate a snowmobile on a street or
highway in the City unless the snowmobile is equipped with at least one
headlight and taillight illuminated at all times. Said lights shall comply
in all respects with the provisions of the Parks, Recreation and Historic
Preservation Law of the State of New York as they are enacted and amended
from time to time.
§ 180-60. Position on road.
It shall be unlawful to operate a snowmobile on a public street or highway
in the City in any other manner than single file and as near to the right-hand
curb or snowbank as practicable.
§ 180-61. Noise. [Amended 12-21-2010 by L.L. No. 4-2010]
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a snowmobile in the City of
Oneida which is out of repair, overloaded, or intentionally modified from its
original factory condition in such a manner as to create loud or unnecessary
grating, grinding, rattling or other noise. Noise of such character, intensity
and/or duration as to disturb public comfort, peace or repose is hereby
declared to be a public nuisance, and is hereby prohibited. Any operation
of a snowmobile which has had any portion of its exhaust system modified
from its original factory condition, resulting in an increase in the level and/
or intensity of the sound emitted by the engine compared to the sound
emitted by the engine in its original factory condition, is prohibited and
declared to be a public nuisance per se and a violation under this article.
§ 180-62. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 12-19-2000 by L.L. No.
6-2000; 12-29-2009 by Ord. No. 09-0564]
Failure to comply with any of the provisions of this article shall be deemed
an offense and the violator or offender shall be as follows:
A. For the first or second offense, not less than $50, nor more than $200.
B. For the third or subsequent offense, not less than $100, nor more than
$300.
64.Editor’s Note: This ordinance also provided for an effective date of 1-1-2010.
§ 180-58 CHARTER § 180-62
C:703

ARTICLE VII
Parking Ticket Amnesty Program of 2010
[Added 10-19-2010 by Ord. No. 10-07]
§ 180-63. Conditions.
The Mayor is hereby authorized to institute an amnesty program upon the
following conditions:
A. Definitions. As used in this article, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
AMNESTY and AMNESTY PROGRAM — The abatement and
modification of the penalty provisions of Subsection B of § 180-30 of this
chapter for certain violations of Articles II and III of Chapter 180 of the
Code of the City of Oneida in accordance with the terms and conditions
stated herein.
B. Term. The amnesty period will commence on November 1, 2010, and
terminate as of the close of business on December 31, 2010.
C. Qualifications. All outstanding unpaid parking tickets issued by the
Oneida Police Department prior to September 30, 2010, shall qualify for
the amnesty program and may be paid at any time during the amnesty
period to obtain the penalty abatement.
D. Amnesty payment. The payment required in order to qualify for the
amnesty program shall be equal to the unpaid base amount of each
outstanding parking ticket as if the ticket had been paid within 72 hours
of its initial issuance.
E. Place of payment. All amnesty payments shall be made to the City
Chamberlain, 109 N. Main St., Oneida, New York, who is hereby
authorized to accept all amnesty payments. Payments must be received
or postmarked by December 31, 2010.
F. Penalties forgiven. Upon receipt of the amnesty payment, the
Chamberlain shall notify the Police Department and the City Court,
which shall then discharge the outstanding unpaid parking ticket(s)
covered by the amnesty payment without further penalties.
G. Condition. The amnesty program is conditioned upon the issuance of an
order of the Chief Judge of the Oneida City Court approving the
disposition of all parking tickets qualifying for the amnesty program as
provided herein.
§ 180-63 CHARTER § 180-63
C:705
Chapter 190
ZONING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Appearance tickets — See Ch. 21.
Building code administration and
enforcement — See Ch. 33.
Fair housing — See Ch. 53.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 64.
Freshwater wetlands — See Ch. 68.
Housing standards — See Ch. 77.
Junkyards — See Ch. 85.
Mobile homes and mobile home parks — See
Ch. 92.
Sewers — See Ch. 139.
Site plan review — See Ch. 143.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 155.
Swimming pools — See Ch. 159.
§ 180-63 ONEIDA CODE § 180-63
C:706
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 190-1. Enactment.
The Common Council of the City of Oneida in the County of Madison, New
York does hereby ordain and enact the City of Oneida Zoning Regulations
under and pursuant to the Municipal Home Rule Law of the State of New
York and consistent with the applicable provisions of Article 5-A of the
General City Law.
§ 190-2. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "City of Oneida Zoning
Regulations" and is hereinafter referred to as "these regulations."
§ 190-3. Purpose. [Amended 9-20-1983]
§ 190-4. Scope.
A. It is the purpose and intent of these regulations to promote the health,
safety or the general welfare of the community, and thus to lessen
congestion in the streets; to secure safety from fire, flood, panic and
other dangers; to provide adequate light, air, and the accommodation of
solar energy systems and equipment and access to sunlight necessary
therefor; to prevent the overcrowding of land; to avoid undue
concentration of population; to facilitate the adequate provision of
transportation, water, sewerage, schools, parks and other public
requirements; to promote aesthetic values; and to encourage the most
appropriate use of land throughout the City as set forth in the City's
Comprehensive Plan, as most recently amended.
B. It is further the purpose of these regulations to consider land use and
development in accord with the provisions of the City's Comprehensive
Plan as regards the proposed settlement and density patterns and
anticipated and desirable rates of population increase; to consider
proposals for land use and development relative to these policies as
embodied in the Comprehensive Plan in order to preserve the character
and quality of life enjoyed in the City at present; and further to consider
the ability of the responsible units of government to provide such
services as would be required by the pattern of land use and
development and the appropriate manner of assuring equitable
participation in these costs.
A. Pursuant to the provisions of the Municipal Home Rule Law and in
accord with the applicable provisions of General City Law, these
regulations authorize and empower those duly appointed or delegated
by the Common Council of the City of Oneida to approve or disapprove
zoning permits and certificates of compliance according to the process
and standards set forth herein.
§ 190-1 CHARTER § 190-4
C:707
§ 190-5. Definitions.
B. These regulations shall apply to the construction, erection or location of
any new building or use; the expansion or addition in any way that
would alter the exterior dimensions of, or area occupied by, an existing
building or use; and the introduction, expansion or change of any use as
herein provided for in the City of Oneida.
C. The enactment or future amendment of these regulations affecting a
previously filed or otherwise eligible subdivision plat shall entitle the
lots delineated on, and part of, such subdivision to the applicable
exemption from these regulations as provided under Article 5-A, § 83-a
of the General City Law.
A. For the purpose of these regulations, certain words and terms used
herein shall be defined as follows:
(1) Unless otherwise defined, words and terms used in these
regulations shall be interpreted to have their customary meaning.
(2) Further, words used in the present tense include the future tense;
the singular includes the plural; the word "person" includes a
corporation as well as an individual; the word "lot" includes the
word "plot" or "parcel"; the word "shall" is always mandatory; and
the word "used" or "occupied" as applied to any land or building
shall be construed to include "intended, arranged, or designed to
be used or occupied."
(3) Upon application, the precise meaning and application of any word
or term used in these regulations shall be as determined by the
Joint Zoning Board of Appeals/Planning Commission. [Amended
11-8-2017 by L.L. No. 5-2017]
B. The interpretation of certain words and terms under these regulations
shall include the following:
ADULT DAY-CARE FACILITY — Provision of daytime care to adults
whose ability to independently perform the normal activities of daily life
is limited by age or physical or other impairment but who do not require
the level of care provided by nursing homes or medical facilities. Said
care shall be provided for a period of time of more than three but less
than 12 hours on any given day.[Added 4-18-2006 by Ord. No. 06-01]
AGRICULTURE — The production of agricultural products for
compensation, including field crops, produce, horticulture, livestock,
and dairy products. The term includes the sale of products grown on
such land and the necessary buildings and accessory construction such
as barns, silos, and fences which are a normal part of agriculture.
Agriculture includes farm, nursery, greenhouse, and truck garden.
ALLEY — A public way which affords, generally, a secondary means of
vehicular access to abutting property.
§ 190-4 ONEIDA CODE § 190-5
C:708
AREA VARIANCE — Authorization by the Joint Zoning Board of Appeals/
Planning Commission for the use of land in a manner which is not
allowed by the dimensional or physical requirements of the applicable
zoning regulations.[Added 12-19-2000 by L.L. No. 6-2000;
amended 11-8-2017 by L.L. No. 5-2017]
BAR — See “tavern.”[Added 4-18-2006 by L.L. No. 06-01]
BASEMENT — A space of full-story height, partly below grade but
having at least 1/2 of its clear floor to ceiling height above the average
grade of the adjoining ground, and which is not designed or used
primarily for year-round living accommodations.
BED-AND-BREAKFAST — A building containing a single dwelling unit
in which at least one, but not more than four, sleeping rooms are
provided by the owner/occupant as overnight/lodging facilities for the
accommodation of transient guests and include a single daily
meal.[Added 4-18-2006 by Ord. No. 06-01]
BUILDING — Any roofed structure permanently affixed to the land
intended for the shelter, housing or enclosure of persons, animals, or
property.
BUILDING, ACCESSORY — A building detached from, subordinate to,
and whose use is incidental to, but consistent with that of the principal
building on the same lot.
BUILDING AREA — The total ground floor area of a principal building
and accessory buildings exclusive of uncovered porches, steps and
terraces. This area determines lot coverage.
BUILDING, DETACHED — A freestanding building surrounded by open
space on all sides and not physically joined to another building.
BUILDING FRONT — That side of any building facing a public roadway
or shoreline as designated on any application for a permit by the
applicant. A building can have more than one front.
BUILDING HEIGHT — The vertical distance measured from the
average level of the proposed finished grade across each face of the
building to the highest point of the roof for flat roofs; to the deck line
of mansard roofs; and to the mean height between eaves and ridge for
gambrel or peaked roofs.
BUILDING LINE — A line parallel with the front, side and rear lot lines,
respectively, beyond which a principal building or use may or may not
extend as determined by these regulations. (See diagram at end of this
chapter.) 65
BUILDING, PRINCIPAL — A building in which is conducted the main or
primary use of the lot on which the building is located.
65.Editor's Note: The diagram is on file in the office of the City Clerk.
§ 190-5 CHARTER § 190-5
C:709
BUSINESS, HOME — An accessory use of a service character by the
owner/occupant and clearly secondary to the use of the principal
building for residential purposes.
BUSINESS OFFICES — Offices in which are conducted professional or
business occupations of a service character and not involving the sale of
merchandise or stock-in-trade nor the storage of vehicles, equipment,
or materials.
CAR WASH — See "motor vehicle wash."
CELLAR — A space of full-story height having more than 1/2 of its clear
height below the average grade of the adjoining ground.
CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE — The instrument of verification as
required under the provisions of these regulations, subsequent to the
completion of any project for which a zoning permit was required and
prior to the use or occupancy of the land or building to which the permit
pertained.
CHARGING — When an electric vehicle is connected to electric vehicle
supply equipment (or standard outlet) for the purpose of recharging
batteries on board the electric vehicle.[Added 6-21-2016 by L.L. No.
2-2016]
CHILD DAY-CARE CENTER — A program or facility caring for children
for more than three hours per day but less than 24 hours a day by
an individual, association, corporation, institution or agency whose
activities include providing child day care or operating a home or
facility where child day care is provided as defined in § 390 of the New
York State Social Services Law. Said definition does not include "group
family day care" and "family day care" as those terms are defined
herein.[Added 4-18-2006 by Ord. No. 06-01]
CLUB — Lands and buildings used for recreational, athletic, or social
purposes by members of formally organized associations, including
fraternities, sororities, lodges, fish and game clubs, golf clubs, and
tennis clubs. Buildings may include restaurant, bar, and overnight
facilities.
COMMERCIAL EXCAVATION — The removal of stone, sand, gravel, or
topsoil, as a commercial product. The process of site improvement or
alteration preparatory to the location of a building or use for which a
zoning permit has been issued is not included in this definition.
COMMUNITY CENTER — A not-for-profit or publicly owned facility
providing community facilities such as recreational programs and
meeting rooms that are open to the public and designed to
accommodate and serve significant segments of the community.[Added
4-18-2006 by Ord. No. 06-01]
CONDITIONAL USE — A use that would not be appropriate throughout
a zoning district but which, if controlled as to number, area, location,
or relation to the neighborhood, may be permitted in certain zoning
districts. It must be reviewed, for approval, by the Joint Zoning Board
§ 190-5 ONEIDA CODE § 190-5
C:710
of Appeals/Planning Commission for compliance with appropriate
standards of § 190-28 of this chapter.[Amended 6-2-1981; 11-8-2017
by L.L. No. 5-2017]
CONDOMINIUM — Any apartment, townhouse or other residential
building, or portion thereof, involving a combination of two kinds of
ownership of real property:
CULTURAL FACILITIES — Establishments utilized for the display of'
exhibits of historic, educational or cultural nature which are not
operated commercially. Also “museums.”[Added 4-18-2006 by Ord.
No. 06-01]
DEVELOPMENT — The division of a parcel of land into two or more
parcels; the construction, reconstruction, conversion, structural
alteration, relocation, or enlargement of any structure; any mining,
excavation, landfill, or land disturbance; and any use or extension of the
use of the land.[Added 4-18-2006 by Ord. No. 06-01]
DRIVE-THROUGH FACILITY — Any portion of a building or structure
from which business is transacted, or is capable of being transacted,
directly with customers located in a motor vehicle during such business
transactions. A drive-through facility is considered an accessory use. An
automobile service station is not considered a drive-through facility for
purposes of this chapter.[Added 4-18-2006 by Ord. No. 06-01]
DUPLEX — One structure containing two dwelling units on two
adjacent lots, attached side by side, having one common wall with yard
area on three sides of each dwelling unit.[Amended 1-20-1981]
DWELLING — A building or portion thereof, providing complete
housekeeping facilities for one family.
DWELLING, MANUFACTURED — A structure, transportable in one or
more sections, which, in traveling mode, is eight body feet or more in
width or 40 body feet or more in lengths, or, when erected on site, is
320 or more square feet, and which is built on a permanent chassis
and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent
foundation when connected to the required utilities, and includes the
plumbing, heating, air conditioning, and electrical systems contained
therein as defined in 42 U.S.C. § 5402(6). Manufactured homes shall not
include modular homes.[Added 4-18-2006 by Ord. No. 06-01]
DWELLING, MOBILE — A factory-fabricated dwelling consisting of
a single structure transportable on its own chassis and wheels or
removable wheel assembly whether or not the wheels and towing hitch
are removed when the unit is installed; also commonly known as
(1) Fee simple ownership of the individual dwelling unit; and
Undivided ownership together with other purchasers of the
common elements of the structure, land and appurtenances.
Management is controlled by a property owners' association.
(2)
§ 190-5 CHARTER § 190-5
C:711
"trailer" and "mobile home." See also "dwelling,
manufactured."[Amended 4-18-2006 by Ord. No. 06-01]
DWELLING, MODULAR — A modular home is that constructed off
site in a minimum of two sections, each of which is transported to
the building site separately, with installation of heating system and
application of siding coming after the erection of the home, and which
is indistinguishable in appearance from conventionally built homes.
Modular homes have no permanent support frame (chassis). Any
structure which is built on a permanent chassis is defined as a
manufactured home under 42 U.S.C. § 5402(6) and this chapter.
Modular homes shall bear the New York State building code
certification as factory-manufactured dwellings.[Added 4-18-2006by
Ord. No. 06-01]
DWELLING, MULTIPLE-FAMILY — Attached dwelling units designed
for year-round or seasonal occupancy by more than four families living
independently of each other.
DWELLING, ONE-FAMILY — A detached dwelling unit designed for
year-round or seasonal occupancy by one family only.66
EARTH STATION (or DISH ANTENNA) — Earth station shall mean a
combination of:
EASEMENT — A legal and binding assignment of interest by deed or
contract for the specified use of a designated portion of property to
other than the landowner.
ELECTRIC VEHICLE — Any motor vehicle that is registered with the
New York State Department of Motor Vehicles and authorized to
operate on public and private highways, roads, and streets, and uses
electrical energy stored on-board for motive purpose. "Electric vehicle"
includes battery electric vehicles and plug-in hybrid electric
vehicles.[Added 6-21-2016 by L.L. No. 2-2016]
ELECTRIC VEHICLE CHARGING STATION — A private parking space
that is served by electric vehicle supply equipment that has as its
primary purpose the transfer of electric energy (by conductive or
Antenna or dish antenna whose purpose is to receive
communication or other signals from orbiting satellites and other
extraterrestrial sources.
(1)
A low-noise amplifier (LNA) which is situated at the focal point
of the receiving component and whose purpose is to magnify and
transfer signals.
(2)
A coaxial cable whose purpose is to carry the signal into the
interior of the building. [Amended 11-7-1984]
(3)
66.Editor's Note: The definition of “dwelling, sectional,” which immediately followed this
definition, was repealed 4-18-2006 by Ord. No. 06-01.
§ 190-5 ONEIDA CODE § 190-5
C:712
inductive means) to a battery in an electric vehicle.[Added 6-21-2016
by L.L. No. 2-2016]
ELECTRIC VEHICLE INFRASTRUCTURE — The structures, machinery,
and equipment necessary and integral to support an electric vehicle,
including the electrical conduit and premises wiring requirements for
the installation of electric vehicle supply equipment, as well as battery
exchange stations.[Added 6-21-2016 by L.L. No. 2-2016]
ELECTRIC VEHICLE SUPPLY EQUIPMENT (EVSE) — The conductors,
including the ungrounded, grounded, and equipment grounding
conductors and the electric vehicle conductors, attachment plugs, and
all other fittings, devices, power outlets, or apparatus installed
specifically for purposes of delivering energy from the premises wiring
to the electric vehicle, complying and conforming with National Electric
Code Article 625 and Society of Automotive Engineers J1772
Standard.[Added 6-21-2016 by L.L. No. 2-2016]
ENTERTAINMENT FACILITY — Any establishment that is operated,
maintained, or devoted to amusement of the general public, whether
privately or publicly owned, where entertainment is offered by the
facility. Entertainment facilities shall include, but not be limited to,
the following: arenas, theaters, bowling alleys, dance halls or clubs,
video arcades, skating rinks, batting cages, and miniature golf courses.
Entertainment facilities shall not include sexually oriented businesses,
taverns, pubs, golf courses, or parks.[Added 4-18-2006 by Ord. No.
06-01]
FAMILY — One or more persons occupying a dwelling, which persons
shall either be related by blood, marriage or adoption, or include not
more than three unrelated individuals, alone, or in addition to any
who are related by blood, marriage or adoption, and living as a single
housekeeping unit as distinguished from a group occupying a rooming
house, fraternity, hotel, commune, or other such group quarters.
FAMILY DAY-CARE FACILITY — A program caring for children for more
than three hours per day per child in which child day care is provided
in a family home for three to six children, or seven and eight children
as defined in § 390 of the New York State Social Services Law.[Added
4-18-2006 by Ord. No. 06-01]
FARM — See "agriculture."
FARM EQUIPMENT DEALERSHIP — Land and structures used for the
display and sale of equipment customarily used in agriculture.
FINANCIAL INSTITUTION — A building used for activities customarily
associated with commercial banking or savings and loan facilities.
FIREWOOD — Seasoned cordwood, trunks and branches of trees and
bushes, but does not include leaves, needles, vines or brush smaller
than three inches in diameter.[Added 4-2-2013 by L.L. No. 2-2013]
§ 190-5 CHARTER § 190-5
C:713
FLOOR AREA — The sum of the gross horizontal areas of the several
floors of the building or buildings, measured from the exterior faces of
exterior walls or from the center lines of walls separating two buildings.
FUNERAL HOME — A building used for the preparation of the dead for
services, burial, or cremation. Also known as a mortuary.
GARAGE, PRIVATE — An enclosed space intended for storage of one
or more motor vehicles and within which space no commercial activity
or industry connected directly or indirectly with motor vehicles is
conducted.
GARAGE, SERVICE — A building or part thereof used for the storage,
selling, renting, servicing, washing or painting and major repair of
motor-driven vehicles. Also known as "service station" or "body shop."
GASOLINE STATION — Any area of land, including structures thereon,
that is used or designed to be used for the sale of gasoline and/or
diesel oil or other motor vehicle fuel and which may include facilities for
lubricating, washing, cleaning, and otherwise servicing motor vehicles,
including the painting or major repair thereof. Also known as "filling
station."
GOVERNMENT AGENCY — Any department, commission, independent
agency, or instrumentality of the United States, New York State,
Madison County, the City of Oneida and any other incorporated or
unincorporated municipality, authority, district or other governmental
unit.[Added 4-18-2006 by Ord. No. 06-01]
GROUP FAMILY DAY CARE — Care provided for not more than 12
children away from their own homes for more than three hours but less
than 24 hours per day for any given child in a licensed group family
day-care home which is operated for such purposes for compensation
or otherwise as defined in § 390 of the New York State Social Services
Law.[Added 4-18-2006 by Ord. No. 06-01]
HABITABLE SPACE — The space within a dwelling unit occupied for
living, sleeping, bathing, eating, and cooking purposes and exclusive of
a cellar, attic or such other portions of the dwelling unit not generally
occupied by the residents of the dwelling unit.
HOSPITAL — See "medical facility."
HOSTEL — A dwelling unit providing complete housekeeping facilities
for a nontransient group of physically or mentally handicapped persons
whose residence in such facility is monitored by a duly constituted
social services agency and which residency and program is certified
by New York State Department of Mental Hygiene. Such facility shall
provide living quarters for a maximum of 12 residents in addition
to resident houseparents or qualified staff personnel and shall be
considered a single-family residence for the purposes of these zoning
regulations.
HOTEL/MOTEL — A building or portion thereof providing rental
sleeping rooms and which may also include dining rooms, kitchens,
§ 190-5 ONEIDA CODE § 190-5
C:714
serving rooms, ballrooms and other facilities and services intended
primarily for the accommodation of the personal needs of the motoring
public, and including facilities for the parking of patrons' motor
vehicles. Auto courts, motor hotels, motor courts, motor inns, motor
lodges, tourist courts, tourist cabins, and roadside hotels are included
in this definition.
HYDROPONIC AGRICULTURAL GREENHOUSE OPERATION — A
hydroponic greenhouse with an agricultural growing area of not less
than 20,000 square feet that grows plants that are useful to human
beings, including, but not limited to, forages, sod, berries, herbs, fruits,
vegetables, flowers, seeds, and nursery stock.[Added 12-19-2017 by
L.L. No. 6-2017]
HYDROPONIC GREENHOUSE — An indoor agricultural greenhouse
operation in which:[Added 12-19-2017 by L.L. No. 6-2017]
INN — A building containing a single dwelling unit in which more
than four sleeping rooms are provided by the owner/occupant for
compensation, for the accommodation of transient guests, with or
without meals.[Added 4-18-2006 by Ord. No. 06-01]
JUNKYARD — Land or structure or part thereof, used for the collecting,
storage, or sale of waste paper, rags, scrap metals, used or salvaged
building or other discarded material, or for the collecting, dismantling,
storage and salvaging of machinery or vehicles. It shall mean any place
of storage or deposit, whether in connection with another business or
not, where two or more unlicensed vehicles, no longer in condition for
legal use on public highways are held, whether for the purpose of resale
of used parts or materials therefrom or not. Such term shall include any
place of storage or deposit for any such purpose of used parts or waste
materials from motor vehicles which, taken together, equal in bulk two
or more such vehicles.
LANDFILL, SANITARY — A municipal or private site for the depositing
of refuse, compacting it to the smallest practical volume, and covering
it with earth or other material in a systematic and sanitary manner.
LIGHT INDUSTRIAL — A use engaged in the basic processing and
manufacture, predominantly from previously prepared materials, of
finished products or parts, including processing, fabrication, assembly,
treatment, packaging, incidental storage, sales, and distribution of such
Some or all of the nutrients are placed in intimate contact with
a plant's root system, being grown in any or all of, a supportive
medium, containerized medium, or nutrient film technique;
(1)
Technical control systems are used to monitor, adapt, and optimize
the greenhouse growing environment; and
(2)
Areas and structures to support the growing may include, without
limitation, administration, washroom, irrigation, heating,
harvesting, grading, warehousing, distribution, and refrigeration.
(3)
§ 190-5 CHARTER § 190-5
C:715
products, but excluding basic industrial processing.[Added 4-18-2006
by Ord. No. 06-01]
LIGHT MANUFACTURING — A use engaged in the basic processing,
assembly and manufacture, predominantly from previously prepared
materials such as textiles, leathers or specialty food ingredients, for
production of finished products offered for sale in support of retail
operations conducted from the premises, including processing,
treatment, assembly, packaging, incidental storage, and retail sale of
such products, but excluding manufacturing, light industrial and
warehouse uses, or other uses which generate hazardous materials,
offensive odors, and other adverse environmental impacts. At least
50% of the first-floor space in premises which are engaged in light
manufacturing shall be devoted to the occupant’s retail operations.
Light manufacturing which is conducted in the upper floors of buildings
in the Downtown Commercial Zone shall be limited to 7:00 a.m. to 9:00
p.m.[Added 5-5-2009 by Ord. No. 09-03]
LOT — A single and contiguous parcel of land considered as a unit,
occupied or capable of being occupied by a principal building or use
and accessory buildings or uses, or by a group of buildings and uses
united by a common use.
LOT AREA — The total area included within front, side and rear lot
lines.
LOT CORNER — A lot located at the intersection of and fronting on two
or more intersecting streets, and having an interior angle at the corner
of intersection of less than 135º.
LOT COVERAGE — That portion of the plot or lot area covered by
building area and expressed as a percentage of total lot area.
LOT LINE — Any line dividing one lot from another or from an
established right-of-way or the shoreline.
LOT LINE, FRONT — The lot line adjoining and separating the lot from
any road or highway right-of-way line or the shoreline; or where there
is not direct frontage on either for any lot established after the effective
date of these regulations as designated and approved by the Joint
Zoning Board of Appeals/Planning Commission.[Amended 11-8-2017
by L.L. No. 5-2017]
LOT UNIMPROVED — A lot for which no building or structure has been
constructed or located and on which no excavation, improved driveway
or the installation of water supply or sewage disposal systems has been
initiated with the intent to serve a building or use.
LOT WIDTH — The distance between side lot lines measured parallel
to the front lot line where such parallel line is a straight line, or the
chord of such parallel line where it is curvilinear, at a distance from the
front lot line equal to the minimum required front yard specified for the
district. (See diagram at end of this chapter.) 67
§ 190-5 ONEIDA CODE § 190-5
C:716
MANUFACTURING — A use engaged in the mechanical or chemical
transformation of materials or substances into new products, including
the assembling of component parts, the creation of products, and the
blending of materials, such as lubricating oils, plastics, resins, or
liquors.[Added 4-18-2006 by Ord. No. 06-01]
MEDICAL FACILITY — A building used for the diagnosis and treatment
of sick and or injured persons. This definition includes hospitals,
medical offices, clinics, and extended-care facilities.[Amended
4-18-2006 by Ord. No. 06-01]
MEDICAL OFFICES/CLINICS — A place where medical or dental care
is furnished to persons on an outpatient basis by one or more doctors
or dentists. A place for the care, diagnosis and treatment of sick, ailing,
infirm or injured persons and those who are in need of medical or
surgical attention, but who are not provided with board or room or
kept overnight on the premises. A facility for human ailments operated
by a group of physicians, dentists, chiropractors, or other licensed
practitioners for the treatment and examination of outpatients. A
medical or dental clinic is an organization of specializing physicians or
dentists, or both, who have offices in a common building. A clinic shall
include laboratory facilities in conjunction with normal clinic services,
but shall not include inpatient care.[Added 4-18-2006 by Ord. No.
06-01]
MOBILE HOME — See "dwelling, mobile."
MOBILE DWELLING PARK — A parcel of land which is designed and
improved for the placement of 10 or more mobile dwellings and which
mobile dwellings are located on sites rented or leased to the occupants
of the mobile homes.
MOTOR VEHICLE SALES AND SERVICE — A lot and/or structures used
for the display and sale of motor vehicles and including servicing of
such vehicles. May also include gasoline service station, and/or service
garage.
MOTOR VEHICLE BODY SHOP — See "garage, service."
MOTOR VEHICLE WASH — Buildings, structures, and land used for the
washing and cleaning of motorized vehicles. May be associated with
other motor vehicle services.
NEIGHBORHOOD RETAIL SERVICES — A limited retail or service
business operating solely from the ground floor of a principal building
with a footprint of no more than 2,500 square feet that provides goods
and services primarily to its immediate neighborhood. Neighborhood
retail establishments shall include grocery stores, personal care
services, florists, pharmacies, bakeries and like businesses. Retail
operating hours and deliveries will be limited to 6:00 a.m. to 10:00
p.m.[Added 4-18-2006 by Ord. No. 06-01; amended 5-5-2009 by
Ord. No. 09-03]
67.Editor's Note: The diagram is on file in the office of the City Clerk.
§ 190-5 CHARTER § 190-5
C:717
NONCONFORMING SITUATION — A lot, building, or structure which
does not conform to the requirements for use, location or dimensions in
the zoning district in which it is situated as regards use, minimum yard
dimensions, minimum lot area, maximum building height or maximum
lot coverage. May be called nonconforming lot, nonconforming
building, or nonconforming use.
NURSERY SCHOOL — A school organized for the purpose of providing
instruction and related daytime care for groups of six to 20 children
from three to five years of age inclusive; and organized on a regular
basis under the supervision of qualified instructors and supervisory
personnel, with adequate accommodation for a program of learning
activities and capable of maintaining proper standards of health and
safety.
NURSING HOME — A facility regulated by the state, providing nursing
care to sick, invalid, infirm, disabled, or convalescent persons, in
addition to lodging and board.
OPEN SPACE RECREATION — A recreation activity particularly
oriented to and utilizing the natural landscape and outdoor character
of an area, including hiking, equestrian and recreational vehicle trail;
ski and golf facilities, park, picnic or beach area; and similar outdoor,
nonintensive structures and uses.
OUTDOOR FURNACE — Any equipment, device or apparatus, or any
part thereof, which is installed, affixed or situated outdoors for the
primary purpose of combustion of fuel to produce heat or energy used
as a component of a heating system providing heat for any interior
space or to transfer heat via liquid to indoor spaces.[Added 4-2-2013
by L.L. No. 2-2013]
PERSONAL CARE SERVICES — Establishments primarily engaged in
providing services involving the care of a person such as beauty shops,
barbershops, nail salons, shoe repair, other salons, and tanning.[Added
4-18-2006 by Ord. No. 06-01]
PLUG-IN HYBRID ELECTRIC VEHICLE (PHEV) — An electric vehicle
that:
PROFESSIONAL OFFICE OF RESIDENT — An office in a residence
used exclusively by the owner/occupier for the provision of personal
services in the following categories: physician, dentist, architect,
Contains an internal combustion engine and also allows power to
be delivered to drive wheels by an electric motor;
(1)
Charges its battery primarily by connecting to the grid or other offboard
electrical source;
(2)
May additionally be able to sustain battery charge using an onboard
internal-combustion-driven generator; and
(3)
(4) Has the ability to travel powered by electricity.
§ 190-5 ONEIDA CODE § 190-5
C:718
lawyer, engineer, artist, musician, certified public accountant. For the
purpose of these regulations, such air office shall be considered a home
business.
PROFESSIONAL OFFICES — The use of offices and related spaces for
such professional services that are provided by accountants, attorneys,
architects, engineers and similar professions. A professional office
excludes uses permitted in a business office and medical offices/
clinics.[Added 4-18-2006 by Ord. No. 06-01]
PROFESSIONAL OFFICES, MINOR — A professional office that has
a maximum of four professionals and two full-time employees per
professional, provided that the maximum occupancy shall be further
limited so that the total square footage of the structure contains at
least 250 square feet per full-time professional or employee occupant of
the structure. For purposes of calculating maximum occupancy under
this provision, two or more part-time professionals or employees who
typically work a total of 40 hours or less per week within the premises
shall be considered to be one full-time occupant.[Added 4-18-2006 by
Ord. No. 06-01; amended 5-5-2009 by Ord. No. 09-03]
PUBLIC USE — A structure or use designed and maintained as a
municipal facility for recreation, transportation, fire and police
protection, and like not-for-profit public and municipal functions.
PUBLIC UTILITY — A structure or use whether privately or publicly
owned and operated, designed and maintained for the provision of
electric, telephone, radio, television, water and sewer services.
PUBLIC UTILITY FACILITIES — Telephone, electric and cable TV lines,
poles, appurtenances and structures; water or gas pipes, mains, valves
or structures; sewer pipes, valves or structures, pumping stations;
telephone exchanges, and other facilities, appurtenances and
structures necessary for conducting a service by a government or
public utility. Telecommunications facilities and telecommunications
towers are not public utility facilities. Telecommunications facilities and
telecommunications towers may be considered public utility facilities;
however, nothing in this definition shall exempt wireless
telecommunications from being subject to the supplemental
telecommunications regulations.[Added 4-18-2006 by Ord. No.
06-01]
RECREATION FACILITIES, COMMERCIAL — Any area of land or water,
including any building or group of buildings, open to use by or catering
to the general public, where recreational, athletic or amusement
facilities are provided, and operated primarily for profit, including
controlled-access facilities accessory to commercial uses, but not
including any outdoor or drive-in theaters, or facilities for automobile
or animal racing.[Added 4-18-2006 by Ord. No. 06-01]
RECREATION FACILITIES, PUBLIC — Recreation facilities operated as
a nonprofit enterprise by the City of Oneida, any other governmental
§ 190-5 CHARTER § 190-5
C:719
entity or any nonprofit organization and open to the general
public.[Added 4-18-2006 by Ord. No. 06-01]
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — A drawn, carried, or motor vehicle which
is designed primarily for use as temporary living quarters for travel or
recreation purposes; includes motor home, travel trailer, truck camper,
tent camper, and van so equipped.
RELIGIOUS INSTITUTION — Any structure used for worship, religious
instruction, or other religious activities including accessory social and
administrative rooms.
RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT FACILITIES — A building or portion
of a building in which are located facilities for scientific research,
investigation, testing, or experimentation, but not facilities for
manufacturing or sales of products.[Added 4-18-2006 by Ord. No.
06-01]
RESTAURANT — A building wherein food or beverages are available for
on-site consumption whether or not this constitutes the principal use.
RESTAURANT, FAST-FOOD — The use of land and buildings for the
preparation and sale of food and beverages from a counter or directly
to persons in motor vehicles; may include space for on-premises
consumption, but usually does not include waiter/waitress service.
RETAIL TRADE — A business or commercial activity involving primarily
the sale of merchandise or stock-in-trade to the public, which business
or commercial activity shall be conducted from within a permanently
situated building.
ROADWAY — A public or private way for vehicular traffic, including the
following.
ROOFLINE — The top or peak of the structural roof of a building, above
which point no sign shall extend or project.
ROOMING HOUSE — Any building or portion thereof containing more
than two and less than 10 rooms that are used, rented or hired out to be
occupied or that are occupied for sleeping purposes for compensation,
whether the compensation is paid directly or indirectly. The term
(1) Arterial roadways are those principal through traffic arteries.
Collector roads are those that interconnect, and carry traffic
between local residential and arterial highways.
(2)
Local roadways are those which are used primarily for access to
abutting residential properties. A cul-de-sac is a minor roadway
with only one outlet and having a turning loop at the closed end.
(3)
Frontage or access roads are generally parallel with and adjacent
to an arterial highway designed to provide access to abutting
properties and protection from through traffic.
(4)
§ 190-5 ONEIDA CODE § 190-5
C:720
"rooming house" shall include lodging house and boardinghouse, but
not tourist home, hotel or motel, sorority or fraternity house or club.
SCHOOL — A building or group of buildings whose principal use is
for educational purposes. Such a building or buildings shall include
classroom space. Evidence of a curriculum and a professional staff is
necessary for classification as educational purposes. The term school
shall include parochial, private, and public institutions ranging from
nursery schools to facilities offering post graduate courses. Profit and
nonprofit status shall not be a consideration.
SEMIPUBLIC FACILITY, INSTITUTION — A quasi-public, not-for-profit,
education, health, historic, cultural, religious, recreational, or
philanthropic facility or institution.
SHOPPING CENTER — A group of four or more retail establishments
sharing a common site and having either common walls or a common
roof structure.[Added 4-18-2006 by Ord. No. 06-01]
SIGN — Any graphic device erected or represented upon or as part of
a building, structure or use of land which directs attention or conveys
a message pertaining to a person, institution, organization or business
and is visible from the public right-of-way or the exterior of the
building, structure or use. Each such graphic display surface shall be
considered a "sign."[Amended 9-5-2017 by Ord. No. 17-01]
SIGN, ADVERTISING — A sign which announces and directs attention
to a business, commodity, service or entertainment sold or offered
elsewhere than upon the premises where such sign is located.
SIGN AREA — The area determined by circumscribing the exterior sign
structure with the appropriate geometric form connecting all extreme
points. The structure supporting a sign is not included in determining
the sign area unless the structure is designed in a way to form an
integral background for the display. Only one face of a double-face sign
is to be considered in determining the area of a sign.
SIGN AWNING — Any awning, whether store front or window, attached
to a building or structure exterior, that will display the name of the
business or which announces and directs attention to business,
commodity, service or entertainment sold or offered on the
premises.[Amended 3-6-1984]
SIGN, DIGITAL — Any sign that advertises or otherwise communicates
using LCD, LED, plasma or other digital imaging medium.[Added
9-5-2017 by Ord. No. 17-01]
SIGN, DISPLAY — Any window sign which announces and directs
attention to business, commodity, service or entertainment sold or
offered on the premises where such sign is located.[Amended
6-2-1981]
SIGN, DOUBLE-FACE — Any sign designed to be viewed from two
directions and which at no point is wider than three feet measured from
§ 190-5 CHARTER § 190-5
C:721
the exterior surface of each face and the two faces of the sign are either
parallel or the angle between them is 30º or less.
SIGN EXEMPT — A sign which may be placed without a permit, but
which shall otherwise comply with the provisions of these regulations.
Such sign shall include official traffic signs, posting or trespass notices,
official notices of hazard or safety precaution, personal identification
signs identifying the residents of the premises, political signs,
temporary signs, and any official flag, emblem, or insignia of a nation,
state, municipality or school not in connection with a commercial use,
and signs on real property other than those advertising a business on
the premises.[Amended 5-5-2009 by Ord. No. 09-03]
SIGN, FEATHER FLUTTER — Any sign consisting of a portable, vertical
banner, in varying lengths, in the shape of a teardrop or narrow
rectangle that contains a harpoon-style pole or staff driven into the
ground for support or supported by means of an individual
stand.[Added 9-5-2017 by Ord. No. 17-01]
SIGN, FLASHING — Any illuminated sign on which the artificial light
is not maintained stationary or constant in intensity and color at all
times when such sign is in use. For the purpose of these regulations,
any revolving, illuminated sign shall be considered a flashing sign.
SIGN, FOR RENT, FOR LEASE, VACANCY TO LET — Any sign used for
the purpose of denoting real property or premises thereof available for
residential or other use by an occupant, tenant, or other person, for a
limited term.
SIGN, FOR SALE, PUBLIC AUCTION, REAL ESTATE AUCTION,
BUILDING SALE — Any sign used for the purpose of denoting real
property or premises thereof available for sale, by public auction or
otherwise, for the purpose of transfer of ownership.
SIGN, FREESTANDING — A sign which is supported by one or more
uprights, poles, or braces, or by a base of wood, stone or concrete in or
upon the ground. This definition shall not include portable signs.
SIGN, ILLUMINATED — Any sign artificially lighted by an exterior or
interior light source.
SIGN, MOBILE — A sign attached to or suspended from any type of
vehicle which is capable of being moved from place to place, whether
actually moved or not, either under its own power or by attachment to
any vehicle and intended primarily for the display of such sign. Such
sign shall not include lettering or other graphics painted or attached
flush to the side or body of service, delivery or other such vehicles.
SIGN, PERMANENT — Any sign not defined herein as
temporary.[Amended 6-2-1981]
SIGN, PORTABLE — A sign that is designed to be movable and is not
permanently attached to the ground, a building, a structure or any
other sign. A portable sign shall not be deemed to include a mobile sign.
§ 190-5 ONEIDA CODE § 190-5
C:722
SIGN PRINCIPAL — A primary or main sign on which is depicted the
central message or identification pertaining to the purpose for which
such sign was erected.
SIGN, ROOF — A sign located between the eaves or projection of the
juncture of the ceiling of the uppermost floor and the roof of a building
and the roofline.
SIGN, TEMPORARY — A poster, handbill, flyer or sign erected for a
nonpermanent purpose such as to announce a forthcoming event or
project notification, which sign shall be designed to be removed upon
completion or termination of the purpose for which it was temporarily
placed. Also classified as exempt sign in this chapter.
SIGN, WALL — Any sign attached to, painted upon or erected against
the wall of a building or structure and not extending more than 1 1/2
feet beyond the building face.
SIGN, WINDOW — A sign maintained in or painted upon a window
which is clearly visible to the general public from an out-of-doors
position, but not including the customary display of merchandise.
SITE ALTERATION/IMPROVEMENT — The excavation or significant
alteration of the site so as to affect surface drainage, removal of
significant tree or soil cover or the provision for new or altered access
to; but not to include landscaping, minor site work or improvements,
tilling the land for agricultural purposes or normal forest management
practices.
SKETCH PLAN — A conceptual plan indicating salient existing features
of a tract or parcel and its surroundings, the general layout of the
proposed project and such additional information as required in
Chapter 143, Site Plan Review.
STORAGE FACILITY, SELF-SERVICE — Real property designed and
used for the purpose of renting or leasing individual storage spaces to
customers for the purpose of storing and removing personal property
on a self-service basis.[Added 5-5-2009 by Ord. No. 09-03]
STORAGE, OUTDOOR — The keeping, in an unenclosed area, of any
goods, material and merchandise in the same place for more than 24
hours.[Added 4-18-2006 by Ord. No. 06-01]
STORY — That portion of a building included between the surface of
any floor and the surface of the floor next above it, or if there is no floor
above it, then the space between any floor and the ceiling next above it.
STRUCTURE — Any permanent man-made building, assembly or
installation in conjunction with the principal or accessory use of a lot,
including a building, sign, platform, ski tow or jump, storage tank, boat
dock and such similarly constructed or assembled objects affecting the
principal or accessory use of the property so as to require a building
permit.
§ 190-5 CHARTER § 190-5
C:723
SWIMMING POOL — A private, outdoor pool designed and built for
swimming purposes as an accessory use on the same parcel as the
principal use or one contiguous thereto, for use primarily by the
occupants or tenants of said property. Such pool shall include any
permanent or aboveground pool and any portable pool more than three
feet in height and 15 feet in length or diameter.
TAVERN — An establishment used primarily for the serving of alcoholic
beverages, including liquor, beer and/or wine, by the drink to the
general public and where food or packaged liquors may be served or
sold only as accessory to the primary use. Also "bar," "cocktail lounge,"
"nightclub."[Added 4-18-2006 by Ord. No. 06-01]
TELECOMMUNICATIONS TOWER — A structure on which
transmitting and/or receiving antenna(s) are located.[Added
4-18-2006 by Ord. No. 06-01]
TOURIST HOME — A building in which overnight accommodations
are offered for transient guests for compensation, but which does not
include in-room cooking facilities.
TRUCKING TERMINAL — An area and building where trucks load and
unload cargo and freight and where the cargo and freight may be
broken down or aggregated into smaller or larger loads for transfer
to other vehicles or modes of transportation. The terminal facility may
include storage areas for trucks and buildings or areas for the repair
of trucks associated with the terminal.[Added 4-18-2006 by Ord. No.
06-01]
UNTREATED LUMBER — Dry wood which has been milled and dried
but which has not been treated or combined with any petroleum
product, chemical, preservative, glue, adhesive, stain, paint or other
substance.[Added 4-2-2013 by L.L. No. 2-2013]
USE — The specific purpose for which a building, structure or land is
designed, arranged, intended or for which it is or may be occupied or
maintained.
USE, ACCESSORY — A use customarily incidental and subordinate to
the principal use of building and consistent in use with the permitted
principal use.
USE, CONDITIONAL — A use that would not be appropriate generally
or without restriction throughout the zoning district. Such use may
be permitted in certain zoning districts if specific provision for such
conditional use is made in this chapter.
USE, PRINCIPAL — The main or primary purpose or activity conducted
on the lot.
USE, STANDARD — A use permitted by right in a specified zoning
district.
USE VARIANCE — The authorization by the Joint Zoning Board of
Appeals/Planning Commission for the use of land for a purpose which
§ 190-5 ONEIDA CODE § 190-5
C:724
is otherwise not allowed or is prohibited by the applicable zoning
regulations.[Added 12-19-2000 by L.L. No. 6-2000; amended
11-8-2017 by L.L. No. 5-2017]
WAREHOUSING — A use engaged in storage and distribution of
manufactured products, supplies, and equipment, but excluding bulk
storage of materials that are inflammable or explosive or that create
hazardous or commonly recognized offensive conditions.[Added
4-18-2006 by Ord. No. 06-01]
WHOLESALE SALES AND DISTRIBUTION — Establishments primarily
engaged in selling merchandise to retailers, to industrial, commercial,
institutional, or professional business users, to other wholesalers, or
acting as agents or brokers and buying merchandise for, or selling
merchandise to, such individuals or companies.[Added 4-18-2006 by
Ord. No. 06-01]
ZONING PERMIT — A certification required prior to any activity
governed by these regulations. Approval of this permit certifies that
the proposed activity is in compliance with this chapter.[Amended
2-18-1992 by Ord. No. 92-01]
§ 190-5 CHARTER § 190-5
C:725

ARTICLE II
Establishment of Districts
§ 190-6. Purpose.
In support of those general purposes outlined above, it is the objective of
these regulations to define various appropriate categories of residential,
commercial, industrial, and agricultural districts in such a manner as to
recognize the existing character and quality of development and natural
features throughout the City and in accord with the findings and objectives
of the City Comprehensive Plan.
§ 190-7. Districts. [Amended 4-18-2006 by Ord. No. 06-01]
A. For these purposes, the City of Oneida is divided into the following
districts: [Amended 5-5-2009 by Ord. No. 09-03]
A Agricultural
R-1 Residential-1
R-2 Residential-2
R-3 Residential-3
N-C Neighborhood Commercial
D-C Downtown Commercial
C General Commercial
C-S Community Services
L-I Light Industrial
M-I Manufacturing-Industrial
B. Intent of districts.
(1) Agricultural District (A): This district is designed to protect
agricultural and related uses while permitting other uses
compatible with rural life such as residential uses.
(2) (Reserved)68
(3) Residential-1 (R-1): This district is designed to preserve and extend
existing single-family residential neighborhoods. The intent is to
provide for larger lots, spacious living units and wide streets.
(4) Residential-2 (R-2): This district is designed to maintain the
integrity of existing traditional two-family-unit residential
neighborhoods by discouraging the continued conversion of one-,
and two-family residences into multifamily dwellings. The district
also provides for select public and institutional uses that will
support and enhance but not conflict with residential uses.
68.Editor's Note: Former Subsection B(2), Rural Residential (R-R), was repealed 5-5-2009 by
Ord. No. 09-03.
§ 190-6 CHARTER § 190-7
C:727
(5) Residential-3 (R-3): The regulations for this district are designed to
maintain appropriate existing housing densities while discouraging
the conversion of larger residences into multifamily dwellings and
encouraging the de-densification of others. This district provides
for the City's well-established, three-family residences and for
select public and institutional, service and retail uses serving the
neighborhood and compatible within predominantly residential
areas.
(6) Neighborhood Commercial (N-C): This district is designed to
provide for integration of commercial development of small-scale
retail, service and professional office uses, and to promote new
residential development within the district, in a manner which is
architecturally compatible with existing adjacent residential
neighborhoods. [Amended 5-5-2009 by Ord. No. 09-03]
(7) Downtown Commercial (D-C): This district is designed to maintain
the historical architecture and downtown streetscape of the City's
central business district while encouraging a broad range of uses
that serve the local and regional community. Development is
intended to reflect the surrounding structures and be pedestrianoriented
with a strong emphasis on a safe and attractive
streetscape.
(8) General Commercial (C): This district is designed to provide for a
broad range of commercial development. The district allows a full
range of retail, office and service uses with a local or regional
market. Development is expected to be generally auto-oriented.
The district's development standards promote attractive
development, an open and pleasant street appearance, and
compatibility with adjacent uses. Development is intended to be
aesthetically pleasing for motorists, transit users, pedestrians, and
the businesses themselves.
(9) Community Services (C-S): This district provides for the compatible
institutional and community services in this area. It focuses on the
potential expansion of the hospital and the surrounding area's
public school, public safety and other community service
properties. It is intended to allow for hospital expansion and
expansion of related health care uses (laboratories, medical
professional offices, assisted living, etc.) while also allowing for
often needed amenities nearby for regional visitors to the medical
facilities.
(10) Light Industrial L-I: This district is intended to provide areas of the
City that are suitable for industrial uses and compatible with
adjacent commercial and residential uses. The district serves to
buffer heavy manufacturing uses from commercial and residential
areas. The district is suitable for warehousing, wholesaling, and
light manufacturing processes that are not hazardous and do not
create undue amounts of noise, dust, odor, vibration, or smoke. The
§ 190-7 ONEIDA CODE § 190-7
C:728
§ 190-8. Standard and conditional uses. [Amended 4-18-2006 by
Ord. No. 06-01]
district is also suitable for retail sale of products manufactured,
assembled, packaged or wholesaled on the site.
(11) Manufacturing-Industrial (M-I): The purpose of this district is to
provide areas of the City that are suitable for light industrial uses
and also for a wide range of heavier manufacturing and processing
activities. Open storage will be allowed in this district, provided
that such storage conforms to defined architectural, landscape, and
environmental design standards.
C. Provision is also made for creation of the following planned
development districts:
R-P Residential-Planned
MD-P Mobile Dwelling-Planned
D. Provision is also made for the creation of an overlay zone:
RM Resource Management (Overlay)
(1) Intent of district.
(a) Resource Management (RM) Overlay: This district is designed
to protect land from current development where soil, water
and access conditions make beneficial development possible
only under special conditions. The characteristics of the
topography, drainage, floodplains, floodways and other natural
characteristics of land in this zone may cause damage to
buildings or structures and possible danger to health due to
the processes of nature. All development of the land within this
district shall be reviewed on an individual basis in order to
ensure that the land is capable of supporting the proposed
development and to further ensure that the environment is
protected before such proposed development commences.
A. The standard and conditional uses permitted in each of the above
established districts, and a summary of the standards applicable
thereto are set forth in the Zoning Schedule A, which is hereby made a
part of these regulations.69
B. Uses not listed as standard or conditional uses in Zoning Schedule A
shall be deemed to be prohibited. Specifically, no building or use shall
be permitted, except as listed under "standard uses" or "conditional
uses" in Zoning Schedule A, according to the respective district and in
accord with the process and regulations hereinafter specified, with the
following exception:
69.Editor's Note: Zoning Schedule A is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 190-7 CHARTER § 190-8
C:729
§ 190-9. Zoning Maps.
The above established districts are delineated on Zoning Maps entitled
"Zoning Map No. 1 - Outside Corporation District, City of Oneida, New
York" and "Zoning Map No. 2 - Inside Corporation District, City of Oneida,
New York" included herein. These maps, with all subsequent amendments
thereto, are hereby made a part of these regulations.70
(1) A conditional use permit shall be required for any use in a
Manufacturing-Industrial (M-I) or Light-Industrial (L-I) District
zone.
C. A building or use considered accessory to the principal building or use
may be erected or placed on the same parcel in accord with the
definition of such building or use and the additional provisions of the
regulations.
70.Editor's Note: The Zoning Maps are on file in the office of the City Clerk.
§ 190-8 ONEIDA CODE § 190-9
C:730
ARTICLE III
Application of Regulations
§ 190-10. Interpretation of Zoning Maps.
The following rules shall apply to determine the boundaries of the districts
shown on the Zoning Maps:
A. Whenever district boundaries follow roadways, the center lines of such
roadways shall be considered the district boundaries. Whenever district
boundaries on the Zoning Maps follow natural features such as streams
or waterways, the center of such natural features or the limits of the
City's jurisdiction where they form a municipal boundary, shall be
considered the district boundary.
B. Whenever district boundaries are so indicated that they apparently
follow individual lot lines, such lot lines shall be considered the district
boundary.
C. Where a district boundary line does not follow such a line, its position
shall be shown on the Zoning Map by a dimension expressing its
distance in feet from a roadway center line or other identifiable point as
indicated; or where no such dimension appears, its location shall be
determined by use of the scale appearing on the respective Zoning
Map.
D. Where a district boundary line divides a single and separate lot on the
effective date of these regulations or their applicable amendment, the
standards for the less restricted portion of such lot shall extend not
more than 50 feet into the more restricted portion, provided that the lot
has frontage on a roadway or shoreline in the less restricted district.
E. RM District.
(1) The delineation of the Resource Management RM District on the
Zoning Maps is intended to include the following specific features:
(a) Flood hazard areas.
(b) Wetlands.
(c) Steep slopes and adverse soil conditions.
(d) Certified Agricultural Districts.
(2) The delineation of these features is not often readily dimensioned
from an identifiable point of reference on the map. Field inspection
and interpretation by the Building Inspector/Code Enforcement
Officer shall determine the actual location of these features with
reference to a particular site as may be required by the Joint
Zoning Board of Appeals/Planning Commission in its review of an
application or an appeal in such areas. [Amended 11-8-2017 by
L.L. No. 5-2017]
§ 190-10 CHARTER § 190-10
C:731
§ 190-11. Interpretation of regulations.
§ 190-12. Nonconforming situations.
F. In the event that the Building Inspector/Code Enforcement Officer is
unable to determine the true location of a district boundary line in a
particular instance, or in the instance that the Building Inspector/Code
Enforcement Officer's determination is disputed, the Joint Zoning Board
of Appeals/Planning Commission, upon application, shall render a
determination. [Amended 11-8-2017 by L.L. No. 5-2017]
A. Regulations governing minimum lot area and lot width; required front,
side and rear yard dimensions; maximum lot coverage and building
height are specified in the Zoning Schedule, subject to such additional
standards as may be set forth in these regulations.
B. Except as otherwise provided in these regulations:
(1) No building shall be constructed, erected, located or expanded, and
no building or part thereof, shall be used for any purpose or in any
manner, except as permitted, for the district in which said building
or land is located, as set forth under the list of permitted standard
and conditional uses in the Zoning Schedule of these regulations.
(2) No existing lot of record on the effective date of these regulations
or their applicable amendment shall be reduced, subdivided, or
otherwise reduced in size or changed in configuration so as to
make it nonconforming.
(3) No building shall be constructed, erected, located or expanded, nor
shall any open space surrounding any building be encroached upon
or reduced in any way, except in accordance with the lot, yard, and
building requirements of these regulations for the district in which
such building is, or is proposed to be, located.
(4) No required yard or other open space, surrounding any building
shall be considered as providing the requisite yard or open space
area for another building on the same or any other lot.
(5) Where any lot or parcel is located in more than one zoning district,
the required minimum lot area shall be as required for that district
in which the building or use is proposed to be located providing the
lot or parcel has the required minimum lot width in this same
district; otherwise, the required minimum lot area, lot width and
yard dimensions shall be determined in corresponding proportion
to the percentage of the lot or parcel in each separate zoning
district.
A. A permitted building or use may be constructed or located on any lot of
record as of the effective date of these regulations or their applicable
amendment, in any district even if said lot does not meet the minimum
§ 190-10 ONEIDA CODE § 190-12
C:732
lot area and lot width requirements for said use in the district in which
it is located, providing the following conditions exist or are met:
(1) The owner of said lot owns no adjoining unimproved land which
would create a conforming lot if combined with the lot which is
deficient in area or width.
(2) Any building or use located on a nonconforming lot shall have front,
side and rear yards conforming to the minimums required for the
district in which said lot is located, unless varied by the Joint
Zoning Board of Appeals/Planning Commission. [Amended
11-8-2017 by L.L. No. 5-2017]
B. The lawful use of any land or principal or accessory building or use
requiring a permit under these regulations and existing on the effective
date of these regulations or their applicable amendment may be
continued although such building or use does not conform with the
provisions of the same; and any such building or use may be removed,
discontinued, reconstructed, added to, altered or changed in use
subject to the following:
(1) A building or use nonconforming as to location shall not be
extended, expanded or altered in any way that will extend or
further aggravate the nonconforming features.
(2) A use or building, nonconforming as to use, shall not be extended,
expanded, or altered during its life to an extent exceeding in
aggregate 50% of the size of such building or use on the effective
date of these regulations or their applicable amendment unless
such building or use is changed to conform to these regulations.
(3) A nonconforming building or use, once purposefully and
substantially removed for a period of one year or more, shall not be
reintroduced or replaced other than by a conforming building or
use, unless a conditional use permit is approved by the Joint Zoning
Board of Appeals/Planning Commission. [Amended 11-8-2017 by
L.L. No. 5-2017]
(4) A nonconforming building or use which has been damaged by fire
or other natural causes to an extent less than 50% of its value, may
be restored, reconstructed or used as before, provided the bulk,
height, and area requirements do not exceed those that existed
before said damage. Said restoration must be completed and a
certificate of compliance issued within one year of such
occurrence.
§ 190-12 CHARTER § 190-12
C:733

ARTICLE IV
Supplementary Regulations
§ 190-13. Lot and building location requirements for all districts.
A. No more than one principal building or use shall be permitted on any
lot, other than as specifically provided or as may be approved under the
Chapter 155, Subdivision of Land, or planned development district
provisions, unless minimum required lot area, lot width and yard
requirements are met for each.
B. On a corner lot in any district where a front yard is required, a yard
shall be provided on each roadway equal in depth to the required front
yard for the district in relation to each such roadway. One rear yard
shall be provided on each corner lot and the applicant shall designate
the rear yard on his application for a permit.
C. Where a single and separate lot extends from one roadway to a parallel
or nearly parallel roadway or shoreline, the principal building shall be
erected to face the roadway or shoreline on which those adjoining
principal buildings face.
D. When an unimproved lot in any district is situated between two
improved lots, the required front yard of the lot on which a building is to
be erected shall have a minimum depth equal to the average depth of
the front yards of the two adjoining improved lots, but not less than 25
feet from the road right-of-way or 50 feet from road center line,
whichever is greater.
E. The yard requirements of these regulations shall not prohibit any fence,
retaining wall or other such structure or solid screen-planting
otherwise permitted, providing the requirements of § 190-21 are met.
F. Maximum building height shall be 35 feet in all districts with heights in
excess of this figure allowed for structures requiring special permit
approval. In no case shall residential structures exceed the maximum
height of City fire/rescue equipment.
G. Maximum building coverage shall be 50% in all districts with coverage
in excess of this figure allowed for structures requiring a conditional
use permit. [Amended 5-5-2009 by Ord. No. 09-03]
H. The height limitations of these regulations shall not apply to farm
structures, church spires, chimneys, water tanks, and necessary
mechanical appurtenances usually carried above the roof level; nor to
flag poles, transmission towers and cables, radio and television
antennae or towers, and similar structures. Any such building or
structure to be constructed in excess of 40 feet, and not otherwise
reviewed by the Joint Zoning Board of Appeals/Planning Commission
shall automatically be considered according to the conditional use
permit review process by the Joint Zoning Board of Appeals/Planning
Commission. [Amended 11-8-2017 by L.L. No. 5-2017]
§ 190-13 CHARTER § 190-14
C:735
§ 190-14. Accessory buildings and uses.
On any lot, accessory buildings or use(s) in connection with the principal
building or use may be constructed and located subject to the following:
A. All accessory building or uses shall require a zoning permit and a
certificate of compliance upon their completion as elsewhere required
in these regulations.
B. No more than two accessory buildings or uses in addition to any private
automobile garage shall be permitted on any lot in conjunction with any
standard use. Agricultural accessory buildings are an exception.
C. The number and placement of accessory buildings and uses in
conjunction with a conditional use, site plan review or planned
development district shall be determined by the Joint Zoning Board of
Appeals/Planning Commission in its revision and approval process.
[Amended 11-8-2017 by L.L. No. 5-2017]
D. Accessory buildings to a residential use which are not attached to a
principal building may be erected in accordance with the following
requirements:
(1) Front yard: not to be located in any required front yard.
(2) Rear or side yard: at least 10 feet from side or rear property line.
(3) Side yard, street side of corner lot: same as for principal building.
(4) No closer to a principal or other accessory building than 10 feet.
E. An accessory building attached to a principal residential building or an
accessory building to other than a residential use, whether attached to
the principal building or not, shall comply in all respects with the
requirements of these regulations applicable to the principal building.
F. No accessory building or structure shall be constructed or located to
house or provide shelter for animals, other than domestic household
pets, on any lot less than one acre in size. Front, side and rear yard
setbacks for any such building or structure designed to house or
provide shelter for livestock shall be a minimum of 75 feet from each lot
line.
G. Except as provided for in § 190-13, the maximum height of any
accessory building or structure shall be 1 1/2 stories or 18 feet,
whichever is less, except that it shall not exceed the height of the
principal building or use. Agricultural buildings and structures are
excepted.
H. A private, outdoor swimming pool shall be permitted as an accessory
use to a dwelling unit only in accordance with the following:
§ 190-14 ONEIDA CODE § 190-14
C:736
(1) A pool shall be accessory to a principal residential use and shall be
erected only on the same lot as the principal structure or one
contiguous thereto.
(2) A pool may be erected or constructed only in the side or rear yard
of the lot, shall conform with the minimum side and rear yard
requirements for the district in which it is located and shall be not
less than 10 feet distant from any principal or accessory building.
(3) A pool shall be surrounded by a fence at least four feet high and
capable of preventing small children from entering. Aboveground
pools with unclimbable vertical sides 46 inches or more high shall
not have to be fenced. [Amended 12-19-2000 by L.L. No.
6-2000]
(4) No pool shall adversely affect the character of any residential
neighborhood and all lighting or other appurtenances shall be so
arranged as not to interfere with neighboring uses.
I. A swimming pool to be constructed or installed as an accessory use to a
tourist accommodation or as part of any commercial facility shall be
permitted after application to and issuance of a permit by the Building
Inspector/Code Enforcement Officer. Such swimming pool shall be so
located as not to cause a hazard to public safety or nuisance to
adjoining uses and shall be designed and located in accord with
acceptable engineering standards and any applicable City or state
requirements. Fencing requirements shall be the same as for a private
pool.
J. A building, mobile home, trailer or other structure accessory to the
construction project for office, storage or related construction use may
be permitted upon issuance of a zoning permit by the Building
Inspector/Code Enforcement Officer, such installation to be temporary
and continued only for the duration of the construction project to which
it is accessory. Such facility shall not be designed or used for living
accommodations except for the nonpermanent accommodation of a
clerk-of-the-works or night watchman, and shall be promptly removed
upon completion of the construction project or part thereof to which it
is accessory, such date to be determined by the Building Inspector/Code
Enforcement Officer. Upon notice from the Building Inspector/Code
Enforcement Officer, the zoning permit shall expire and the rights and
privileges thereunder shall be vacated. Failure to remove such
installation in a prompt manner after notice by the Building Inspector/
Code Enforcement Officer shall be considered a violation of these
regulations. Location of such a structure shall be at the discretion of the
Building Inspector/Code Enforcement Officer.
K. The minimum setback of all principal and accessory buildings or
structures in excess of 100 square feet, other than docks, boat houses,
or swimming float, as hereinafter regulated, shall be a minimum
§ 190-14 CHARTER § 190-14
C:737
§ 190-15. Sign requirements. [Amended 6-21-1981; 9-20-1983;
2-18-1992 by Ord. No. 92-01; 4-18-2006 by Ord. No. 06-01; 2-3-2009
by Ord. No. 09-01; 5-5-2009 by Ord. No. 09-03; 6-7-2016 by Ord. No.
16-03; 9-5-2017 by Ord. No. 17-01]
distance of 50 feet from the mean high-water mark of any stream, river,
or pond whether or not man-made.
L. A private dish antenna and its component shall be permitted as an
accessory use to a dwelling unit only in accordance with the following:
[Amended 11-7-1984]
(1) A dish antenna assembly shall be erected or constructed only in the
side or rear yard of a lot and shall conform with the minimum side
and rear yard requirements for the district in which it is located.
(2) Dish antennas consist of three main components: the antenna,
called the dish; a low-noise amplifier (LNA); and a receiver. The
antenna and LNA are located outdoors and the receiver is placed
indoors.
(3) The antenna shall be supported on a concrete base of three to
seven square feet.
(4) A dish antenna shall not adversely affect the character of any
residential neighborhood and shall be so arranged as not to
interfere with neighboring uses.
(5) In commercial uses, dishes on top of buildings shall not exceed the
allowable height specified for the district in which it is located and
shall be installed securely so as to withstand winds up to 100 miles
per hour.
M. A private electric vehicle charging station is permitted as an accessory
use for all dwellings and multiple-family dwellings. The electric vehicle
charging station shall be approved upon submission of a completed
electrical inspection to the Code Enforcement Officer. [Added
6-21-2016 by L.L. No. 2-2016]
A. Purpose. This section is intended to permit only those signs which are:
(1) Legible in the circumstances in which they are meant to be seen;
(2) Compatible with their surroundings;
(3) Appropriate to the type of activity to which they pertain; and
(4) Expressive of the identity of individual proprietors and of the
community as a whole.
B. Application. The location, placement, installation, alteration, or
extension of any sign, other than an exempt sign as hereinafter defined,
shall require a sign permit and certificate of compliance in accord with
§ 190-14 ONEIDA CODE § 190-15
C:738
the requirements set forth in this section. Exempt signs include trafficcontrol
signs including: "entrance," "exit," and "parking" signs on
private property other than those permitted to advertise a business
on the premises; posted/no-trespassing signs; official notices of hazard
or safety precaution; personal signs identifying residential occupancy;
political signs; temporary signs (see definition in § 190-5); display signs;
and any flag, emblem, or insignia of a nation, state, municipality, or
school not in connection with a commercial use.
C. General requirements in all districts.
(1) All signs shall be constructed of durable material and maintained in
good condition.
(2) The back or reverse side of a single-sided sign visible from any
public right-of-way shall be finished in an appropriate manner
which shall include a backing similar to the facing.
(3) No sign in any district shall be erected within, or project into, a
public right-of-way or shall project across a lot line, except where
such sign is attached to and does not project more than 48 inches
from the face of the building.
(4) No lights or string of lights will be used for the purpose of
advertising, displaying, or otherwise attracting attention to the
premises when not part of a sign or approved street or outdoor
lighting.
(5) Mobile signs are prohibited.
(6) Fences, outbuildings and accessory structures shall not be
considered in the tabulation of linear feet of the principal building,
and such structures shall not be made part of any sign.
(7) No sign shall physically or visually impair vehicular or pedestrian
traffic by design, illumination, color, or placement.
(8) All construction fixtures, wiring, and installations shall conform to
the New York State Fire Prevention and Building Code where
applicable.
(9) All wiring to freestanding signs shall be underground.
(10) Any sign for a business, service or activity no longer in existence at
that location shall be removed within 30 days from the date of the
discontinuation, and any wall, surface or other area from which
such sign is removed shall be restored so that no remnant of the
sign is visible. One thirty-day extension may be granted by the
Code Enforcement Officer.
(11) All temporary signs (see definition in § 190-5) may be erected
within 15 days before the event and shall be removed within 15
days of completion of the action advertised.
§ 190-15 CHARTER § 190-15
C:739
(12) Freestanding signs. No freestanding sign shall be more than 24
feet in height as measured at the edge of the road surface which it
fronts, or 20 feet as measured from ground level at the base of the
sign, whichever shall permit the greatest height. A freestanding
sign which is more than 36 square feet shall not be closer than 100
feet to any other freestanding sign which is more than 36 square
feet.
(13)Wall signs. Wall signs shall be attached to the wall or face of the
building and shall not extend more than 24 inches from such wall or
face, nor shall they project above the roofline.
(14) Roof signs. A roof sign shall not exceed 40% of the roof area and
shall not project above the roofline.
(15) Projecting signs. A projecting sign shall have a clear distance from
the sidewalk or ground level of at least eight feet to the bottom of
the sign and a maximum distance of 12 feet to the top of the sign.
The sign may project no more than 48 inches from the building to
which it is attached unless otherwise limited by this section.
Projecting signs shall not exceed eight square feet.
(16) Double-faced signs. A sign which is designed to be viewed from two
directions and the two faces are not more than 36 inches wide at
any point and are either parallel or at not more than a thirty-degree
angle to one another shall be considered to be one sign for the
purpose of this section.
(17)Window signs. Permanent window signs shall not exceed 15% of
the area of the window in which they are displayed, and temporary
window or display signs shall not exceed 25% of the window area,
and in no case shall the total sign area exceed 40% of the window
area.
(18) Double-frontage buildings. Commercial buildings which front on
two parallel public streets and provide customer access from both
streets shall be considered to have two front faces for the purposes
of this section.
(19) Existing billboards or other signs shall be allowed to remain until
ownership of the signs changes hands, as long as they are
maintained in good repair. Any such sign or billboard frame which
has not been used for 60 days shall be considered not in use and
must be taken down. One sixty-day extension may be granted by
the Building Inspector/Code Enforcement Officer upon written
application stating the reason therefor.
(20) Seasonal ground-mounted banners are allowed with an approved
permit, from May 1 through October 31, on subject premises, with
a maximum of two banners per parcel.
§ 190-15 ONEIDA CODE § 190-15
C:740
(21) Contractor and/or service signs: one sign per lot; on premises;
maximum six square feet; must be removed within 15 days after
service is complete.
(22) Election signs: 45 days before election, removed within 15 days
after election; maximum of 32 square feet; placement per
§ 190-15C(3). [Amended 4-16-2019 by Ord. No. 19-02]
(23) Sandwich signs: allowed in Downtown Commercial Zone only; must
be removed daily at close of business; not to exceed two feet by
three feet; one sandwich sign per business.
(24) Digital signs. Digital signs shall require review and approval by the
Sign Review Board prior to the issuance of a sign permit. The
message or display on any digital sign shall not change more than
two times per minute.
(25) Feather flutter signs. Feather flutter signs shall require review and
approval by the Code Enforcement Officer. Feather flutter signs are
permitted from May 1 through October 31. A maximum of two
feather flutter signs are permitted per business.
D. District requirements. Signs shall be permitted according to
established zoning districts as follows:
(1) In the R-1, R-2, R-3, R-P, and MD-P Residential Districts, the
following shall be permitted:
(a) One nameplate, identification of permitted home business, or
professional sign not to exceed three square feet in R-3; no
signage allowed in R-1, R-2.
(b) One institutional, religious, or organization identification sign
not to exceed 16 square feet.
(c) A sign advertising the sale or development of a tract of land.
The size of this sign shall not exceed 16 square feet, and not
more than one sign shall be placed upon the tract along any
single highway frontage.
(d) When a use variance has been granted in the above districts,
one sign will be allowed with a sixteen-square-foot maximum.
(2) In A and N-C Districts, the following shall be permitted:
(a) The signs permitted under Subsection D(1) above, except that
Subsection D(1)(a) shall have a maximum size of six square
feet instead of three.
(b) One principal business sign for business or commercial uses,
not to exceed 32 square feet.
(3) In the C-S District, the following shall be permitted:
§ 190-15 CHARTER § 190-15
C:741
(a) The signs permitted under Subsection D(1) above.
(b) A maximum of two institutional, business, or service signs with
a combined area not to exceed two square feet per linear foot
of the front face of the principal building, or 50 square feet,
whichever is less.
(c) One accessory sign for each separate incorporated business or
service in a building or complex, provided that such sign(s)
shall not exceed, either singularly or in combination, a
maximum of six square feet and that any sign(s) be attached to
the principal building or sign.
(4) In C, L-I and M-I Districts, the following shall be permitted:
(a) The signs permitted under Subsection D(1) above.
(b) A maximum of three business signs with a combined area not
to exceed two square feet per linear foot of the front of the
building, or 100 square feet, whichever is larger.
(c) One accessory sign for each separate incorporated business or
service in a building or complex, providing such sign(s) shall
not exceed, either singularly or in combination, a maximum of
six square feet and they shall be attached to the principal
building or sign.
E. "For sale" or "for lease" signs:
(1) Signs denoting property or buildings "for sale," "public auction,"
"real estate auction," "building sale," and other similarly worded
signs, in R-1, R-2, R-3, R-P and N-C Zones of the City of Oneida shall
not exceed four square feet in area if single-faced or six square feet
in area if double-faced. In all other zoning districts, they shall not
exceed a total of 32 square feet in area. The signs shall be placed so
that the top of the sign will not be more than four feet above ground
level. The signs shall be placed only in the front yard or part of the
property offered for sale and shall be no closer than 10 feet to the
sidewalk if one exists, and no closer than 10 feet to the curb or
edge of the road if no sidewalk exists. If the ten-foot distance
cannot be adhered to, the sign shall then be placed in front of the
building on the subject property only, as close as possible to the
foundation line. No such signs shall be placed on any City property
or right-of-way.
(2) Signs denoting "for rent," "for lease," "vacancy," or "to let" in R-1,
R-2, R-3, R-P and N-C Zones shall not exceed four square feet in
area. In all other zoning districts, they shall not exceed a maximum
of 32 square feet. All signs shall be placed directly in front of the
building or property affected, as close as possible to the foundation,
but in no case farther than five feet from the foundation, if possible,
and shall have a maximum height of four feet from the ground level
§ 190-15 ONEIDA CODE § 190-15
C:742
to the top of the sign. No such sign shall be placed on any City
property or right-of-way.
(3) All signs set forth in Subsection E(1) and (2) shall be removed
within a reasonable time after the property has been sold, leased or
is no longer marketed. No directional signs indicating property "for
sale," "public auction," "real estate auction," or "building sale" shall
be permitted except at intersections of dead-end streets. The size
of directional signs shall not exceed three square feet in area. No
directional or open house signs shall be permitted on any City
property or right-of-way.
(4) Open house signs shall be subject to the limitations stated above
for "for sale" signs and at Subsection E(3).
F. Existing signs:
(1) All signs in existence on the effective date of this section shall,
within 90 days thereof, be registered with the Building Inspector/
Code Enforcement Officer on a form supplied by the City. A record
of all existing signs shall be compiled by the Code Enforcement
Officer, and the owner, tenant, or lessee of any nonconforming sign
shall be notified in writing.
(2) All nonconforming signs existing and erected prior to the effective
date of this amendment may continue as long as maintained in
good repair and not altered in design, color, message or otherwise.
Upon the termination of the business by the owner or replacement
of the sign by said owner, all subsequent signs at such location shall
conform to the provisions of this chapter.
(3) Upon the determination of the Building Inspector/Code
Enforcement Officer that a sign is in need of repair, a notice of
violation shall be sent to the owner of the sign. The owner shall
have 30 days in which to comply. An extension of compliance time
may be granted for one additional thirty-day period. No such
extension shall be granted except on written application stating the
reasons therefor.
G. Administration:
(1) An application for a sign permit shall be filed with the Building
Inspector/Code Enforcement Officer on a form supplied by the City.
(2) Within five days of filing, the Building Inspector/Code Enforcement
Officer shall determine if the sign application is in compliance with
the dimensional requirements of this section. If the proposed sign
is in compliance, the application shall be referred to the Sign
Review Board.
(3) If the proposed sign is not in compliance, the Building Inspector/
Code Enforcement Officer shall disapprove the application, and the
§ 190-15 CHARTER § 190-15
C:743
§ 190-16. Off-street parking and loading.
applicant shall be so notified in writing. Further, the applicant shall
be notified of the right to make an application to the Zoning Board
of Appeals for a variance. The Zoning of Board of Appeals will
review the variance application and make a determination as to the
variance application.
(4) The Sign Review Board shall review and approve, approve with
modifications, or disapprove the application within 45 days of
receipt from the Building Inspector/Code Enforcement Officer. The
applicant shall be notified, in writing, of the Board's decision.
Review by the Sign Review Board shall relate exclusively to the
design of the proposed sign.
(5) A certificate of compliance shall be issued by the Building
Inspector/Code Enforcement Officer upon completion of any sign in
full compliance with its approved application. A temporary
certificate of compliance may be issued at the discretion of the
Building Inspector/Code Enforcement Officer.
H. Sign Review Board. The Sign Review Board shall consist of seven
members to be appointed by the Mayor and confirmed by the Common
Council for three-year terms, with initial members to be staggered so
that three expire after one year; two after two years and two after three
years.
A. Parking. In recognition of the need to provide adequate off-street
parking for automobiles in the City in connection with existing and
future uses, and at the same time to preserve the natural appearance
and ground cover of the community so far as possible, the following
procedures and requirements for the provision of off-street parking are
hereby established:
(1) Required parking spaces.
Use Spaces Required
Two-family dwelling 2 for each dwelling unit
Multiple-family dwelling 1 1/2 for each dwelling unit
Home business 2 for each dwelling unit plus
space for all customers,
patients, or clients
Tourist accommodation 1 for each guest room
Business, professional office;
professional office, minor
[Amended 5-5-2009 by Ord.
No. 09-03]
1 for each 400 square feet of
floor space
§ 190-15 ONEIDA CODE § 190-16
C:744
Use Spaces Required
Public, semipublic facility,
institution, religious institution
1 for each 4 adult seating
spaces, or visitors expected at
any one time, plus space for all
employees
Commercial recreation; tourist
attraction seating
1 for each five spaces/individual
accommodation, plus space for
all employees
Retail, personal service trade,
light manufacturing [Amended
5-5-2009 by Ord. No. 09-03]
1 for each 300 square feet of
floor space devoted to retail or
customer use, plus 1 for each
manufacturing employee on
maximum shift
Shopping center, plaza, or
group of stores
2.5 square feet per square foot
of retail area
Restaurant, fast-food restaurant 10, plus 1 for each 60 square
feet of dining area for sit-down
facility, or of building area for
fast-food restaurant
Warehouse, material storage;
fuel supply, vehicle sales,
service
1 for each employee on
maximum shift. Parking area
shall not be less than 25% of the
building floor area.
Gasoline station; service garage
bay
1 for each service, plus space
for all employee cars and
stacking space for 4 cars per
bay for any auto wash
(2) The Joint Zoning Board of Appeals/Planning Commission, in the
review of a conditional use or under site plan review, shall establish
the requisite number of parking spaces and their satisfactory
location consistent with the generally established standards of
these regulations. In particular, it shall be the objective of the Joint
Zoning Board of Appeals/Planning Commission to encourage
sufficient and suitably located, designed and improved off-street
parking in a coordinated manner that recognizes the relationship
between adjoining or neighboring uses, the public roadway system
and available public parking. To this end, it shall be within the
purview of the Joint Zoning Board of Appeals/Planning Commission
in its review capacity to establish and vary parking requirements in
any situation consistent with the nature, scale and hours of
operation of any use, as well as to consider current provisions for,
and past experience with, off-street parking in the expansion of any
existing building or use. [Amended 11-8-2017 by L.L. No.
5-2017]
§ 190-16 CHARTER § 190-16
C:745
(3) Each off-street space shall consist of at least 180 square feet with a
minimum width of 10 feet. In addition, other than for an individual
residence, space necessary for aisles, maneuvering and drives shall
be provided and shall be so arranged as not to interfere with
pedestrian or motor traffic on the public roadway and so as to
permit all motor vehicles utilizing such facility to turnaround within
the parking area to enable any vehicle to enter the public roadway
in a forward position.
(4) For any building having more than one use, parking space shall be
required for each use. For the purposes of computing parking
requirements, floor areas shall be the sum of the horizontal area
within exterior walls of the several floors of a building, excluding
basement, cellar, and attic areas.
(5) Within the Inside Corporation District, outdoor parking or storage
of boats and other vehicles used primarily for recreational
purposes, motor homes, trailers, vehicle transport, construction
trailers, utility trailers, and PODS® (portable on-demand storage
units), in any residential district or on any lot used for residential
purposes, shall be confined to the rear or side yard, and said
parking shall not be within 10 feet of any lot line for a period
exceeding 14 days in any calendar year. On a corner lot, such
outdoor parking is allowed on the front yard not designated as the
911 address, and adequate screening in the form of plantings,
fencing or other visual separation must be approved by the
Planning Director or Code Enforcement Officer. [Amended
5-5-2009 by Ord. No. 09-03; 2-16-2016 by Ord. No. 16-01;
9-5-2017 by Ord. No. 17-01]
(6) No recreational vehicle, whether occupied or unoccupied shall be
located, or parked, other than in an authorized campsite, parking
area, or on the property of the owner for a period of more than 72
hours, except after application for and issuance of a temporary
permit, such permit to be authorized by the Building Inspector/
Code Enforcement Officer for a specified period not to exceed
seven days. The Building Inspector/Code Enforcement Officer may,
at his discretion, issue such permit for any combination or group of
vehicles or units as he deems appropriate.
B. Loading. In addition to any required off-street parking, off-street
loading facilities shall be provided for each commercial or industrial
building or use hereafter constructed, established, or expanded and
having a gross floor area in excess of 600 square feet, in accord with the
following:
(1) Off-street loading shall be so arranged as not to interfere with
pedestrian or motor traffic on the public roadway, and any required
off-street loading berth shall have a clear area not less than 12 feet
in width by 25 feet in length.
§ 190-16 ONEIDA CODE § 190-16
C:746
§ 190-17. Site improvements and screening. [Amended 6-15-1982]
(2) An off-street loading space may occupy any part of any required
side or rear yard, except no such berth shall be located closer than
100 feet to any residential use other than on the same premises
unless wholly within an enclosed structure.
(3) Adequate screen-planting, fencing, or other visual separation shall
be provided in conjunction with any such required off-street
loading area.
C. Off-street parking or loading areas, once designated and approved,
shall not be diminished, assigned, or otherwise used except after
application for and issuance of a permit approving such action.
A. Landscaping may be required according to the following:
(1) Any use required by these regulations as outlined in §§ 190-28 and
190-30 to be landscaped shall provide for the planting of trees,
shrubs, bushes and ground cover. Also, existing trees, and shrubs
shall be protected wherever possible. Landscaping structures such
as retaining walls or tree wells may be required.
(2) The Joint Zoning Board of Appeals/Planning Commission may
request a landscaping plan, drawn to scale, showing all existing
landscaping before development, landscaping to be retained and all
new plantings. The species and size of all trees, shrubs, and bushes
may be shown on the plan. [Amended 11-8-2017 by L.L. No.
5-2017]
(3) The area required to be landscaped shall be determined by the
Joint Zoning Board of Appeals/Planning Commission based on the
type, location and size of project. [Amended 12-19-2000 by L.L.
No. 6-2000; 11-8-2017 by L.L. No. 5-2017]
B. Fencing and screen-planting may be required according to the
following:
(1) Any use required by these regulations to be fenced or screened
shall provide a fence so as to preclude entry, or shall provide a
structural or planted (landscaped) screen sufficient to effectively
screen such use from view from abutting properties and the public
right-of-way as is considered appropriate.
(2) The Joint Zoning Board of Appeals/Planning Commission shall
determine the requirements for fencing and screening in
conjunction with its review of planned development districts, and in
conjunction with its review of conditional use permits where
fencing and screening may be required. [Amended 11-8-2017 by
L.L. No. 5-2017]
§ 190-16 CHARTER § 190-17
C:747
§ 190-18. Dwelling units in Commercial or Manufacturing-
Industrial Districts.
In any Commercial or Manufacturing-Industrial District, the requirements
for lot area, lot width, side yards, and rear yards as specified for dwellings in
the R-3 Residential District shall apply to any commercial or manufacturing
building in which one or more dwelling units are also located. In lieu of this
requirement for such buildings, there may be provided on the lot at ground
level, free, accessible and usable open space of at least 400 square feet for
each dwelling. Said open space shall not be used for storage, automobile
parking, accessory buildings or other uses, but shall be available and usable
for outdoor recreational use and for household activities which are normally
carried on outdoors.
§ 190-19. Residential floor area requirements. [Amended 5-5-2009
by Ord. No. 09-03]
All dwelling units must have a minimal dimensional criterion of 18 feet wide.
Minimum residential ground floor area, measured from the exterior faces of
exterior walls, exclusive of garages and open porches, shall be as follows:
District Number of Stories
Minimum Ground
Floor Area Per
Dwelling
Residential R-1 and A One story 1,000 square feet
More than one story 900 square feet
Residential R-2 One story 900 square feet
More than one story 800 square feet
Residential R-3 One story 800 square feet
More than one story 750 square feet
Mobile Dwelling-
Planned
One story 750 square feet
§ 190-20. Additional area regulations.
C. Any landscaping, fencing or screening installed in accordance with this
section shall be maintained in good order and repair to achieve the
objectives of the same. Failure to maintain the required landscaping,
fencing and screening shall be considered a violation of these
regulations and a breach of any condition imposed and/or granted with
respect to said land.
A. Visibility at street corners. On corner lots, except in districts where no
front yard is required, no fence, wall, hedge or other structure or
planting more than three feet in height shall be erected, placed or
maintained so as to obstruct visibility of vehicular traffic within the
triangular area formed by the intersecting street right-of-way lines and
§ 190-17 ONEIDA CODE § 190-20
C:748
§ 190-21. Fences, walls, and plantings. [Amended 8-7-1979;
10-2-1979; 5-5-2009 by Ord. No. 09-03]
No fence, wall, or planting shall be placed or maintained within the required
front yard which interferes with the safe movement of vehicular or
pedestrian traffic or the removal and storage of snow. Specifically, no fence,
wall, or planting shall be closer than three feet to any street right-of-way or
sidewalk. No fence or wall shall exceed six feet in height in any front or side
yard. See also § 190-20A.
§ 190-22. Lots in two districts.
Where a district boundary line divides a lot held in one ownership at the
time of adoption of said district line, the regulations for the less restricted
portion of such lot shall apply to the remainder of said lot up to a distance
of not more than 50 feet from said district line.
§ 190-23. Access to county and state highways.
When new access (driveway) to a state or county highway is being created,
there shall be provided a turnaround area off the public right-of-way. This is
intended to eliminate the need to back a motor vehicle out onto a county or
state roadway.
a straight line joining said street lines at points 20 feet distant from the
point of intersection, measured along said street lines.
B. Front yard exceptions. In residential districts where the average front
yard for buildings existing immediately adjacent to a lot within 100 feet
exceeds the minimum specified, a front yard shall be provided on the lot
equal to this greater average depth, but need not exceed 50 feet. Where
such average front yard is less than the minimum specified, the building
may be built to this lesser depth, but shall not be less than 25 feet from
the road right-of-way. An adjacent vacant lot shall be considered as
having the minimum front yard as required in the district for the
purpose of computing such average front yard. [Amended 12-19-2000
by L.L. No. 6-2000]
C. Transition yard requirements.
(1) Where two districts abut on the same street between two
intersecting streets, there shall be provided for buildings hereafter
constructed or structurally altered within a distance of 50 feet from
the district boundary line in the less restricted district a front yard
equal in depth to 1/2 the required depth of that required in the
more restricted district.
(2) Where the side or rear yard of a lot abuts a side or rear yard of a lot
in a more restricted district, there shall be provided along such
abutting line or lines a side or rear yard equal in depth to that
required in the more restricted district.
§ 190-20 CHARTER § 190-24
C:749
§ 190-24. Adequacy of water supply and sewage disposal.
Before a permit is issued for the construction of a building requiring a water
supply and sewage disposal, the applicant shall provide written evidence
that acceptable provisions have been made for both.
§ 190-25. Nursery school. [Amended 10-7-1980; 10-20-1981]
A. Physical plant.71
(1) The location of a nursery school facility can be properly
accommodated on the parcel in question without interfering with
or in any way being incompatible with adjoining uses.
(2) Adequate opportunity for safe and convenient children dropoff and
pickup is provided for and will in no way present a hazard to the
children or interfere with the proper flow of traffic along the public
street. Consideration will be given to the number of arrivals and
departures daily and the time of day at which such are to occur
relative to traffic patterns in the neighborhood.
(3) No exterior display, construction or evidence of the nursery school
other than appropriately situated outdoor play area and equipment
shall be permitted, except one identification sign as otherwise
permitted in a residential district.
B. Sanitation.
(1) All rooms, outdoor play space, equipment, supplies and furnishings
shall be kept clean and sanitary at all times. The premises shall be
kept free from dampness, odors, vermin and the accumulation of
trash.
(2) Each nursery school shall comply with the requirements of state
and local departments of health. Adequate and safe water supply
and sewage facilities shall be provided and shall comply with state
and local laws.
C. Safety precautions.
(1) Suitable precautions shall be taken to eliminate all conditions
which may contribute or create a fire or safety hazard.
(2) Electrical heaters or other portable heating device shall not be
used in rooms accessible to children regardless of the type of fuel
used.
(3) There shall be an adequate number of fire extinguishers which
shall be tested and maintained in good working condition.
71.Editor's Note: Original Section 25A, Definition, which immediately preceded this
subsection, was repealed 12-19-2000 by L.L. No. 6-2000.
§ 190-24 ONEIDA CODE § 190-25
C:750
§ 190-26. Solar collector systems and solar access. [Amended
9-20-1983; 8-18-2015 by Ord. No. 15-01; 11-8-2017 by L.L. No.
5-2017]
Solar collector systems are permitted in any district. A conditional use
permit is required for all solar installation projects, with the exception of
those using a New York State unified solar permit. In reviewing proposals
for new construction, the Building Inspector/Code Enforcement Officer shall
bring applications relating to solar systems to the attention of the Joint
Zoning Board of Appeals/Planning Commission. The Joint Zoning Board of
Appeals/Planning Commission shall take into consideration, to the extent
possible, the effect the proposed construction, reconstruction, alteration,
(4) The home shall be equipped with a first aid kit which shall be kept
adequately stocked for emergency treatment. First aid supplies
shall be kept in a clean container in a locked cabinet.
(5) All flammable liquids, cleaning supplies, detergents, matches,
lighters and any other such items which may be harmful to children
shall be kept in a locked cabinet.
(6) Children shall be cared for only on such floors as are provided with
readily accessible alternate means of egress which are remote from
each other.
(7) There shall be fire safety precautions established, and quarterly
fire drills shall take place so that each child is made aware of these
precautions.
(8) There shall be one smoke detectors near heat-producing equipment
and one near the entrance of each room used by children.
(9) Adult supervision required shall be a ratio of children to adults of
not be greater than 12:1.
D. Procedures for new renewal of zoning permit.
(1) Conditional use permit must be obtained before new zoning permit
is granted.
(2) All applicable mandatory state regulations shall be met.
(3) For a renewal of zoning permit, the Joint Zoning Board of Appeals/
Planning Commission must review the original conditional use
permit and send recommendations to the Building Inspector/Code
Enforcement Officer. [Amended 11-8-2017 by L.L. No. 5-2017]
(4) Zoning permits must be renewed every five years for said nursery
school.
(5) State revocation of said certificate, issued by the New York State
Department of Education, would result in the revocation of City
zoning permit.
§ 190-25 CHARTER § 190-26
C:751
etc., will have on the solar access of surrounding properties. Where new
construction involves more than one structure, the Joint Zoning Board of
Appeals/Planning Commission must give consideration to the solar access
of each new structure prior to the permit application approval.
§ 190-26.1. Outdoor furnaces. [Added 4-2-2013 by L.L. No. 2-2013]
A. Purpose. Although outdoor furnaces may provide an economical
alternative to conventional heating systems, concerns have been raised
regarding the safety and environmental impacts of these heating
devices, particularly the production of offensive odors and adverse
potential health effects of uncontrolled emissions. This section is
intended to ensure that outdoor furnaces are used in a manner that
does not create a nuisance and is not detrimental to the health, safety
and general welfare of the residents of the City of Oneida.
B. Permit required. No person shall cause, allow or maintain the use of an
outdoor furnace within the City of Oneida without first having obtained
a permit from the Code Enforcement Officer and Fire Department. An
application for a permit shall be made to the Code Enforcement Officer
and Fire Department on the forms provided.
C. Existing outdoor furnaces. Any outdoor furnace in existence on the
effective date of this section shall be permitted to remain, provided that
the owner had properly applied for and obtained a permit from the
Code Enforcement Officer for such existing outdoor furnace in
accordance with former Chapter 70 of the Code of the City of Oneida.
The owner of any existing outdoor furnace which was not properly
permitted under former Chapter 70, has six months from the effective
date of this section to obtain the necessary permit. If the owner of an
existing outdoor furnace does not receive a permit within six months of
the effective date of this section, such outdoor furnace shall be
removed. "Existing" or "in existence" means that the outdoor furnace is
in place on the site as of the date of adoption of this section.
D. Use; placement; operation.
(1) Permitted fuel. Only firewood and untreated lumber are permitted
to be burned in any outdoor furnace. Burning of any and all other
materials in an outdoor furnace is prohibited.
(2) Minimum lot size. Outdoor furnaces shall be permitted only on lots
of three acres or more.
(3) Setbacks. Outdoor furnaces shall be set back not less than 200 feet
from the owner's nearest property line.
(4) Months of operation. Outdoor furnaces shall be operated only
between September 1 and May 31.
(5) Spark arrestors. All outdoor furnaces shall be equipped with
properly functioning spark arrestors.
§ 190-26 ONEIDA CODE § 190-26.1
C:752
§ 190-27. Adult entertainment businesses. [Amended 5-7-1996 by
Ord. No. 96-03]
E. Suspension of permit. A permit issued pursuant to this section may be
suspended as the Code Enforcement Officer may deem necessary to
protect the public health, safety and welfare of the residents of the City
of Oneida, if any of the following conditions occurs:
(1) Emissions from the outdoor furnace exhibit greater than twentypercent
opacity (six-minute average) except for one continuous sixminute
period per hour of not more than twenty-seven-percent
opacity, which shall be determined as provided in 6 NYCRR
227-1.3(b);
(2) Malodorous air contaminants from the outdoor furnace are
detectable outside the property of the person on whose land the
outdoor furnace is located;
(3) The emissions from the outdoor furnace interfere with the
reasonable enjoyment of life or property;
(4) The emissions from the outdoor furnace cause damage to
vegetation or property; or
(5) The emissions from the outdoor furnace are or may be harmful to
human or animal health.
F. A suspended permit may be reinstated once the condition which
resulted in suspension is remedied and reasonable assurances are
given that such condition will not recur. Recurrence of a condition
which has previously resulted in suspension of a permit shall result in
the revocation of the permit, and the subject outdoor furnace shall not
be eligible for another permit.
G. Effect on other regulations. Nothing contained herein shall authorize or
allow burning which is prohibited by codes, laws, rules or regulations
promulgated by the United States Environmental Protection Agency or
any other federal, state, regional or local agency. Outdoor furnaces, and
any electrical, plumbing or other apparatus or device used in
connection with any outdoor furnace, shall be installed, operated and
maintained in conformity with the manufacturer's specifications and
any and all local, state and federal codes, laws, rules and regulations;
the more restrictive or stringent provision or requirement shall prevail.
A. Purpose. It is recognized that there are some uses which, because of
their very nature, have serious objectionable operational
characteristics when several of them are concentrated under
circumstances which produce a deleterious effect upon adjacent areas.
Special regulation of these uses is necessary to ensure that adverse
effects will not contribute to the blighting or downgrading of the
surrounding neighborhood. The primary reason for regulation is to
§ 190-26.1 CHARTER § 190-27
C:753
prevent a concentration of these uses in any one area which could
create adverse neighborhood effects.
B. Restrictions. Adult entertainment businesses are prohibited, and no
person as owner, operator, manager or agent shall operate or permit
the operation of an adult entertainment business in the City of Oneida,
within:
(1) Five hundred feet of any residential zoning district or any one-,
two-, three- or four-family, mobile or multifamily dwelling,
including structures devoted to both residential and commercial or
business purposes.
(2) Five hundred feet of any public or private school.
(3) Five hundred feet of any church or other religious facility or
institution.
(4) Five hundred feet of any public park.
C. Measurement. The distance provided hereinabove shall be measured by
following a straight line, without regard to intervening buildings, from
the nearest point of the property parcel upon which the adult
entertainment business is to be located to the nearest point of the
parcel of property or the land use district boundary line from which the
adult entertainment business is to be separated.
D. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
ADULT ENTERTAINMENT BUSINESSES —
ADULT ARCADES — One or more motion-picture projectors, slide
projectors or similar machines, for viewing by five or fewer persons
each are used to show films, motion pictures, video cassettes,
slides or other photographic or media reproductions, which are
characterized by emphasis upon the depiction or description of
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
(1)
ADULT BOOKSTORES — Have as substantial (50% or more)
portion of the stock-in-trade and offer for sale, for any
consideration, any one or more of the following:
Books, magazines, periodicals, or other printed matter or
photographs, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or
other visual representations, which are characterized by an
emphasis upon the depiction or description of specified sexual
activities or specified anatomical areas; or
(a)
Instruments, devices or paraphernalia which are designed for
use in connection with specified sexual activities.
(b)
(2)
ADULT CABARETS — Any nightclub, bar, restaurant, tavern or
similar establishment which features live performances
(3)
§ 190-27 ONEIDA CODE § 190-27
C:754
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES —
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS —
characterized by exposure of specified anatomical areas or by
specified sexual activities or films, motion pictures, video cassettes,
slides or other photographic or media reproductions characterized
by an emphasis upon the depiction or description of specified
sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, or performances or
activity known as adult female "topless" or "bottomless" dancing.
ADULT MOTION-PICTURE THEATERS — Where, for any form of
consideration, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or
other photographic or media reproductions are shown, and in
which a substantial portion of the total presentation time is devoted
to, or the presentation is distinguished or characterized by
emphasis on, the showing, depiction or description of specified
sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
(4)
ADULT THEATER — A theater, concert hall, auditorium or similar
establishment which, for any form of consideration, regularly
features live performances characterized by the exposure of
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
(5)
MASSAGE PARLORS — Where, for any form of consideration,
massage, alcohol rub fomentation, electric or magnetic treatment
or manipulation of the human body is administered, unless by
a medical practitioner, chiropractor, acupuncturist, physical
therapist or similar professional person licensed by the State of
New York. This definition shall not be deemed to include an athletic
club, health club, school, gymnasium, reducing salon, spa or similar
establishment where massage or similar manipulation of the
human body is offered as an incidental accessory service.
(6)
(1) Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal; or
(2) Acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse or sodomy; or
Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region,
buttocks or female breast.
(3)
Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic
region, buttock and female breast below a point immediately above
the top of the areola; and
(1)
Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state even if
completely and opaquely covered.
(2)
E. Violations. The violation of this section shall be punishable as a Class A
misdemeanor. Each day a violation continues shall constitute a separate
violation. The City may also maintain an action or special proceeding
for an injunction or other equitable relief to compel compliance with, or
to restrain the violation of, this section. The use of any remedy shall not
§ 190-27 CHARTER § 190-27
C:755
prevent the use of any other remedy hereunder. The listing of remedies
herein shall not deprive the City of the use of any other remedies
provided by law.
F. Exception. The provisions of this section shall not apply to any theater,
concert hall or similar establishment which is primarily devoted to
theatrical performances.
§ 190-27 ONEIDA CODE § 190-27
C:756
ARTICLE V
Special Procedures and Standards
§ 190-28. Conditional uses. [Amended 4-15-1980; 6-15-1982]
A. Purpose. It is the purpose of this section to provide a process and
guidelines to review those uses which may be appropriate to the
respective zoning districts, but where the number, location,
juxtaposition, and site improvement should be carefully considered and
regulated.
B. Procedure. On application, the Joint Zoning Board of Appeals/Planning
Commission may authorize the Building Inspector/Code Enforcement
Officer to grant a zoning permit for any use for which approval of the
Joint Zoning Board of Appeals/Planning Commission is required by
these regulations according to the process and standards set forth
below: [Amended 11-8-2017 by L.L. No. 5-2017]
(1) The application for a zoning permit for a conditional use shall be on
a form provided by the Building Inspector/Code Enforcement
Officer. The Building Inspector/Code Enforcement Officer shall
determine the completeness of any application made under this
section and shall notify the applicant within 10 days of the date of
submission if such application is incomplete or deficient in any way,
and shall further specify the deficiencies.
(2) The Joint Zoning Board of Appeals/Planning Commission shall
consider the application and render its decision within 45 days of
the date of submission of a complete application if no public
hearing is held; or, alternatively, schedule and hold a public hearing
within 45 days of the date of submission and render its decision
within 45 days of the date of the hearing. These respective time
frames may be extended only by mutual written agreement
between the applicant and the Joint Zoning Board of Appeals/
Planning Commission. A public hearing shall be at the option of the
Joint Zoning Board of Appeals/Planning Commission.
(3) Notification of the Joint Zoning Board of Appeals/Planning
Commission's decision to authorize or deny the permit and the
reasons therefor, will be given in writing to the Building Inspector/
Code Enforcement Officer, the City Clerk and the applicant within
five days of the decision.
(4) Notification shall also be sent to the county clerk for filing with the
property deed.
(5) Upon a rezoning of any district in which a conditional use permit
has been authorized, the said conditional use permit shall become a
nonconforming use, subject nevertheless to the conditions imposed
thereon and shall thereafter be subject to the regulations
applicable to a nonconforming use.
§ 190-28 CHARTER § 190-28
C:757
(6) All applications for a conditional use permit must have the
signature of the owner of the subject property.
C. Standards. Conditional uses to be considered by the Joint Zoning Board
of Appeals/Planning Commission are listed in the Zoning Schedule.
[Amended 4-18-2006 by Ord. No. 06-01; 2-17-2009 by Ord. No.
09-02; 5-5-2009 by Ord. No. 09-03; 11-8-2017 by L.L. No. 5-2017]
(1) Unless varied in this section, the following standards will guide the
Joint Zoning Board of Appeals/Planning Commission in its review of
conditional use applications.
(a) Location, size of use and structure, nature and intensity of
operations involved, size of site in relation to it, and location of
site with respect to streets giving access to it will be in
harmony with the orderly development of the district.
(b) Location, nature, and height of buildings, walls, and fences will
not discourage the appropriate development and use of
adjacent land and buildings, or impair their value.
(c) Operations of conditional use shall not be more objectionable
to nearby properties than will be operations of any permitted
standard use.
(d) Adequate combination of public and private parking is
provided.
(e) There will be no emission of noxious odors, gases or smoke.
(2) Residential uses, including multifamily dwellings; residential care
facility; and mixed commercial-residential use.
(a) Floor space, health, safety, and sanitary conditions shall be
adequate to ensure livability, be in accord with New York State
Multiple Residence Law, where applicable, and provide a
minimum floor space of 500 square feet per dwelling unit.
(b) Lot size per building for multiple-family dwellings shall be in
accord with the minimum lot size required in the district and,
in addition, shall have the following number of square feet for
each dwelling unit in excess of the first according to the type of
unit:
[1] Efficiency unit: 2,500 square feet.
[2] One bedroom: 3,000 square feet.
[3] Two bedrooms: 4,000 square feet.
[4] Three or more bedrooms: 5,000 square feet.
§ 190-28 ONEIDA CODE § 190-28
C:758
(c) Adequate off-street parking shall be provided, including a
minimum of 1 1/2 spaces per dwelling unit and one per each
customer, client, or patron.
(d) The use shall not interfere or conflict with the peaceful
enjoyment of neighboring residential uses and shall be in
accord with the density guidelines for the area according to the
established categories of the City Comprehensive Plan and
these regulations.
(e) Adequate screening, landscaping, and fencing may be required
in accordance with § 190-17.
(3) Home businesses.
(a) Purpose. The intent of regulations governing home
occupations is to protect the character of the surrounding
neighborhood, particularly adjacent residential uses, from
intrusions and nuisances created by operating businesses in a
residential area, while recognizing the needs of certain
residents and community benefits of allowing certain types of
work in the home. The regulations ensure that the home
occupation remains subordinate to the residential use, and that
the residential viability of the dwelling is maintained. The
regulations recognize that many types of jobs can be done in a
home with little or no effects on the surrounding
neighborhood.
(b) Definition. A home business is one where the residents use
their home as a place of work; where the business use is clearly
incidental and secondary to the use of the property for
residential purposes. Examples include but are not limited to
artists, writers, tutors, consultants and home offices. Home
businesses also provide an opportunity for a home to be used
as a business address but not as a place of work.
(c) Use-related regulations.
[1] Allowed uses. The intent of the regulations of this chapter
is to establish performance standards for home
occupations rather than to limit the allowed uses to a
specific list. Uses which comply with the standards of this
chapter are allowed by right unless specifically listed in
Subsection C(3)(c)[2] below.
[2] Prohibited uses. The following uses are specifically
prohibited for home occupations:
[a] Home businesses may not provide any type of repair
or assembly service for vehicles or equipment with
internal combustion engines (such as autos,
motorcycles, scooters, snowmobiles, outboard marine
§ 190-28 CHARTER § 190-28
C:759
engines, lawn mowers, chain saws, and other small
engines) or for large appliances (such as washing
machines, dryers, and refrigerators).
[b] Home businesses may not involve any other work
related to automobiles and their parts.
[c] Home businesses may not serve as headquarters or
dispatch centers where employees come to the site
and are dispatched to other locations.
(d) Operational regulations.
[1] No person other than the residents of the dwelling unit
may be engaged or employed in the home business or
businesses.
[2] In R-1 and R-2 Zones, homes businesses must be limited to
those businesses that do not have clients, customers, or
other business affiliates coming to the home business site.
[3] In R-1 and R-2 Zones, no sign will be displayed which
would be visible from the outside of the dwelling unit; in
R-3 Zones, the Sign Ordinance (§ 190-15) shall apply.
[4] In no case shall a home business be open to the public at
times earlier than 8:00 a.m. nor later than 10:00 p.m.
[5] A maximum of five customers, clients, or delivery vehicles
may visit the site per day.
[6] Retail sale of goods must be entirely accessory to any
services provided on the site.
(e) Site-related standards.
[1] The area set aside for home businesses shall not exceed
20% of the total floor area of such residence, or exceed
400 square feet of any accessory building if located
therein.
[2] No operations, storage, or display of materials or products
shall occur on the outside of the residential premises.
[3] No alteration of the residential appearance of the premises
shall be permitted, including the creation of a separate
entrance to the dwelling unit or utilization of an existing
entrance exclusively for the business.
[4] The home business shall not require additional off-street
parking spaces for clients or customers.
§ 190-28 ONEIDA CODE § 190-28
C:760
[5] No toxic, explosive, flammable, combustible, corrosive,
radioactive or other hazardous materials shall be used or
stored on site.
[6] The home business shall produce no noise, vibrations,
glare, objectionable fumes or electrical interference
detectable to normal sensory perception on residential
units on the subject lot or adjacent lots.
(4) Business and office uses, including professional office, funeral
home, and medical facility.
(a) The use shall not interfere or conflict with the character of the
immediate neighborhood nor with the peaceful enjoyment of
neighboring uses.
(b) The amount of land and building area shall be appropriate to
the nature and scale of the proposed business or professional
office use.
(c) Adequate screening, landscaping, and fencing may be required
in accordance with § 190-17.
(5) Public accommodation uses, including school, tourist
accommodation, restaurant, fast-foot restaurant.
(a) No building, parking, or service area shall be closer than 100
feet to any existing residential use in a residential district other
than one on the premises.
(b) Such use shall be adequately fenced and/or screened from any
adjacent residential property, and lighting shall be directed
away from adjacent property and the highway.
(c) The location and situation of all structures shall be satisfactory
to the Joint Zoning Board of Appeals/Planning Commission
relative to the visual character and travel safety along the
roadway on which such facility fronts.
(d) Ingress and egress shall be so designed as to minimize traffic
congestion, and for this purpose, the number and location of
driveways shall be subject to the explicit approval of the Joint
Zoning Board of Appeals/Planning Commission.
(e) Adequate screening, landscaping, and fencing may be required
in accordance with § 190-17.
(6) Motor vehicle uses including gasoline station; service or repair
garage; motor vehicle sales/service, and car wash.
(a) No building, parking, or service area shall be closer than 100
feet to any existing residential use.
§ 190-28 CHARTER § 190-28
C:761
(b) The minimum distance between pump islands and between the
building and any pump islands shall be 20 feet.
(c) No waste water, oil, toxic or inflammable materials shall
pollute, or create hazardous or unsightly conditions.
(d) Ingress and egress shall be so designed as to minimize traffic
congestion, and for this purpose, the number and location of
driveways shall be subject to the explicit approval of the Joint
Zoning Board of Appeals/Planning Commission.
(e) Any motor vehicle wash shall provide a minimum of four
stacking spaces per bay on the lot.
(f) No exterior storage of dismantled or disabled vehicle parts or
salvage material shall be permitted unless properly screened
or fenced.
(g) Adequate screening, landscaping, and fencing may be required
in accordance with § 190-17.
(7) Riding stable and animal hospital/kennel.
(a) Adequate provision for the storage and removal of all animal
wastes shall be made. In particular, no manure shall be piled
within 300 feet of any residence, other than one on the lot.
(b) Any fencing or exercise area or like ancillary facility shall be
subject to the review and approval of the Joint Zoning Board of
Appeals/Planning Commission.
(8) Manufacturing-industrial uses, including fertilizer/feed mill, bulk
fuel storage, concrete/asphalt batch plant, and other like uses.
(a) The proposed use and the nature of the activity will be
compatible with existing adjoining uses or unimproved lands.
(b) The location and situation of all structures shall be satisfactory
to the Joint Zoning Board of Appeals/Planning Commission
relative to the visual character and travel safety along the
roadway on which the facility fronts.
(c) Ingress and egress shall be so designed as to minimize traffic
congestion and hazards and for this purpose, the number and
location of driveways shall be subject to the explicit approval of
the Joint Zoning Board of Appeals/Planning Commission.
(d) The individual parking, storage, landscaping, signing,
screening, and other needs of the proposed use shall be
provided in a manner satisfactory to the Joint Zoning Board of
Appeals/Planning Commission. Specifically, the location and
extent of exterior storage of vehicles, equipment, and
materials shall be designated on the application. Screen
§ 190-28 ONEIDA CODE § 190-28
C:762
planting, landscaping or other site improvements, as may be
required by § 190-17 to protect the visual character of the
area, shall be instituted in accord with the direction of the Joint
Zoning Board of Appeals/Planning Commission.
(9) Public utility, public use.
(a) Such facility shall not be located on a residential roadway,
unless no other site is available, and shall be so located as to
necessitate minimal travel of service vehicles over residential
roadways.
(b) The location, design and operation of such facility shall not
adversely affect the character of the surrounding area.
(c) Adequate fences, barriers and other safety devices shall be
provided, and the facility shall be screen-planted and
landscaped in accordance with the provision of § 190-17.
(10) Commercial excavation.
(a) Such extraction shall not endanger the stability of adjacent
land or structures, nor constitute a detriment to public health,
safety, or welfare by reason of excessive dust, noise, traffic, or
other condition. The Joint Zoning Board of Appeals/Planning
Commission shall specify any reasonable requirements to
safeguard the public health, safety, and welfare in authorizing
a permit for such use.
(b) The face of the excavation area shall not exceed a 2:1
(horizontal to vertical) slope when not used for any thirty-day
period and a 3:1 slope when the excavation use is concluded.
(c) The top and the base of such slope shall not be nearer than 100
feet to any lot line nor nearer than 100 feet to the center line of
any roadway.
(d) Screen-planting may be required to protect the visual
character of the area.
(e) A plan for restoration and rehabilitation of a commercial earth
excavation area or borrow pit shall accompany the application
and shall be in conformity with the State Mined Lands
Reclamation Act.72 The Joint Zoning Board of Appeals/Planning
Commission, upon approval of such plan, may require a
performance security to assure rehabilitation of commercial
excavation sites in conformity with the plan.
(11) Mobile dwelling as accessory agriculture use. A mobile dwelling as
an accessory to an agricultural use may be permitted by the Joint
Zoning Board of Appeals/Planning Commission as a conditional use
72.Editor's Note: See Environmental Conservation Law § 23-2701 et seq.
§ 190-28 CHARTER § 190-28
C:763
when the Joint Zoning Board of Appeals/Planning Commission finds
that such mobile dwelling is necessary for the conduct of a farming
operation, and that the mobile dwelling will be occupied by the
owner, or a full-time manager or employee of the farm. The mobile
dwelling shall be subject to the following regulations:
(a) It shall be located on a standard size lot and shall have
minimum yard dimensions in accordance with the Zoning
Schedule for the district in which it is to be located.
(b) The mobile dwelling shall have a minimum floor area of 750
square feet.
(c) An accessible, adequate, safe, and potable supply of water
shall be provided to the mobile dwelling. The water system
shall be adequate to provide a minimum of 150 gallons per day
and at least 20 pounds of pressure to the mobile dwelling.
(d) The mobile dwelling shall be connected to the City sewer
system; or where public sewer service is not feasible, a method
of sewage disposal approved by the City shall be installed.
(e) Prior to the start of any construction on the site, a zoning
permit shall be secured for the mobile dwelling. A site plan
showing the mobile home in relation to the property lines shall
be submitted for the purpose of securing a building and zoning
permit. The site plan shall also show the driveway access,
walks, storage facilities outside of the mobile dwelling, trees
on the site, and on-site well and sewage disposal, if any.
(f) Remove all wheels and transport devices, mount or place on
permanent concrete block or masonry unit.
(12) Drive-through window facilities.
(a) Purpose. Drive-through windows have become a critical
accessory to more and more retail and service-oriented uses.
Due to potential impacts on traffic volume, vehicular and
pedestrian circulation and the environment, the following
additional standards are required for the permitting of drivethrough
windows.
(b) Site location criteria. The site of the drive-through window
shall meet the following criteria:
[1] The use will not substantially increase traffic on streets in
a residentially zoned district;
[2] The use will not substantially lessen the usability of
adjacent or nearby commercially zoned property or
commercial use by interfering with pedestrian traffic;
§ 190-28 ONEIDA CODE § 190-28
C:764
[3] The site will be adequate in size and shape to
accommodate said use and to accommodate all yards,
parking, landscaping, and other required improvements;
[4] The use will not substantially lessen the usability and
suitability of adjacent or nearby residential zoned property
for residential use.
(c) General design standards. All the following must be provided
for the primary use to be granted a building permit for a drivethrough
window:
[1] Lighting: All lighting on the exterior of the building shall
be of an indirect nature, emanating only from fixtures
located under canopies or hoods, under eaves of buildings
and at ground level in the landscaping. Freestanding pole
lights shall not exceed a maximum height of 14 feet and
shall be so arranged and shielded that there shall be no
glare or reflection onto adjacent properties or public
rights-of-way;
[2] Signs should be placed and waiting lanes should be
designed so that waiting cars do not block sidewalks or
public streets.
[3] Landscaping, waiting-lane devices, and overall design
should not prevent vehicles from safely and efficiently
leaving waiting lanes.
(d) Traffic circulation.
[1] A traffic study addressing both on-site and off-site traffic
and circulation impacts is required.
[2] Sites located adjacent to an alley must incorporate the use
of the alley as the drive-through lane entrance unless it
can be demonstrated that such a configuration would
either hinder pedestrian or vehicular circulation off site.
[3] Pedestrians must be able to enter the establishment from
the parking lot or sidewalk without crossing the waiting or
exit lines.
[4] Waiting lanes shall be designed for the maximum length
possible. At a minimum, waiting lanes should
accommodate average peak monthly traffic flow, allowing
23 feet per vehicle. Applicants must provide data about the
peak flows of the business to determine the minimum
waiting needed.
[5] The waiting lane shall be independent of any on-site
parking, parking maneuvering areas, public streets, alley
or traffic ways serving other on and/or off-site uses.
§ 190-28 CHARTER § 190-28
C:765
(e) Site plan requirements. In addition to the general
requirements for site plan review, drive-up window site plans
must also include the following features:
[1] Design and placement of signs to ensure that they
facilitate the safe and smooth flow of traffic.
[2] Details of pedestrian and vehicular circulation.
[3] Details of waiting lanes, including location and design of
curbs, gates, bollards and chains, pavement markings and
similar devices.
(13) Bed-and-breakfast establishments. The following standards are
applicable to bed-and-breakfast establishments:
(a) The owner or owners of the bed-and-breakfast must reside in
and continue to reside in the dwelling as his/her/their principal
residence. The owner will provide a sworn statement certifying
to such residency upon request of the Director.
(b) The number of guest rooms for transient accommodation shall
not exceed four.
(c) Each bed-and-breakfast shall be established, maintained and
operated so as to preserve and complement the residential
character and integrity of the surrounding area when the
facility is established in a residential district; however, fire
escapes, handicapped entrances and other features may be
added to protect public safety.
(d) Breakfast shall be served on the premises only for guests and
employees of the bed-and-breakfast. Guest rooms may not be
equipped with cooking facilities. No other meals shall be
provided on the premises.
(e) No more than one person who is not a principal resident of the
dwelling shall be an employee at the dwelling site at any one
time.
(f) One professional-quality sign is allowed on the property with
up to eight square feet per sign face, and may be attached to
the exterior or placed in the window of the residence or
accessory structure, or placed within the front yard setback,
mounted on an architectural post not to exceed four feet in
height, or a monument sign not to exceed four feet above grade
in the front setback. No sign shall interfere with vision
clearance on adjoining public rights-of-way.
(g) No more than an average of two business-related deliveries per
day is allowed. Such deliveries shall not restrict pedestrian or
vehicular circulation on adjoining public streets and sidewalks.
§ 190-28 ONEIDA CODE § 190-29
C:766
§ 190-29. Site plan review (resource management). [Amended
7-3-1979]
A. Purpose.
(1) It is the purpose of this section to provide a process for the
recognition and detailed evaluation of those types of natural and
related land use considerations important to the achievement of
the City Comprehensive Plan and the purpose of these regulations
and which, given the nature, level of detail and scale of the
Citywide inventory and Zoning Maps, require a more exact site
specific evaluation on a case-by-case basis than is otherwise
possible. Specifically, the Resource Management (RM) - Overlay
District has been established to depict land and water areas with
particularly significant limitations to development that necessitate
a more careful evaluation of the likely impact of such development.
The types of limitations encompassed within this overlay district
include:
(a) Flood hazard areas.
(b) Wetlands.
(c) Steep slopes and adverse soil conditions.
(d) Certified agricultural districts.
(2) Consistent with this purpose, the provisions of this section shall
apply to all land and water areas in a Resource Management (RM) -
Overlay District as set forth in the following.
B. Procedure. The process for consideration of any proposed use to be
situated in any Resource Management (RM) - Overlay District shall be
as follows: [Amended 11-8-2017 by L.L. No. 5-2017]
(1) The nature and content of an application for any use considered
under this section shall be as set forth in Chapter 143, Site Plan
Review, and such additional information as may be required in the
administration of this section. The Building Inspector/Code
Enforcement Officer shall determine the completeness of any
application considered under this section and shall notify the
applicant within five days of the date of submission if such
application is incomplete or deficient in any way, and shall further
specify the deficiencies. At the same time the application is sent to
the Joint Zoning Board of Appeals/Planning Commission for action,
it shall be sent to the Conservation Advisory Council for review and
recommendation.
(2) The Joint Zoning Board of Appeals/Planning Commission shall
consider the application including such professional expert
assistance as may be necessary, and render its decision within 45
days from the date of submission of a complete application if no
§ 190-29 CHARTER § 190-29
C:767
public hearing is held; or, alternatively, schedule and hold a public
hearing within 45 days of the date of submission and render its
decision within 45 days of the date of hearing. These respective
time frames may be extended only by mutual written agreement
between the applicant and the Joint Zoning Board of Appeals/
Planning Commission. Consideration of the application at public
hearing shall be optional at the discretion of the Joint Zoning Board
of Appeals/Planning Commission.
(3) Notification of the Joint Zoning Board of Appeals/Planning
Commission's decision to authorize or deny the permit and the
reasons for this decision shall be given in writing to the Building
Inspector/Code Enforcement Officer, a copy filed with the City
Clerk within five days of the date of the Joint Zoning Board of
Appeals/Planning Commission's decision and a copy of the Joint
Zoning Board of Appeals/Planning Commission's determination
furnished to the applicant upon request.
C. Applicable standards. Any use proposed to be located within a Resource
Management (RM) - Overlay District shall be evaluated according to the
following specific guidelines:
(1) Flood hazard areas. The provisions of Chapter 64, Flood Damage
Prevention, shall be met.
(2) Wetlands. No use shall be situated in or adjacent to, any wetland
area where the location of such use, by landfill or drainage, will
damage or affect in a significantly detrimental manner the water
retention capacity or unique flora or fauna characteristics of such
wetland; and further, no such use shall be located where the
instability or inadequate bearing capacity of the wetland would
jeopardize the stability of the use itself. In particular, any use
proposed in such area shall be reviewed according to the
applicable provisions of the New York State Freshwater Wetlands
Act. [Amended 12-19-2000 by L.L. No. 6-2000]
(3) Steep slopes and adverse soil condition. No structure shall be
situated on any slope in excess of 25%, or any soils where the
location of such use will cause or aggravate significant earth
erosion or slippage, or encourage malfunctioning of any individual
sewage disposal or the contamination of the water table.
(4) Certified agricultural districts. To the maximum extent practicable,
new development should not take place on viable agricultural land.
D. Exempt actions. Proposed actions in the Resource Management District
which are included in the State or Local Type II List of Actions, as
defined under Part 617.5 of the New York State Environmental Quality
Review Act73 are hereby exempt from the procedures set forth in this
section of the zoning regulations. Such exemption shall not waive the
73.Editor's Note: See Environmental Conservation Law § 8-0105 et seq.
§ 190-29 ONEIDA CODE § 190-29
C:768
§ 190-30. Planned development districts. [Amended 6-15-1982]
requirements of any other portion of these zoning regulations as they
relate to the action under consideration.
A. Purpose.
(1) This section is designed to provide a means of developing those
land areas within the City considered appropriate for new
residential, commercial or industrial use, or a satisfactory
combination of these uses, in an economic and compatible manner,
while encouraging the utilization of innovative planning and design
concepts or techniques in these areas without departing from the
spirit and intent of these regulations.
(2) In particular, this provision is designed to accommodate proposed
planned unit development or clustering techniques not otherwise
provided for in the established zoning districts.
B. Procedure. [Amended 11-8-2017 by L.L. No. 5-2017]
(1) For the establishment of a planned development district:
(a) Application for designation of a planned development district
shall be referred to the Joint Zoning Board of Appeals/Planning
Commission within 10 days of the date of submission. The
applicant shall furnish that data called for in Chapter 143, Site
Plan Review.
(b) The Joint Zoning Board of Appeals/Planning Commission and
any professional planning adviser that the Joint Zoning Board
of Appeals/Planning Commission may see fit to engage shall
review such application. The Joint Zoning Board of Appeals/
Planning Commission may require such changes in the
preliminary plan as are found to be necessary to meet the
requirements of this section, to protect the established
permitted uses in the vicinity and to promote the orderly
growth and sound development of the City. In evaluating the
proposal and in reaching its decision regarding the preliminary
plan, the Joint Zoning Board of Appeals/Planning Commission
shall consider and make findings regarding those applicable
considerations set forth under Subsection C of this section.
(c) The Joint Zoning Board of Appeals/Planning Commission shall
report its findings and offer its recommendation to the
Common Council within 45 days. It may approve, disapprove,
or give conditional approval subject to stipulated conditions or
modifications regarding the proposed development.
(d) The Common Council shall hold a public hearing, after public
notice as required for any amendment to these regulations,
and shall consider the report and recommendations of the Joint
§ 190-29 CHARTER § 190-30
C:769
Zoning Board of Appeals/Planning Commission and all other
comments, reviews and statements pertaining thereto. It may
amend the Zoning Maps to establish and define the type and
boundaries of the planned development district.
(2) For the approval of development within an established planned
development district:
(a) Amendment of the Zoning Maps shall not constitute
authorization to develop in the district.
(b) Such authorization, after a planned development district has
been established shall require that the applicant submit to the
Joint Zoning Board of Appeals/Planning Commission such
further plans and specifications, supporting documents and
data as are required under final site plan in Chapter 143, Site
Plan Review.
(c) The Joint Zoning Board of Appeals/Planning Commission, and
the Joint Zoning Board of Appeals/Planning Commission's
professional planning advisor, shall set forth the particular
ways in which the proposed development is consistent with the
City Comprehensive Plan and the requirements of this section,
including, but not limited to, findings of fact and conclusions
on the applicable consideration set forth under Subsection C of
this section.
(d) No permit shall be issued until the Joint Zoning Board of
Appeals/Planning Commission has authorized issuance of a
permit by resolution.
(e) All conditions imposed by the Joint Zoning Board of Appeals/
Planning Commission in its review of the final site plan shall
run with the land and shall not lapse or be waived as a result of
any change in tenancy or ownership.
(f) If construction of the development in accordance with the
approved plans and specifications has not begun within six
months after the date of the issuance of the permit, all permits
shall become null and void and the approval shall be deemed
revoked and vacated, except as application may be made to
and considered by the Joint Zoning Board of Appeals/Planning
Commission.
C. Applicable standards.
(1) Residential-Planned (R-P) District.
(a) Area/density. Any residential planned district shall have a
minimum area of 10 acres, and all development within the
district will not exceed the maximum density guidelines as
§ 190-30 ONEIDA CODE § 190-30
C:770
expressed for the area in question in the City Comprehensive
Plan and these regulations.
(b) Required minimum yard dimensions shall be as follows:
[1] Perimeter of entire district: 25 feet.
[2] Front: 35 feet for one-family dwelling; 35 feet for twofamily
dwelling; 40 feet for multiple-family dwelling.
[3] Side: 15 feet each side for one-family dwelling, 20 feet
each side for two-family dwelling, 40 feet between any
buildings for multiple-family dwelling.
[4] Rear: 25 feet, all principal buildings.
(c) Roadways shall be as follows: All roadways, whether to be
offered for cession to the City or not, shall be constructed in
accord with City standards as established in Chapter 155,
Subdivision of Land, and, in addition, according to any further
requirements or stipulations deemed necessary by the City
Engineer and as set forth in the resolution of approval of the
final plan.
(d) Off-street parking shall be provided as follows:
[1] Number of spaces.
[a] One- and two-family dwellings: 1 1/2 spaces per
dwelling unit.
[b] Multiple-family dwellings: 1 1/2 spaces per dwelling
unit.
[2] Parking spaces, other than in a garage, shall be in the side
or in the rear yard.
(e) Open space and recreation area shall be provided as follows:
Suitable and satisfactorily located lands comprising at least
5%, but not required to be more than 10% of the area of the
planned residential district shall be designated and reserved
for open space recreational purposes. Improvements and
facilities to be provided as part of such recreation area and
provisions for its maintenance shall be acceptable to the City
and the responsibility of the applicant.
(f) Adequate screening, landscaping, and fencing may be required
in accordance with § 190-17.
(2) Mobile Dwelling-Planned District (MD-P).
(a) Mobile dwelling shall have a minimum floor area of 750 square
feet.
§ 190-30 CHARTER § 190-30
C:771
§ 190-31. Cluster development regulations. [Added 10-3-1989 by
Ord No. 89-05]
(b) Yard requirements shall be determined by the Joint Zoning
Board of Appeals/Planning Commission depending upon lot
arrangement, but in no case shall there be less than 30 feet
between mobile dwellings and no mobile dwelling shall be
closer than 50 feet to any boundary of this district. [Amended
11-8-2017 by L.L. No. 5-2017]
(c) Any area from the floor of the mobile dwelling to the ground
shall be skirted with a suitable opaque material.
(d) An enclosed storage area of at least 80 square feet shall be
provided for each mobile dwelling.
(e) A minimum of two off-street parking spaces shall be provided
for each mobile dwelling.
(f) In the case of a proposed mobile dwelling park (see definitions
in § 190-5), City of Oneida Mobile Home Park Standards74 shall
supersede any standards and/or requirements of this section
with the exception of the minimum zoning district size of 10
acres.
(g) Any area zoned MD-P shall be subdivided in accordance with
Chapter 155, Subdivision of Land, if lots are to be offered for
sale.
(h) Adequate screening, landscaping, and fencing may be required
in accordance with § 190-17.
A. Purpose.
(1) Residential cluster development is encouraged in the City of
Oneida in order to provide permanent open space for the
enjoyment of present and future generations; to protect natural
resources and qualities; to provide for a variety and choice of
housing, including housing for people of low and moderate income;
to reduce the cost of residential development; to encourage and
maintain agriculture; and to protect the value of property.
(2) The purpose of this section is to provide specific standards and
explicit procedures that will facilitate residential cluster
development.
B. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
74.Editor's Note: See Ch. 92, Mobile Homes and Mobile Home Parks.
§ 190-30 ONEIDA CODE § 190-31
C:772
AGRICULTURE — The growing and harvesting of crops, the raising and
breeding of poultry and livestock, and the management and harvesting
of woodlots.
APPLICANT — A developer submitting an application for development.
ATTACHED HOUSING — Homes having at least one wall in common.
COMMON OPEN SPACE — An open space area within or related to
a site designated as a development, and designed and intended for
the use or enjoyment of residents and owners of the development.
Common open space may contain such complementary structures and
improvements as are necessary and appropriate for the use or
enjoyment of residents and owners of the development.
CRITICAL NATURAL AREAS — The following areas, as identified by a
natural resource inventory and/or the municipal Comprehensive Plan:
surface water, fresh- or saltwater wetlands; flood hazard areas; stream
corridors; slopes over 18%; areas with a seasonal high-water table less
than one foot as indicated by the Standard Soil Survey.
DETACHED HOUSING — Homes having no walls in common.
FARMER — A person whose full- or part-time employment is agriculture
and who has the necessary training and/or experience for this
occupation.
FLOOD HAZARD — A land area adjoining a river, stream, water course
or lake which is likely to be flooded during a one-hundred-year flood,
as depicted by the United States Department of Housing and Urban
Development. 75
GROSS DENSITY — See "residential density."
LOT — A parcel of land considered as a unit, occupied or capable of
being occupied by a principal building or use and accessory buildings
or uses, or by a group of buildings united by a common use or interest
and responsibility therefor, and designated so as to have its principal
frontage on an improved street.
LOWER-INCOME HOUSEHOLDS — Households for which the total
household income does not exceed 80% of the median for the county in
which the project is located.
NET DENSITY — The number of dwelling units per acre of land within
the portion of a tract delineated for residential use. The area of the tract
less common open space, critical natural area, major roads, and utility
rights-of-way.
PLAT — A map or maps of a subdivision or site plan.
PRIME AGRICULTURAL SOIL — Soil types, whether presently used for
agriculture or not, classified as I, II, or III for agricultural purposes by
the United States Department of Agriculture Soil Conservation Service.
75.Editor's Note: See Ch. 64, Flood Damage Prevention.
§ 190-31 CHARTER § 190-31
C:773
PUBLIC OPEN SPACE — An open space area conveyed or otherwise
dedicated to a municipality, municipal agency, board of education, state
or county agency, or other public body for recreational or
conservational uses.
PUBLIC SEWERAGE (or WATER SUPPLY) — Sewer service (or water
supply) that physically links individual homes in the residential cluster
to a central treatment plant (or, in the case of water supply, to a central
distribution facility), elsewhere in the City.
RESIDENTIAL CLUSTER — An area to be developed as a single entity
according to a plan containing housing units which have a common or
public open space area as an appurtenance.
RESIDENTIAL DENSITY — The number of dwelling units per gross acre
of residential land area, including streets, easements, and open space
portions of a development.
RESIDENTIAL PORTION OF THE TRACT — The area of the proposed
development tract devoted to residential structures; associated private
yard areas (front, sides and back); parking associated with the units;
and the area of roads, paths, and walkways within the residential area.
SITE — See "tract."
SITE ANALYSIS — A presentation by the developer, in the form of
maps and accompanying text of the natural and cultural resources
and qualities of the site and its environs. The site analysis shall cover
the site's geology, soil, slopes, underground and surficial hydrology,
vegetation, wildlife, and other factors that may be relevant. The
analysis shall conclude in a site plan based on the analysis, and showing
the opportunities and constraints of the site and its environs for
residential cluster development.
STANDARD SOIL SURVEY — The soil survey published by the United
States Department of Agriculture, Soil Conservation Service for the
county in which the project is located.
STREAM CORRIDORS — The geographical area that includes the
stream, the floodplain, adjoining areas with a seasonal high-water table
of one inch or less (as shown on the Standard Soil Survey), and
contiguous slopes greater than 12%, as shown on the Standard Soil
Survey.
TRACT — The total area which has been designated as a unit for
residential cluster development.
YIELD — The maximum number of residential units allowable on a
specific tract under the applicable terms of this Chapter 190 generally
and this section as applicable.
C. Applicability.
(1) Applicants are encouraged to submit proposals for residential
cluster development in all residential districts of the City.
§ 190-31 ONEIDA CODE § 190-31
C:774
(2) The Joint Zoning Board of Appeals/Planning Commission may
require residential cluster development on a specific tract if it finds
either of the following: [Amended 11-8-2017 by L.L. No.
5-2017]
(a) A conventional (noncluster) subdivision or development
proposal would intrude or adversely affect critical areas on the
tract.
(b) The tract includes five acres or more of agricultural land as
determined by the standard soil survey and conventional
development would remove more than 10% of this land from
potential agricultural use.
(3) Any finding by the Joint Zoning Board of Appeals/Planning
Commission under Subsection C(2) of this section shall be
accompanied by data to support the finding. [Amended
11-8-2017 by L.L. No. 5-2017]
D. Common open space and division of site.
(1) For the purposes of measurement and analysis under the provisions
of this section, the tract shall be divided into three parts, and any or
all parts may be comprised of areas that are not contiguous:
(a) Common open space area(s).
(b) Residential area(s).
(c) The area(s) devoted to roads, utilities, and rights-of-way.
(2) An application for residential cluster development may designate
common open space areas for active or passive recreational use;
for agricultural or woodlot management; or for preservation in a
natural condition to maintain natural resources and qualities.
Common open space may include any reasonable combination of
these uses though the intended uses must be specified.
(3) At least 30% of any residential cluster development shall be
retained for common open space. All critical natural areas and
prime agricultural lands shall be retained in common open space
except that residential and utility areas may intrude into no more
than 10% of these areas if no alternative location is available.
(4) Residential areas shall be located on the basis of an environmental
site analysis as specified in Subsection J of this section. A
residential cluster application may include a variety of housing
types and lot arrangements, including but not limited to detached
homes on large or small lots, and attached units such as
townhouses, patio homes, etc.
E. Density provisions.
§ 190-31 CHARTER § 190-31
C:775
(1) Gross density. The yield of the tract shall not exceed the number of
units permitted under the zoning or subdivision provisions
applicable to the zoning district in which the tract is located. The
permitted number of lots or units will be determined on the basis of
a sketch plan prepared under the applicable provisions of this
Chapter 190, Zoning. All lots must be acceptable for approval
under the applicable provisions of the ordinance.
(2) Net density with public or community water and sewerage. If
public or community water and sewerage are not available, the net
density of the residential area(s) of the tract shall not exceed the
densities specified in Subsection K(2). If a variety of housing types
is proposed, the net density shall not exceed the sum of the
maximums for each area proposed for each type.
F. Density bonuses.
(1) The following density bonuses are offered to further promote the
purpose of this section. The granting of a bonus or bonuses will
only be considered by the Joint Zoning Board of Appeals/Planning
Commission if specifically applied for by the applicant. The Joint
Zoning Board of Appeals/Planning Commission shall make a finding
of fact with respect to each bonus applied for. Density bonuses will
be granted by the Joint Zoning Board of Appeals/Planning
Commission only if all other provisions of this section are properly
met. [Amended 11-8-2017 by L.L. No. 5-2017]
(2) If the applicant chooses to take advantage of the opportunity for
bonuses under both Subsections F(3) and (4), the calculation under
F(3) shall precede the calculation under F(4).
(3) Housing for lower-income households. To further encourage the
purposes of this section, the yield as calculated under Subsection
E(1) may be increased by one percentage point for every
percentage point of the yield that is designated for sale or rent to
lower-income households, to a maximum of 20%. To qualify for this
bonus, the applicant shall submit a written plan showing how
housing will be provided for lower-income households, and how it
will be maintained at low rents or resale prices in the future.
(4) Additional open space. To further encourage the purposes of this
section, the yield as calculated under Subsection E(1) [and
Subsection F(3) if applicable] may be increased by the number of
units that results from multiplying the appropriate percentage from
Column (2) to the yield for the tract as calculated Subsection E(1)
[and Subsection F(3) if applicable].
Column (1) Percentage of
Tract Income Open Space
Column (2) Allowable
Increase in Yield (percent)
50 10
60 20
§ 190-31 ONEIDA CODE § 190-31
C:776
Column (1) Percentage of
Tract Income Open Space
Column (2) Allowable
Increase in Yield (percent)
70 30
50 40
G. Transfer of development credits option.
(1) General. In order to further promote the purposes of this section,
an applicant may increase the gross density on the residential
cluster tract in exchange for tract(s) restricted to permanent open
space elsewhere in the community. This may be accomplished by
transferring the yield allowable on the tract(s) that will be
restricted to permanent open space to the residential cluster tract.
(2) Under this provision, the yield on the residential cluster tract shall
not exceed the total of the yield permitted in the residential cluster
tract under the other applicable provisions of this section, plus the
yield(s) permitted on the tract(s) restricted to permanent open
space under the provisions of the zoning law applicable to that
(those) tract(s).
(3) The yield of the tract to be restricted to permanent open space shall
be determined on the basis of a sketch plan prepared under the
provisions of the zoning law applicable to the district in which the
tract is located. All lots must be acceptable for approval under the
applicable provisions of the ordinance.
(4) The yield and the physical plan for the residential cluster tract shall
conform to the provisions of this section.
(5) As a condition for preliminary approval, the applicant must show,
for the tract to be restricted to permanent open space, either a title
to the property, a contract of sale, or an option to purchase.
(6) The tract to be restricted to permanent open space shall be so
restricted in perpetuity by deed, and certification of such a
restriction shall be a condition for preliminary approval.
(7) The tract restricted to permanent open space may be transferred or
sold to a municipality, retained by the owner, or sold to a new
owner.
(8) An application for final approval of a residential cluster
development under the transfer of development credits option shall
include plats, deeds, and other documentation showing compliance
with the provisions of this section regarding the tract to be
restricted in permanent open space.
(9) Use of the restricted tracts for agriculture, woodlot management,
recreation, maintenance of natural systems, or other use shall be
consistent with the adopted municipal Comprehensive Plan.
§ 190-31 CHARTER § 190-31
C:777
H. Disposition and management of common open space. The following
three options are available for the disposition and management of
common open space.
(1) Dedication to public agency. The applicant may transfer or sell the
common open space to the municipality or other governmental
agency for public use and maintenance if the municipality or other
governmental agency agrees to accept.
(2) Subdivision and resale of common open space. At the time of
preliminary approval or at a later date in accordance with
Subsection I(2) below, the applicant or homeowners' association
may submit a plan for subdividing the residential cluster tract and
conveying some or all of the common open space to a buyer who
intends to keep it in recreational or agricultural use. If this option is
selected, the provisions of Subsection G, Transfer of development
credits option, shall apply. For land intended for agricultural use,
the following additional provisions shall also apply:
(a) An agricultural management plan shall accompany the
application. The plan shall include the specific use intended for
the land; a soil conservation plan approved by the Soil
Conservation Service; and a statement of means of managing
any possible conflicts with adjoining residences that may
accompany normal agricultural practices.
(b) The "preservation" tract shall have good agricultural soil and
be well suited for the specific agricultural use that is intended.
The agricultural management plan shall document this
assertion.
(c) Agricultural land shall only be sold to a farmer who has shown
to the Joint Zoning Board of Appeals/Planning Commission's
satisfaction an intention to keep the land in agricultural use for
at least 10 years, or to a nonfarmer landowner who shows that
he has at least a ten-year lease with such farmer. [Amended
11-8-2017 by L.L. No. 5-2017]
I. Staged development.
(1) A residential cluster plan may provide for development staged over
time. In such a plan, each stage shall be substantially selfsustaining
with regard to such factors as access, parking, utilities,
and common open space.
(2) If the residential cluster is to be developed in stages, the ultimate
extent of the common open space shall be shown at the time of
preliminary approval, but the Joint Zoning Board of Appeals/
Planning Commission may permit the common open space to be
divided among the stages submitted for final plat approval. Terms
and conditions of preliminary approval shall continue for three
years from date of preliminary approval, unless this period is
§ 190-31 ONEIDA CODE § 190-31
C:778
extended by the Joint Zoning Board of Appeals/Planning
Commission. [Amended 11-8-2017 by L.L. No. 5-2017]
J. Submission schedule and requirements. Submission of schedule and
requirements shall be consistent with and conform to the present
Chapter 155, Subdivision of Land, of the Code of the City of Oneida.
K. Design guidelines for residential clusters.
(1) General guidelines.
(a) Residential cluster plans shall be consistent in all respects with
the adopted land use element of the Comprehensive Plan and
with the other elements of the plan.
(b) Residential cluster plans shall be subject to other applicable
provisions of this municipality's land development regulations,
except where these provisions are specifically superseded by
the provisions of the residential cluster provisions of this
chapter.
(2) Guidelines. The following shall apply to residential clusters:
Housing Type
Semi-
Detached Attached
Standard Detached
Homes
Not in
Rows* Townhouses
Garden
Apartments
Maximum net
density 5
(dwelling units
per net acre)
4 6-8 12 24
Minimum land
area per unit
(sq. ft.)
6,000 4,500-6,0001,800-3,000 1,400
Minimum private
yard area total:
front, side, and
back (sq. ft.)
800 600 300 300
Maximum
building height,
principal
structures, (ft.)
30 30 40 40
Maximum
building height,
accessory
structures (ft.)
20 20 20 20
§ 190-31 CHARTER § 190-31
C:779
Housing Type
Semi-
Detached Attached
Standard Detached
Homes
Not in
Rows* Townhouses
Garden
Apartments
Minimum
parking spaces
per unit
2-3 2-3 2-3 1.5-2.5
Minimum length
of attached
buildings along
one plane (ft.)
200 200
NOTES:
*Duplexes or combinations of three, four, five or six homes.
(3) Common open space.
(a) Common open space areas shall be located and maintained to
implement the recreation, conservation, and land use elements
of the municipal Comprehensive Plan.
(b) Open space areas should be identified on the basis of the
municipal natural resources inventory and the environmental
site analysis specified in Subsection J of this section.
(c) Buildings, roads, terrain alterations, or other improvements
shall intrude into no more than 10% of critical areas, or prime
agricultural land, and to that extent only if no alternatives are
available.
(d) Common open space may be used for sewage disposal using
techniques conforming to applicable environmental and
engineering standards.
(e) The design and use of open space areas shall protect the
natural resources and qualities of the site, including the
natural terrain, woodland cover, significant stands of trees,
views, and unique and unusual features.
(f) Where common open space is to be used for agricultural
purposes, or woodlot management, a plan shall be presented.
For agricultural projects, a soil conservation plan approved by
the United States Department of Agriculture. Soil
Conservation Service shall accompany the application.
(4) Housing and site layout.
§ 190-31 ONEIDA CODE § 190-31
C:780
(a) Areas designated for housing shall be based on the
environmental site analysis specified in Subsection J of this
section.
(b) Flexibility and variety in lot and building layout is encouraged,
to allow the best relationship between man-made improvement
and the land. Lots, building, utilities, grading, and other site
improvements shall be designed so as to minimize alteration of
natural terrain and cover.
(c) Residential areas shall be landscaped. Shade trees shall be
provided along roads, walkways and parking areas.
Landscaped buffers shall be provided around recreation,
parking, utility, refuse disposal area, and wherever else the
Joint Zoning Board of Appeals/Planning Commission deems
necessary. [Amended 11-8-2017 by L.L. No. 5-2017]
(d) Agricultural areas shall be separated from residential by dense
buffers of natural or landscaped shrub and tree cover at least
25 feet in width.
(5) Circulation and parking shall be consistent with and conform to the
present Chapter 155, Subdivision of Land, of the Code of the City of
Oneida.
L. Findings for residential clusters.
(1) As part of the approval of a residential cluster development the
Joint Zoning Board of Appeals/Planning Commission shall state the
following conclusions in writing, supported by appropriate facts
and analysis: [Amended 11-8-2017 by L.L. No. 5-2017]
(a) That departures from zoning regulations otherwise applicable
to the residential cluster development property conform to the
standards pursuant to Article 3, § 37 of the General City Law.
(b) That the proposals for maintenance and conservation of the
common open space are reliable; and the amount, location, and
purpose of the common open space are adequate.
(c) That the physical design of the proposed development for
utilities, vehicular and pedestrian traffic, the amenities of light
and air, and recreational visual enjoyment are adequate.
(d) That the proposed residential cluster will not have an
unreasonably adverse impact upon its environs.
(e) In the case of a staged development, that the terms and
conditions intended to protect the interests of the public and of
the residents, occupants and owners of the ultimate
development are adequate.
§ 190-31 CHARTER § 190-32
C:781
§ 190-32. State Environmental Quality Review Act (SEQRA).
Compliance with the State Environmental Quality Review Act76 will be
accomplished during the administration of these regulations.
§ 190-33. Freshwater Wetlands Act.
Compliance with the State Freshwater Wetlands Act77 will be accomplished
during the administration of these regulations.
76.Editor's Note: See Environmental Conservation Law § 8-0105 et seq.
77.Editor's Note: See Environmental Conservation Law § 24-0501 et seq.
§ 190-32 ONEIDA CODE § 190-33
C:782
ARTICLE VI
Administration and Enforcement
§ 190-34. Zoning permit.
§ 190-35. Certificate of compliance.
A. Permit required. No building or structure will be erected or located; no
existing building expanded or added to in any way that would alter its
exterior dimensions; and no use will be located, changed, introduced or
expanded relative to the area occupied or involved by such use, except
as such building, structure, or use may be specifically exempt, until a
zoning permit has been issued by the Building Inspector/Code
Enforcement Officer.
B. Application. There shall be submitted with all applications for a zoning
permit those items of information and in the number set forth in
Chapter 143, Site Plan Review, and such other information as may be
necessary in the judgment of the Building Inspector/Code Enforcement
Officer.
C. Notification of determination. The Building Inspector/Code
Enforcement Officer shall review the application and shall issue or
refuse to issue the zoning permit and/or advise the applicant of any
required additional information or referral required within 10 days of
receipt of the application. Notice of refusal to issue any permit shall be
given to the applicant in writing stating the reasons for refusal.
Approval of the application shall be indicated by issuance of the zoning
permit.
D. Duration of validity. A zoning permit issued under these regulations
shall be valid for a period of one year from the date of issuance except
as application may be made to the Joint Zoning Board of Appeals/
Planning Commission for a one-year extension. [Amended 11-8-2017
by L.L. No. 5-2017]
E. Approval of a zoning permit constitutes compliance with these zoning
regulations. An approved building permit may also be required before a
project can be started.
A. Certificate required. No project or action requiring a zoning permit
shall be occupied, opened, put into operation or be deemed complete
and approved until a certificate of compliance is issued by the Building
Inspector/Code Enforcement Officer.
B. Application. Application for a certificate of compliance shall be made
coincidental with any application for a zoning permit.
C. Notification of project completion. Upon completion of any project or
action for which a zoning permit and certificate of compliance are
required, it shall be the responsibility of the applicant to immediately
notify the Building Inspector/Code Enforcement Officer.
§ 190-34 CHARTER § 190-35
C:783
§ 190-36. Amendment. [Amended 11-8-2017 by L.L. No. 5-2017]
§ 190-37. Public hearings.
D. Notification of determination. The Building Inspector/Code
Enforcement Officer shall make or cause to have made an inspection of
each project action for which a certificate of compliance is required
before issuing such certificate. The certificate shall be issued only if the
proposed use of the building, system, or land conforms to the provisions
of these regulations and to the application on which the zoning permit
was issued. Issuance of the certificate or written notification of refusal
to issue the same and the reasons therefor shall be accomplished within
10 days from the date of notification of project completion.
A. The Common Council may on its own motion, on petition, or on
recommendation of the Joint Zoning Board of Appeals/Planning
Commission, amend these regulations.
B. All proposed amendments originating by petition or by motion of the
Common Council shall be referred to the Joint Zoning Board of Appeals/
Planning Commission which shall have 30 days to submit a
recommendation. Failure of the Joint Zoning Board of Appeals/Planning
Commission to report within the required time shall be deemed to
constitute its recommendation for approval of the proposed
amendment.
C. Before any amendment, there shall be a public notice and hearing as
required by law.
D. After the public hearing and referral to and any report by the Joint
Zoning Board of Appeals/Planning Commission and County Planning
Board, a majority vote of the members of the Common Council shall be
required to amend these regulations, except in the case of a protest
petition as provided in § 83 of the General City Law.
A. Public notice of any required public hearing will be advertised in a
newspaper of general circulation in the City at least five days prior to
the date of such hearing and shall specify the date, time, place, and
purpose of such hearing.
B. The instrument of the City responsible for calling any public hearing
may require any applicant in an action necessitating public hearing to
notify, by certified mail or other acceptable means, adjoining and other
specifically designated property owners and persons of legitimate
interest concerning the public hearing.
C. The hearing shall be conducted in accord with any bylaws or guidelines
governing or established by the appropriate body and any guidelines
established by presiding officer for consideration of the matter at hand.
Any person or party of interest may appear in person or by authorized
§ 190-35 ONEIDA CODE § 190-37
C:784
§ 190-38. Referrals to Madison County Planning Board.
§ 190-39. Enforcement and violation. [Amended 3-5-1985]
representative or counsel and shall be given an opportunity to be heard
as it is relevant to the proceeding.
A. Whenever any amendment, conditional use or variance would apply to
real property within a distance of 500 feet from the City boundary or
within 500 feet of any county or state property or right-of-way
(including highways), it shall be referred to the Madison County
Planning Board, which shall have 30 days in which to report its
recommendations. Failure of the County Planning Board to report
within 30 days may be construed to be approval. Notification of action
taken on any matter referred to the County Planning Board shall be
given within seven days of such action to the County Planning Board.
This section is in compliance with § 239-m of Article 12-B of the General
Municipal Law.
A. Enforcement. These regulations shall be enforced by the Building
Inspector/Code Enforcement Officer, designated by the Common
Council. The Building Inspector/Code Enforcement Officer shall
establish such procedure and make such inspections as are necessary
to carry out his duties in the administration and enforcement of these
regulations. Further, the Building Inspector/Code Enforcement Officer
shall prepare and submit a written record and report of all official
actions, including permits and certificates issued and denied, to the
Common Council on a monthly basis or as otherwise directed by the
Council with copies transmitted to the Joint Zoning Board of Appeals/
Planning Commission. [Amended 11-8-2017 by L.L. No. 5-2017]
B. Citizen complaint. Any resident, property owner or other person of
legitimate interest may file with the Building Inspector/Code
Enforcement Officer a written, signed complaint against any alleged
violation of these regulations. It shall be the duty of the Building
Inspector/Code Enforcement Officer to investigate such alleged
violation and to report thereon to the Common Council in a timely
manner, which report shall be filed and be part of the public record of
the City.
C. Notification and correction. Any building or use which does not comply
with these regulations shall be so recorded by the Building Inspector/
Code Enforcement Officer and a report thereof filed with the Common
Council. The Building Inspector/Code Enforcement Officer shall give
official written notice to this effect to the owner of record thereof. The
owner shall initiate measures to correct such noncompliance within 30
days from the date of notification. If within this thirty-day period,
application is not made to initiate a process for correction and if
thereafter such correction is not pursued according to an agreed upon
timetable and to the satisfaction of the Common Council, the Council
§ 190-37 CHARTER § 190-39
C:785
§ 190-40. Appeal and court review. [Amended 12-19-2000 by L.L.
No. 6-2000; 11-8-2017 by L.L. No. 5-2017]
§ 190-41. Interpretation.
In interpreting and applying the provisions of this chapter, they shall be held
to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of public health, safety,
and general welfare. When this chapter imposes a greater restriction on the
use of buildings or land or on the heights of buildings, or requires larger
open spaces, or makes any other greater requirement than is imposed
or required by any other ordinance, rule, or regulation, or by easements,
covenants, or agreements, the provisions of this chapter shall govern.
§ 190-42. Repealer.
Any provisions of the Zoning Ordinance of the City of Oneida, Laws of 1924
as amended, which are in conflict with this chapter are hereby repealed.
shall instruct the City Attorney to institute proceedings to compel
compliance and assess such penalties as are provided.
D. Penalties for offenses.
(1) Any person or persons who violate or cause to be violated any
provision of these regulations shall, upon conviction for such
violation, be subject to a fine not to exceed $250, imprisonment not
to exceed 15 days, or both, for each such violation; and every week
(seven days) that said violation continues shall constitute a
separate and additional violation.
(2) In addition to the above-provided penalty and punishment, the
Common Council may also maintain an action or proceeding in the
name of the City in a court of competent jurisdiction to compel
compliance with, or to restrain by injunction the violation of, these
regulations.
A. Appeal. All appeals for relief from the application of these regulations
and request for interpretation shall be directed to the Joint Zoning
Board of Appeals/Planning Commission, whose duties and procedures
are contained in § 190-44.
B. Court review. Any person or persons, jointly or severally aggrieved by
any decision of the Joint Zoning Board of Appeals/Planning Commission,
Common Council or any official instrument of the City in the
administration of these regulations may apply to have the decision
reviewed in the manner provided by Article 78 of the Civil Practice Law
and Rules, provided that the proceeding is commenced within 30 days
after the filing of the decision in the office of the City Clerk. Costs shall
not be allowed against the City unless it appears to the court that the
City or its representatives acted with gross negligence or in bad faith or
with malice in making the decision appealed from.
§ 190-39 ONEIDA CODE § 190-42
C:786
The adoption of the Zoning Ordinance of the City of Oneida of 1971,
however, shall not affect any pending, or prevent any future prosecution
of, or action to abate any existing violation of the ordinance of 1924,
as amended, if the use is in violation of the provision of this chapter.
Nothing herein shall be deemed to change the status of nonconforming uses
heretofore created by virtue of the existing Zoning Ordinance, if such uses
remain nonconforming under the provisions of this chapter.
§ 190-43. Fees. [Amended 4-15-1980; 2-1-1983]
All fees for permits in conjunction with this chapter shall be established by
the Common Council, as may be required from time to time.
§ 190-44. Appeals. [Amended 5-18-1982; 6-16-1999 by Ord. No.
99-02; 12-19-2000 by L.L. No. 6-2000; 2-16-2016 by L.L. No. 1-2016;
11-8-2017 by L.L. No. 5-2017]
A Joint Zoning Board of Appeals/Planning Commission shall be designated
by the Common Council to carry out the duties prescribed for such Joint
Zoning Board of Appeals/Planning Commission under these regulations.
A. Appointment, terms and removal.78
B. Powers and duties.
(1) The Joint Zoning Board of Appeals/Planning Commission shall
prescribe such rules for the conduct of its affairs as may be
necessary to carry out its duties under these regulations, and all its
determinations shall be made in accord therewith. In particular, the
Joint Zoning Board of Appeals/Planning Commission shall conduct
itself according to the following:
(a) Meetings/required attendance. All meetings of the Joint Zoning
Board of Appeals/Planning Commission shall be held at the call
of the Chairperson and at such other times as a majority of the
members of the full Joint Zoning Board of Appeals/Planning
Commission may determine. All meetings shall be conducted in
accord with the guidelines established by the Chairperson or,
in his absence, the Acting Chairperson, and such Chairperson
may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses.
All meetings of the Joint Zoning Board of Appeals/Planning
Commission shall be open to the public. Each regular member
of the Joint Zoning Board of Appeals/Planning Commission is
required, as a condition of retention of his or her position on
the Joint Zoning Board of Appeals/Planning Commission, to
attend all meetings of the Joint Zoning Board of Appeals/
Planning Commission, except as may be excused in advance by
the Mayor for good cause.
78.Editor's Note: See § 190-45, Joint Zoning Board of Appeals/Planning Commission.
§ 190-42 CHARTER § 190-44
C:787
(b) Records. The Joint Zoning Board of Appeals/Planning
Commission shall keep minutes of its proceedings, including its
examinations, findings and official actions, and shall record the
vote of each member upon every question put to vote or, if
absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact. All decisions of
the Joint Zoning Board of Appeals/Planning Commission shall
be recorded in the minutes, which shall fully set forth the
reasons for the decision of the Joint Zoning Board of Appeals/
Planning Commission and the findings of fact on which the
decision was based, and an appropriate record of every official
determination of the Joint Zoning Board of Appeals/Planning
Commission shall be on file in office of the City Clerk, together
with all documents pertaining thereto.
(c) Voting requirements. The concurring vote of three members of
the Joint Zoning Board of Appeals/Planning Commission shall
be required to constitute an official action by the Joint Zoning
Board of Appeals/Planning Commission.
(d) Appeals and applications. An appeal for an interpretation or
variance may be made only after a determination and
notification of action taken by the Building Inspector/Code
Enforcement Officer or other body of original jurisdiction. All
applications must have the signature of the owner of the
subject property.
(2) The Joint Zoning Board of Appeals/Planning Commission shall have
all the powers and duties prescribed by law and by these
regulations and may reverse or affirm wholly or partly, or may
modify, the order, requirement, decision or determination appealed
from and shall make such order, requirement, decision or
determination as in its opinion ought to be made and to that end
shall have all the powers of the officer or body from whom the
appeal is taken. Where there are practical difficulties or
unnecessary hardships in the way of carrying out the strict letter of
these regulations, the Joint Zoning Board of Appeals/Planning
Commission shall have the power in passing upon appeals to vary
or modify the application of any of the regulations or provisions of
these regulations relating to the use, construction or alteration of
buildings or structures, or the use of land, so that the spirit of the
regulations shall be observed, public health, safety, and welfare
secured and substantial justice done. In particular, the powers of
the Joint Zoning Board of Appeals/Planning Commission are as
follows:
(a) Interpretation. To decide any question involving the
interpretation of any provision of these regulations, including
determination of the exact location of any zoning district
boundary or any other determination made in the
administration or application of these regulations. Such
interpretation shall be considered and rendered by the Joint
§ 190-44 ONEIDA CODE § 190-44
C:788
Zoning Board of Appeals/Planning Commission only upon
application or appeal following and based upon a
determination made by the Building Inspector/Code
Enforcement Officer or other body to whom original
jurisdiction has been assigned under the regulations, except as
such may be requested by an official instrument of the City.
(b) Variance. To grant use variances and area variances in
accordance with the provisions of § 81-b of the General City
Law.
C. Procedure.
(1) Application. All applications made to the Joint Zoning Board of
Appeals/Planning Commission shall be in writing, in the form
prescribed by the Joint Zoning Board of Appeals/Planning
Commission. Every application shall refer to the specific provisions
of the regulations involved and shall exactly set forth the
interpretation that is claimed, or the details of the variance that is
applied for and the grounds on which it is claimed that the variance
should be granted, as the case may be. Such appeal shall be taken
within 60 days of the date of notification of the determination which
is being appealed by filing with the Joint Zoning Board of Appeals/
Planning Commission a notice of application or appeal specifying
the grounds thereof. Upon such application, the Building Inspector/
Code Enforcement Officer shall transmit to the Joint Zoning Board
of Appeals/Planning Commission all of the papers constituting the
record upon which the action appealed from was taken.
(2) Stay. An appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action
appealed from unless the Building Inspector/Code Enforcement
Officer from whom the appeal is taken certifies to the Joint Zoning
Board of Appeals/Planning Commission, after the notice of appeal
shall have been filed with him, that, by reason of acts stated in the
certificate, a stay would, in his opinion, cause imminent peril to life
or property, in which case proceedings shall not be stayed
otherwise than by a restraining order which may be granted by the
Joint Zoning Board of Appeals/Planning Commission or by a court
of record on application, on notice to the Building Inspector/Code
Enforcement Officer from whom the appeal is taken, and on due
cause shown.
(3) Notification and public hearing. The Joint Zoning Board of Appeals/
Planning Commission shall fix a reasonable time for any public
hearing in connection with an application and shall give public
notice thereof by publication in the official paper of a notice of such
public hearing at least five days prior to the date thereof; and shall,
at least five days before such public hearing, mail notice thereof to
the applicant.
(4) (Reserved)
§ 190-44 CHARTER § 190-44
C:789
§ 190-45. Joint Zoning Board of Appeals/Planning Commission.
[Added 11-8-2017 by L.L. No. 5-2017]
(5) Decision and notification. Within 62 days from the date of final
closing of any public hearing, the Joint Zoning Board of Appeals/
Planning Commission shall render a determination with respect to
the application, and the applicant or his authorized representative
so notified in writing within five days of the date of determination.
When specifically requested by the applicant, such notification
shall be by certified mail. Every decision of the Joint Zoning Board
of Appeals/Planning Commission shall be by resolution and in
accord with the requirements of Subsection A of this section with
respect to the keeping of records and voting requirements. The
Joint Zoning Board of Appeals/Planning Commission shall notify the
Building Inspector/Code Enforcement Officer and City Clerk of the
action taken on any application.
A. Administrative/general provisions.
(1) Establishment of Joint Board. The City of Oneida Joint Zoning
Board of Appeals/Planning Commission is hereby established in
order that the objectives and competent administration of this
chapter and Chapters 143 and 155 of the Code of the City of Oneida
may be fully and equitably achieved.
(2) Appointment of members. The Mayor shall appoint seven members
to the Joint Zoning Board of Appeals/Planning Commission. The
initial appointments to the Joint Board shall be such that the term
of one member shall expire each consecutive year. Thereafter,
members of the Joint Board shall be appointed by the Common
Council for a term of seven years from and after the expiration of
each initial term of office.
(3) Chairperson. The Mayor shall annually appoint one of the members
of the Joint Zoning Board of Appeals/Planning Commission to act as
Chairperson to preside at all meetings and hearings, to supervise
the affairs of the Joint Board and to fulfill the customary functions
of that office.
(4) Secretary. A secretary of the Joint Zoning Board of Appeals/
Planning Commission shall be designated by the Mayor on an
annual basis. The secretary shall keep minutes of all of the Joint
Board's proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon every
question or, if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact and
shall also keep records of all of the Joint Board's official actions.
B. Powers and duties.
(1) The Joint Zoning Board of Appeals/Planning Commission shall be
authorized to hear all land use, planning and zoning matters within
the City of Oneida. The Joint Board shall have all of the power and
§ 190-44 ONEIDA CODE § 190-45
C:790
authority of the previously constituted and comprised Zoning
Board of Appeals and Planning Commission as set forth in this
chapter, Chapters 143 and 155 of the Code of the City of Oneida,
the General City Law and the General Municipal Law when
considering all land use, planning and zoning matters.
C. Conflict with this chapter.
(1) To the extent any parts of this chapter or any other chapter of the
Code of the City of Oneida are inconsistent with or conflict with any
of the provisions of this section, the terms of this section shall
control.
(2) Wherever the terms "Zoning Board of Appeals," "Zoning Board,"
"Planning Commission" or "Planning Board," other than references
to the Madison County Planning Board, appear in the Code of the
City of Oneida or the Oneida City Charter, said terms shall
hereafter mean and refer to the Joint Zoning Board of Appeals/
Planning Commission.
§ 190-45 CHARTER § 190-45
C:791
Disposition List
Chapter DL
DISPOSITION LIST
§ DL-1. Disposition of legislation.
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
L.L. No.
4-2000
10-17-2000 Revenue recovery fees Ch. 132
----- 12-6-2000 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 180
L.L. No.
5-2000
12-19-2000 Flood damage prevention Ch. 64
L.L. No.
6-2000
12-19-2000 Adoption of Code Ch. 1
L.L. No.
1-2001
4-3-2001 Charter amendment § 5.26
L.L. No.
2-2001
3-6-2001 Charter amendment § 1.9
----- 6-21-2001 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 180
----- 10-3-2001 Animals amendment Ch. 17
----- 11-7-2001 Amendments to building
construction, health and
sanitation, solid waste and
vehicles and traffic
Chs. 34, 73, 147,
180
L.L. No.
1-2002
4-16-2002 Sewer rates and charges
amendment
Ch. 139, Part 2
----- 6-18-2002 Sewer rates and charges
amendment
Ch. 139, Part 2
L.L. No.
2-2002
8-6-2002 Tax exemption for firsttime
homebuyers
Ch. 165, Art. VII
L.L. No.
3-2002
8-6-2002 Fire prevention
amendment
Ch. 61
Ordinance 2-4-2003 Oneida Business Park
Lighting District
Repealed by L.L.
No. 1-2014
Ordinance 2-4-2003 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 180
Ordinance 4-2-2003 Street acceptance
amendment
NCM
§ 190-45 ONEIDA CODE § DL-1
C:792
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
L.L. No.
1-2003
4-15-2003 Kenwood Fire Protection
District tax repealed
NCM
Ordinance 6-4-2003 Noise amendment Ch. 98
Ordinance 6-18-2003 Animals amendment Ch. 17
L.L. No.
1-2004
4-20-2004 Sales tax amendment NCM
Ord. No.
04-01
6-18-2004 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 180
Ord. No.
04-02
7-15-2004 Swimming pools
amendment
Ch. 159
Ord. No.
04-03
Number not
used
Ord. No.
04-04
11-17-2004 Street acceptance NCM
Ord. No.
05-01
1-5-2005 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 180
Ord. No.
05-02
1-5-2005 Solid waste amendment Ch. 147
L.L. No.
1-2005
5-3-2005 Tax exemption for mixeduse
properties
Ch. 165, Art. VIII
L.L. No.
2-2005
5-3-2005 Tax exemption for
residential subdivision
infrastructure
Ch. 165, Art. IX
Ord. No.
05-03
12-6-2005 Peddling and soliciting
amendment
Ch. 116
Ord. No.
05-04
12-6-2005 Solid waste amendment Ch. 147
Ord. No.
06-01
4-18-2006 Zoning amendment Ch. 190
Ord. No.
06-02
10-3-2006 Dog licenses amendment Ch. 17
Ord. No.
07-01
2-20-2007 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 180
Ord. No.
07-02
2-20-2007 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 180
L.L. No.
1-2007
4-3-2007 Building Code
administration and
enforcement
Ch. 33
L.L. No.
2-2007
4-3-2007 Appearance tickets
amendment
Ch. 21
§ DL-1 CHARTER § DL-1
C:793
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
07-03
4-3-2007 Abandoned, unsafe and
collapsed buildings
Ch. 34
Ord. No.
07-04
4-3-2007 Fire prevention
amendment
Ch. 61
L.L. No.
3-2007
9-4-2007 Alternative veterans tax
exemption amendment
Ch. 165, Art. VI
L.L. No.
4-2007
9-4-2007 Senior citizens tax
exemption amendment
Ch. 165, Art. I
Ord. No.
07-05
11-21-2007 Animals amendment Ch. 17
Ord. No.
07-06
12-28-2007 Street and drainage
easements acceptance
NCM
Ord. No.
08-01
3-4-2008 Health and sanitation
amendment
Ch. 73
Ord. No.
08-02
3-18-2008 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 180
Ord. No.
08-03
5-20-2008 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 180
Ord. No.
08-04
11-18-2008 Street acceptance NCM
Ord. No.
09-01
2-3-2009 Zoning amendment Ch. 190
Ord. No.
09-02
2-17-2009 Zoning amendment Ch. 190, footnote
only
Ord. No.
09-03
5-5-2009 Site plan review
amendment; zoning
amendment
Chs. 143; 190
L.L. No.
1-2009
9-15-2009 Outdoor furnaces Repealed by L.L.
No. 2-2013
Ord. No.
09-04
10-20-2009 Street acceptance NCM
Ord. No.
09-05
12-29-2009 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 180
Ord. No.
10-01
3-3-2010 Zoning amendment Ch. 190
L.L. No.
1-2010
3-16-2010 Charter amendment § 6.1
Ord. No.
10-02
6-1-2010 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 180
§ DL-1 ONEIDA CODE § DL-1
C:794
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
10-03
7-20-2010 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 180
Ord. No.
10-04
8-3-2010 Swimming pools
amendment
Ch. 159
Ord. No.
10-05
9-21-2010 Solid waste amendment Ch. 147
Ord. No.
10-06
10-19-2010 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 180
Ord. No.
10-07
10-19-2010 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 180
L.L. No.
2-2010
8-17-2010 Retirement incentive
program
NCM
L.L. No.
3-2010
12-7-2010 Animals amendment Ch. 17
L.L. No.
4-2010
12-21-2010 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 180
L.L. No.
1-2011
3-15-2011 Streets, sidewalks and
public places amendment
Ch. 151
L.L. No.
2-2011
3-15-2011 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 180
L.L. No.
3-2011
6-21-2011 Peddling and soliciting
amendment
Not yet codified
L.L. No.
4-2011
6-21-2011 Streets, sidewalks and
public places amendment
Ch. 151
L.L. No.
5-2011
6-21-2011 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 180
L.L. No.
6-2011
8-16-2011 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 180
– 10-18-2011 Solid waste amendment Ch. 147
L.L. No.
7-2011
11-1-2011 Tax levy limit override
2012
NCM
L.L. No.
1-2012
3-20-2012 Special events Ch. 112
Ord. No.
12-01
4-17-2012 Fire prevention
amendment
Ch. 61
Ord. No.
12-02
5-1-2012 Taxicabs amendment Ch. 169
Ord. No.
12-03
6-19-2012 Electrical standards
amendment
Ch. 45
§ DL-1 CHARTER § DL-1
C:795
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
L.L. No.
2-2012
7-3-2012 Tax levy limit override
2013
NCM
Ord. No.
12-04
8-7-2012 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 180
L.L. No.
3-2012
9-4-2012 Conveyance of property to
Madison County Industrial
Development Agency
Ch. 36, Art. I
Ord. No.
12-05
11-20-2012 Secondhand dealers
amendment
Ch. 135
Ord. No.
12-06
11-20-2012 Mobile homes and mobile
home parks amendment
Ch. 92
Ord. No.
12-07
11-20-2012 Junkyards amendment Ch. 85
Ord. No.
12-08
11-20-2012 Solid waste amendment Ch. 147
Ord. No.
12-09
11-20-2012 Taxicabs amendment Ch. 169
Ord. No.
12-10
11-20-2012 Animals amendment Ch. 17
Ord. No.
12-11
11-20-2012 Amusement devices
amendment
Ch. 13
Ord. No.
12-12
11-20-2012 Alarm systems amendment Ch. 5
L.L. No.
4-2012
12-4-2012 Traffic Safety Board Ch. 172
L.L. No.
1-2013
2-19-2013 Charter amendment § 5.27
L.L. No.
2-2013
4-2-2013 Outdoor furnaces
repealer; zoning
amendment
Chs. 70,
reference only;
190
L.L. No.
3-2013
7-2-2013 Charter amendment §§ 3.0 [2.10], 3.6,
5.18, 5.22, 5.30,
5.33, 8.1, 8.2,
9.1, 9.3, 9.4, 9.6,
11.1, 11.2, 11.3,
11.6 and 11.7
L.L. No.
4-2013
7-16-2013 Charter amendment §§ 5.13 and 5.22
L.L. No.
5-2013
8-20-2013 Tax levy limit override
2014
NCM
§ DL-1 ONEIDA CODE § DL-1
C:796
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
13-01
8-20-2013 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 180
L.L. No.
1-2014
4-1-2014 Ordinance establishing
Oneida Business Park
Lighting District repealer
NCM
L.L. No.
2-2014
4-1-2014 Charter amendment § 10.5
L.L. No.
3-2014
4-1-2014 Alarm systems amendment
Ord. No.
14-01
6-17-2014 Bicycles and skateboards
amendment
Ch. 26
Ord. No.
14-02
6-17-2014 Kenwood Sanitary Sewer
District amendment
Ch. 139, Part 1
Ord. No.
14-03
6-17-2014 Streets, sidewalks and
public places amendment
Ch. 151
Ord. No.
14-04
6-17-2014 Subdivision of land
amendment
Ch. 155
Ord. No.
14-05
6-17-2014 Taxicabs amendment Ch. 169
Ord. No.
14-06
6-17-2014 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 180
L.L. No.
4-2014
7-15-2014 Charter amendment § 5.31
L.L. No.
5-2014
7-15-2014 Charter amendment § 3.15
L.L. No.
6-2014
9-2-2014 Public nuisance abatement Ch. 122
L.L. No.
7-2014
10-7-2014 Charter amendment §§ 5.16 and 5.23
L.L. No.
8-2014
11-18-2014 Taxicabs amendment Ch. 169
L.L. No.
9-2014
12-16-2014 Alcoholic beverages
amendment
Ch. 9
L.L. No.
10-2014
12-16-2014 Junkyards amendment Ch. 85
L.L. No.
11-2014
12-16-2014 Streets, sidewalks and
public places
Ch. 151
L.L. No.
1-2015
7-7-2015 Drugs: Synthetic drugs
and other similar
substances
Ch. 43, Art. I
§ DL-1 CHARTER § DL-1
C:797
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
15-01
8-18-2015 Zoning amendment Ch. 190
L.L. No.
2-2015
9-15-2015 Charter amendment § 1.6
L.L. No.
3-2015
11-17-2015 Tax levy limit override
2016
NCM
L.L. No.
4-2015
12-1-2015 Charter amendment § 5.26
L.L. No.
1-2016
2-16-2016 Zoning amendment Ch. 190
Ord. No.
16-01
2-16-2016 Zoning amendment Ch. 190
Ord. No.
16-02
2-16-2016 Zoning Map amendment NCM
Ord. No.
16-03
6-7-2016 Zoning amendment Ch. 190
L.L. No.
2-2016
6-21-2016 Zoning amendment Ch. 190
Ord. No.
16-04
8-2-2016 Sewers amendment Ch. 139
L.L. No.
1-2017
2-21-2017 Energy efficiency, cost
reduction and greenhouse
gas reduction
Ch. 47
L.L. No.
2-2017
4-18-2017 Vacant, abandoned, unsafe
and collapsed buildings
amendment
Ch. 34
L.L. No.
3-2017
9-5-2017 Tax levy limit override
2017
NCM
Ord. No.
17-01
9-5-2017 Zoning amendment Ch. 190
L.L. No.
4-2017
9-19-2017 Energize NY Benefit
Financing Program
Ch. 46
L.L. No.
5-2017
11-8-2017 Zoning amendment (Joint
Zoning Board of Appeals
and Planning Commission)
Charter; Ch. 64;
Ch. 77; Ch. 143:
Ch. 155; Ch. 190
L.L. No.
6-2017
12-19-2017 Zoning Amendment Ch. 190
Ord. No.
18-01
2-6-2018 Building Code
Administration and
Enforcement Amendment
Ch. 33
§ DL-1 ONEIDA CODE § DL-1
C:798
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
L.L. No.
1-2018
2-20-2018 Energize NY Benefit
Financing Program
Amendment
Ch. 46
L.L. No.
2-2018
2-20-2018 Charter Amendment Ch. C
L.L. No.
3-2018
6-5-2018 Health and Sanitation
Amendment
Ch. 73
Ord. No.
18-02
7-3-2018 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 180
L.L. No.
1-2019
3-5-2019 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 180
Ord. No.
19-01
4-2-2019 Fire Prevention
Amendment
Ch. 61
Ord. No.
19-02
4-16-2019 Zoning Amendment Ch. 190
Ord. No.
19-03
5-21-2019 Solid Waste Amendment Ch. 147
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition Supp No.
L.L. No.
2-2019
10-1-2019 Tax Levy Limit
Override 2020
NCM 36
L.L. No.
3-2019
11-19-2019 Charter
Amendment
Ch. C 36
L.L. No.
4-2019
12-17-2019 Small Cell Wireless
Deployment
Requirements
Ch. 145 36
§ DL-1 CHARTER § DL-1
C:799