Part I: Charter
Chapter C
CHARTER
C:1

ARTICLE I
IN GENERAL
Sec. 1.001. Short title.
This local law may be known and cited as the "Charter of the City of Olean,
New York."
Sec. 1.002. Definitions and rules of construction.
(a) GENERAL CONSTRUCTION LAW — Unless the context requires
otherwise, the General Construction Law, as now or hereafter amended,
applies to this charter.
(b) ADDITIONAL DEFINITIONS AND RULES OF CONSTRUCTION —
Unless the context requires otherwise, the following definitions and
rules of construction apply to this charter. In the event of a conflict
between the provisions of this subsection and the General Construction
Law, the provisions of this subsection control.
(1) CATCHLINES OF SECTIONS, SUBSECTIONS, ETC.; EFFECT OF
HISTORY NOTES — Catchlines for sections, subsections or
paragraphs that are printed in boldface or italicized type are
intended as mere catchwords to indicate contents and are not titles
or part of the law, nor shall they be so deemed when amended or
reenacted. History or source notes appearing in parentheses after
sections are not intended to have any legal effect but are merely
intended to indicate the derivation of the matter contained in the
section. All references to articles, divisions or sections are to the
chapters, articles, divisions or sections of this charter.
(2) CHARTER — The charter of the City of Olean, New York.
(3) CITY — The City of Olean, New York.
(4) COMMON COUNCIL, COUNCIL — The common council of the city.
(5) COUNTY — Cattaraugus County, New York.
(6) LIBERAL CONSTRUCTION — This charter is to be liberally
construed.
(7) MAY — Is to be construed as being permissive.
(8) MUST — Is to be construed as being mandatory.
(9) NONTECHNICAL AND TECHNICAL WORDS — Words and phrases
shall be construed according to the common and approved usage of
the language, but technical words and phrases and such others as
may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall
be construed and understood according to such meaning.
Sec. 1.001 CHARTER Sec. 1.002
C:3
Sec. 1.003. Repealer.
(10) OFFICIAL TITLES — All references to officers, employees, boards,
commissions and authorities are to officers, employees, boards,
commissions and authorities of the city.
(11) SHALL — Is to be construed as being mandatory.
(12) STATE — The State of New York.
(13)TENSE — Words used in the past or present tense include the
future as well as the past and present.
(a) All resolutions, ordinances, local laws and special acts of a general and
permanent nature in conflict with this charter are repealed, except
that:
(1) No special act published in the Consolidated Laws is repealed
unless so stated in this charter; however all portions of such acts
that are inconsistent with this charter are superseded. This
subsection does not revive any portion of any such special act
previously repealed by the city.
(2) No local law codified in the publication known as the Olean City
Code (which document may not be official as of the date of adoption
of this charter) is repealed.
(3) Local Law No. 1-1966 (compiled as sections 264-273 of the city's
1971 charter compilation) are saved from repeal.
(4) The provisions of N.Y. Laws (1915) ch. 535, § 99, as amended N.Y.
Laws (1916) ch. 543, § 1 (compiled as section 331 of the city's 1971
charter compilation) are converted into an ordinance.
(5) The last two sentences of N.Y. Laws (1915) ch. 535, § 31 (being the
last two sentences of section 118 of the 1971 charter compilation)
are converted into an ordinance; provided that all references in
such sentences to the city clerk are changed to the city assessor.
(6) The provisions of N.Y. Laws (1915) ch. 535, §§ 82-85, 88-90, as
amended Local Law No. 1-1941 (compiled as sections 250-254,
257-260 and 262 of the 1971 charter compilation) are converted
into a local law that is not repealed by this charter.
(7) The provisions of N.Y. Laws (1915) ch. 535, §§ 91, 92, 97 and Local
Laws Nos. 18-1940, 3-1964 (except § 8), 6-1968 (except §§ 5, 6, 10)
(all compiled as sections 274, 276, 278-281, 300-309, 315, 316,
321-324, 329, 333 of the city's 1971 charter compilation) are
converted into a local law that is not repealed by this charter.
(8) The provisions of N.Y. Laws (1915) ch. 535, § 100, as amended N.Y.
Laws ch. 543, § 1 and Local Laws Nos. 3-1979, 1-1987 and 1-1989
are converted into a local law that is not repealed by this charter.
Sec. 1.002 OLEAN CODE Sec. 1.003
C:4
Sec. 1.004. Effective date.
Sec. 1.005. Severability.
The sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this charter are
severable. If any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section is declared
unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of a court of competent
jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the remaining
phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections.
Sec. 1.006. Creation and name; powers in general.
The citizens of the state who may from time to time reside within the
territorial limits of the City of Olean are hereby created a municipal
corporation in perpetuity to be known as the City of Olean. The city may
take and hold in trust real or personal property for any public purpose, upon
terms as may be prescribed by the grantor or donor and may provide for the
execution of such trusts. The city may sue or be sued, prosecute and defend
in any court of law or equity.
Sec. 1.007. Status as a town.
Except as otherwise stated in this charter, the city shall be a town of the
county. All provisions of law not inconsistent with this charter that are
applicable to towns in the county shall apply to the city. All acts required
by law to be performed by the board of town auditors in towns of the
(9) The provisions of N.Y. Laws (1915) ch. 535, § 34, as amended L.L.
No. 3-1934, § 5 (compiled as section 188 of the 1971 charter
compilation) are converted into as local law that is not repealed by
this charter; provided, however, that the second sentence of such
section is repealed.
(10) The provisions of N.Y. Laws (1915) ch. 535, § 55, as amended L.L.
No. 3-1934, § 5 (compiled as section 189 of the 1971 charter
compilation) are converted into an ordinance.
(b) Resolutions, ordinances, local laws and special acts not in conflict with
this charter are not repealed and are continued in full force and effect.
(a) If approved by the voters at the November 1991 general election, this
charter shall take effect on January 1, 1994.
(b) Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (a) of this section:
(1) The first election for the mayor and councilmembers under this
charter shall be held on the first Tuesday in November 1993 and
the provisions of this charter applicable to the terms of elected
officials and wards shall apply to such election.
(2) The conversion of certain legislation into local laws or ordinances
described in § 1.003(a)(4)—(a)(10) takes effect on January 1, 1992.
Sec. 1.003 CHARTER Sec. 1.007
C:5
county shall be performed by the common council. The city shall for all
purposes relating to the assessment and collection of taxes constitute a
separate town in the county. The county legislature shall levy upon the city
the proportionate share or amount of tax authorized by state law for the
respective towns.
Sec. 1.008. Boundaries.
The boundaries of the city shall be as established on the effective date of
this charter; such boundaries are ratified and confirmed.
Sec. 1.009. City court.
The city court as heretofore created and organized is ratified and confirmed.
Sec. 1.010. Other agencies, bureaus, etc.
Other agencies, bureaus, departments, boards, commissions or offices not
provided for in this charter exist as provided for by state law.
Sec. 1.007 OLEAN CODE Sec. 1.010
C:6
ARTICLE II
GOVERNING AUTHORITY
DIVISION 1
GENERALLY
Sec. 2.001. Suspension of licenses. 2.042
The mayor may summarily suspend any license granted by the common
council. Such suspension shall be effective until the next regular council
meeting. At such meeting the common council shall investigate the matter
and dispose of the same as it may see fit.
Sec. 2.002. through Sec. C.2.020. (Reserved)
Sec. 2.001 CHARTER Sec. 2.002
C:7

DIVISION 2
MAYOR
Sec. 2.021. Election; term; qualifications.
The mayor shall be elected by the voters of the city for a term of four years.
He shall be a resident of the city.
Sec. 2.022. Compensation.
The mayor shall receive as compensation the sum of $50,000 per annum,
payable in monthly installments, for the first term of office following the
adoption of this charter. Thereafter, the council may determine the annual
salary of the mayor by ordinance, but no ordinance increasing such salary
shall become effective until the date of commencement of the term of the
mayor elected at the next regular election, provided that such election
follows the adoption of such ordinance by at least six months. The mayor
shall receive the actual and necessary expenses incurred in the
performance of the duties of his office.
Sec. 2.023. Chief executive officer; other duties.
The mayor shall be the chief executive officer of the city. The mayor shall
have such other powers and duties as or provided by state law, this charter,
local law, city ordinance or city resolution.
Sec. 2.024. Enforcement of laws.
The mayor shall see that the laws of this state, and the legislation adopted
by the common council are faithfully executed. The mayor shall cause the
arrest of all persons violating same.
Sec. 2.025. Supervision of departments, offices, etc.; delegation of
powers.
Sec. 2.026. Office of mayor.
There is established the office of mayor. The office shall assist the mayor
in the performance of official duties. All salaried personnel in the office
of mayor shall be appointed by the mayor. Compensation for salaried
personnel in the office of mayor shall be determined annually in the budget
process.
(a) Except as otherwise provided by law, the mayor shall direct and
supervise all departments, offices and agencies of city government.
(b) The mayor may authorize any city officer or department head who is
subject to his authority and supervision to exercise any of his powers
with respect to subordinates in that officer's or department head's
department, office or agency.
Sec. 2.021 CHARTER Sec. 2.027
C:9
Sec. 2.027. Communications and recommendations to common
council.
The mayor shall communicate to the common council at its first meeting in
January of each year a general statement of the affairs of the city in relation
to its finances, government and improvements, with such recommendations
as he may deem proper. The mayor shall recommend to the common council
from time to time such measures as he may deem necessary or expedient
for it to take in order to expedite or carry into effect any legislation which it
shall have passed.
Sec. 2.028. Approval or disapproval of legislation.
(a) Every order, ordinance, resolution and act of which the mayor approves
shall have its approval in writing on a transcript thereof signed by him
officially. The transcript of every such order, resolution, ordinance and
act of which he disapproves shall be returned by him to the common
council or clerk, with his objections in writing thereon or thereto
attached, which shall be filed with the city clerk. The common council
shall at its next regular meeting after such return proceed to reconsider
such order, resolution, ordinance or act. If the same is then passed by a
concurring vote of two-thirds of all the members of the common council
then in office, it shall have full force and effect, but if not so passed by
such concurring vote of 2/3 of the members of the common council then
in office, such order, resolution, ordinance or act so disapproved by the
mayor shall have no force or effect. This subsection does not apply to
local laws.
(b) The approval of local laws shall be as provided in Municipal Home Rule
Law §§ 20 and 21.
(c) If any order, resolution, ordinance or act, a transcript of which shall be
presented to the mayor, shall relate to special and distinct matters, or to
one or more items of appropriation or payment of money, the mayor
may approve such order, resolution, ordinance or act, and sign the
transcript thereof as to one or more of said matters or items specified,
and disapprove it as to others. In such case he shall attach to the
transcript a statement of the items of which he does not approve, with
his objections thereto, and such matters and items shall not take effect
unless reconsidered and passed by the common council in the same
manner as in the case of the mayor refusing to approve of an entire
order, resolution, ordinance or act. This subsection does not apply to
local laws.
(d) If such transcript shall not be returned by the mayor to the common
council or clerk within 10 days after it was passed by the common
council, Sunday excepted, such order, resolution, ordinance or act shall
be of like effect and force as if duly approved by him, unless within such
time his term of office shall have expired, in which case the same shall
have no force. This subsection does not apply to local laws.
Sec. 2.027 OLEAN CODE Sec. 2.029
C:10
Sec. 2.029. Signing appointments, permits and licenses; execution
of deeds, contracts and other papers.
The mayor shall sign all appointments to office made by the common
council and all permits and licenses granted by the common council. When
authorized so to do by the common council, he shall execute in behalf of the
city all deeds, contracts and other papers to be executed as the act of the
city.
Sec. 2.030. Oaths, affidavits and acknowledgments.
The mayor may administer oaths and take affidavits. The mayor may take
proof and acknowledgment of other deeds and other instruments if there
has been filed with the county clerk a certificate of the mayor's election.
Such certificate must be under the seal of the city and signed by the city
clerk.
Sec. 2.031. through Sec. 2.040. (Reserved)
Sec. 2.029 CHARTER Sec. 2.031
C:11

DIVISION 3
COMMON COUNCIL
Sec. 2.041. Composition.
The common council shall consist of seven councilmembers. One
councilmember shall be elected by the voters of each of the wards. Each
councilmember must be a resident of the ward from which he is elected.
Sec. 2.042. Wards.
The city is divided into seven wards. The boundaries of the wards shall be
established by ordinance.
Sec. 2.043. Terms of office.
Councilmembers are elected for terms of two years, except that the
councilmembers elected from wards I, III and V at the November 1993
general election shall have terms of one year. Thereafter councilmembers
elected from such wards shall be elected for terms of two years.
Sec. 2.044. Compensation.
Sec. 2.045. General duties.
It shall be the duty of each councilmember to:
Sec. 2.046. President.
(a) The salary of each councilmember shall be $3,500 per annum, payable
in monthly installments, for the first term following the adoption of this
charter. Thereafter, the council may determine the annual salary of
councilmembers by ordinance, but no ordinance increasing such salary
shall become effective until the date of commencement of the terms of
councilmembers elected at the next regular election, provided that such
election follows the adoption of such ordinance by at least six months.
Councilmembers shall receive their actual and necessary expenses
incurred in the performance of their duties of office.
(b) The president of the common council shall receive an additional $500
per annum.
(1) Attend meetings of the common council and serve upon committees
when appointed;
(2) Report to the mayor all city officers who are guilty of misconduct or
neglect of duty.
(a) At the first meeting of the common council in January of each year the
common council shall select by a majority vote a councilmember to be
president of the common council.
Sec. 2.041 CHARTER Sec. 2.046
C:13
Sec. 2.047. Quorum.
A quorum shall consist of a majority of the common council.
Sec. 2.048. Voting.
Except as otherwise provided, each councilmember present at any meeting
of the common council shall have a vote on every question brought before
the common council for its consideration. No councilmember shall be
excused from voting on any question except by a concurring vote of 2/3 of
all present. The president of the common council when presiding shall have
a vote as councilmember. No person whose election as councilmember shall
be contested shall be entitled to vote on any question connected with any
such contest.
Sec. 2.049. Time of regular meetings.
The common council shall hold its first annual meeting on January 2 of each
year. If January 2 is a Saturday, Sunday or public holiday, the meeting shall
be held on the next succeeding day which is not a Saturday, Sunday or legal
holiday. The common council shall hold regular meetings at least twice in
each month.
Sec. 2.050. Special meetings.
The mayor, the president of the common council or any three
councilmembers may call a meeting of the common council by filing a
written notice with the city clerk. The city clerk shall give notice of the
meeting in the manner prescribed by law and the common council.
Sec. 2.051. Rules of proceedings, compelling attendance and
prescribing powers and duties of officers.
The common council shall determine the rules of its proceedings. Such rules
shall not be subject to the approval of the mayor and shall be valid without
his approval. The common council may compel the attendance of absent
members. The common council may prescribe the powers and duties of all
officers appointed, subject, however, to the provisions of this charter.
(b) The president of the common council shall preside at meetings of the
common council. The president may vote on any question submitted to
the common council.
(c) If a vacancy exists in the elected office of mayor, the president of the
common council shall be vested with all the powers and perform all the
duties as mayor of the city until the vacancy shall be filled. When so
serving as mayor, the president shall remain president of the common
council.
Sec. 2.046 OLEAN CODE Sec. 2.052
C:14
Sec. 2.052. Standing committees.
The president of the common council shall appoint the standing committees
for a term of one year. The president of the common council shall announce
the standing committees at the first common council meeting in January of
each year.
Sec. 2.053. Power to issue subpoenas.
Sec. 2.054. Administering oaths and affirmations.
The chairman of each committee of the common council or the presiding
officer of the common council shall have power to administer oaths or
affirmations to all persons appearing before the common council or before
such committee to testify upon any matter.
Sec. 2.055. Ordinances.
Sec. 2.056. General powers.
(a) The common council and the committees thereof shall have the power
to issue subpoenas to compel persons to appear and testify before
either of them and to compel persons to produce all books, papers or
documents in respect to any matter pending before either of them.
(b) Any action of the common council adopted or proceeding taken under
or by virtue of the powers conferred by this section shall be valid
without the approval of the mayor, and no copy thereof need be
presented to the mayor.
(a) The subject matter of each ordinance shall be clearly stated in the title
to the ordinance.
(b) No ordinance shall be adopted by the common council unless the title
thereof has been published at least once in a newspaper of general
circulation in the city. Such publication must be at least 10 days prior to
the meeting at which it is proposed to adopt the ordinance.
(c) Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (b), emergency
ordinances may be adopted without prior publication of the title.
(d) Unless provided otherwise, ordinances become effective upon adoption.
(a) The common council shall exercise all the corporate powers conferred
by this charter, and except as otherwise provided by law shall have
control and management of the property, real and personal, belonging
to the city and all finances thereof. No debt or liability which may
become a charge against the city shall be created or contracted except
by authority of the common council unless otherwise provided.
Sec. 2.052 CHARTER Sec. 2.056
C:15
Sec. 2.057. Powers over parks and other public places.
The common council may by vote of a majority of its members to enact
ordinances for the government and protection of all public parks, squares,
gardens and places in the city. All such places shall be subject to all
ordinances with respect thereto.
(b) The common council may make, establish, publish, modify, amend or
repeal ordinances, by-laws, regulations, rules and resolutions for the
purpose of exercising any power granted to it.
Sec. 2.056 OLEAN CODE Sec. 2.057
C:16
ARTICLE III
OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
DIVISION 1
GENERALLY
Sec. 3.001. Officers designated.
Sec. 3.002. Appointment of appointed officers and department
heads.
Sec. 3.003. Terms of office.
Sec. 3.004. When office becomes vacant.
In addition to other circumstances provided by law, city offices become
vacant under any of the following circumstances:
(a) The elected officers of the city are the mayor and the councilmembers.
(b) The appointed officers of the city are the city clerk, city auditor and the
city attorney.
(a) The mayor shall appoint, subject to confirmation by a majority vote of
the common council, all city officers provided for by this charter, or
created by the council, or authorized or approved by the council, or
required by state law.
(b) The mayor shall appoint, subject to confirmation by a 2/3 majority vote
of the common council, all city department heads.
(a) The term of office of all elected officers of the city shall commence on
January 1 next succeeding their election. Except as stated otherwise,
the terms of office of all elected officers of the city shall expire on
December 31 in the last year of their respective terms. Every elected
city officer shall hold his term of office until his successor shall have
been elected and shall have qualified, unless the office has become
vacant.
(b) The term of office of appointed officers shall be until their respective
successors are appointed and confirmed by the common council in the
manner provided for in this charter.
(1) The incumbent is removed from office, resigns, dies, or ceases to be a
resident of the city; or in case of councilmembers, ceased to be
residents of their respective wards.
(2) When a person dies after his election or appointment and before his
term of office has commenced.
Sec. 3.001 CHARTER Sec. 3.004
C:17
Sec. 3.005. How resignations made.
The resignation of a city officer must be made in writing to the common
council and filed with the city clerk.
Sec. 3.006. Removal, suspension or termination of department
heads and appointed city officers.
Except as otherwise provided by this charter, state law, or personnel rules,
the mayor shall have the power to remove, suspend or terminate, subject to
approval by a 2/3 majority vote of the common council, any appointed city
officer or department head.
Sec. 3.007. Filling vacancies.
Sec. 3.008. Discipline of appointed officers.
(3) At any election any two or more persons running for the same office
shall each receive an equal number of votes, being the highest in
number, in consequence of which there shall be a failure to elect.
(a) All vacancies in an appointive city office shall be filled by appointment
by the mayor in the manner provided for an original appointment to the
office.
(b) Vacancies in the office of councilmember occurring prior to the
expiration of the term shall be filled for the balance of the unexpired
term by appointment by the mayor subject to confirmation by a 2/3
majority vote of the common council.
(c) Vacancies in the office of mayor shall be filled by special election for the
remainder of the unexpired term. The common council within 30 days
after such vacancy occurs shall by resolution order the election to be
held not less than 20 days nor more than 30 days after the adoption of
such resolution. The city clerk shall immediately thereafter publish a
notice of such election once a week until such election is held in two
newspapers published in the city. Certificates of nomination for the
offices to be filled at a special election shall be filed with the city clerk
at least 15 days before the election. Every special election shall be
conducted and the vote canvassed by the inspectors of election in the
same manner as that provided by the Election Law, except that the
statement of the result of the election and all papers relating to such
election shall be filed with and returned to the city clerk by the
inspectors of election.
(a) This section does not apply to persons who are subject to Civil Service
Law § 75.
(b) Written charges against any appointed city officer may be filed with the
mayor alleging the officer:
(1) Is guilty of misconduct or neglect of duty;
Sec. 3.004 OLEAN CODE Sec. 3.008
C:18
Sec. 3.009. Increasing and diminishing compensation.
Sec. 3.010. Blanket bonding.
The city may obtain blanket bonding for city officers and employees in
accordance with Public Officers Law § 11(2).
Sec. 3.011. through Sec. 3.020. (Reserved)
(2) Is incompetent or without capacity to perform the duties of office;
or
(3) Is guilty of some delinquency seriously affecting his general
character.
(c) The mayor must designate the time and place when he will hear, try and
determine such charges. A copy of the charges with a notice of the time
and place of hearing thereon must be served upon the accused at least
three days prior to such hearing.
(d) The mayor shall be present at the time and place designated by him for
the hearing and proceed to hear, try and determine the charges. The
accused shall have the right to be present at his trial and be heard in
person and by counsel, and to give and furnish evidence in his defense.
The trial shall be open to the public.
(e) The mayor has the power to issue subpoenas in his name and to compel
the attendance of witnesses upon any proceeding authorized by this
section, and any person served with a subpoena is bound to attend in
obedience to the command thereof. The mayor may compel the
attendance of witnesses and compel them to testify in the same manner
as in the case of any officer or board authorized by law to issue
subpoenas and take testimony.
(f) Subject to section 3.006, if the mayor shall find the accused guilty of the
charges made against him he may punish him by reprimand, by
forfeiting and withholding pay for a specified time, by suspension
without pay during a fixed period or by dismissal from office.
(a) The salary or compensation of an elective officer of the city shall not be
increased or diminished during the continuance of the term of office to
which such officer shall have been elected, except that the common
council may increase the salary of an elected officer after the election of
the officer, if his duties shall have been increased.
(b) The salary or compensation of any appointive office or position, except
compensation on per diem basis, shall not be increased during any
fiscal year, after the same shall have been fixed and provided for in the
budget for such fiscal year.
Sec. 3.008 CHARTER Sec. 3.011
C:19

DIVISION 2
CITY CLERK
Sec. 3.021. Salary.
The city clerk shall receive for his services as city clerk such salary as the
common council may prescribe. Except as stated in this charter, the city
clerk shall not receive any other fee or award from the city.
Sec. 3.022. Status as town clerk.
The office of the city clerk is declared the town clerk's office for the purpose
of depositing, filing and entering for record therein all books and papers
required by law to be deposited, filed or entered for record in a town clerk's
office. The city clerk shall possess the powers, discharge the duties and
receive the fees of a town clerk.
Sec. 3.023. Clerk of common council.
The city clerk shall be present at all meetings of the common council and
shall act as clerk of the common council. The clerk shall record all local
laws, bylaws, rules, ordinances, resolutions and proceedings of the common
council.
Sec. 3.024. Clerk for officers and boards.
The city clerk shall act as clerk for such officers and public boards within
the city as the common council may direct.
Sec. 3.025. Custody of seal, records, books and papers.
Except as otherwise provided by this charter the city clerk shall have the
custody of the city seal and all city records, books and papers.
Sec. 3.026. Transcript of orders, resolutions and ordinances
requiring mayor's approval.
The city clerk shall within 48 hours after the passage by the common council
of any order, resolution, ordinance, act or proceeding of the common council
requiring the approval of the mayor, deliver to the mayor a transcript of
the same, either personally or by leaving the same at his office, place of
business or residence. The transcript shall be certified by the clerk to be
a true copy thereof and contain the date of the passage of the legislation
therein by the common council.
Sec. 3.027. Transcripts of papers or records; production of books
and papers.
The city clerk shall furnish a transcript or copy of any other paper or record
kept by him as clerk upon payment of the fee established therefor. The
city clerk shall receive the fee from all persons requesting the information,
Sec. 3.021 CHARTER Sec. 3.027
C:21
except where the copy of the record to be furnished is to be used for a
municipal purpose. The books and papers of his office shall be produced on
reasonable demand made by anyone who wishes to secure information for
themselves.
Sec. 3.028. Recordation of ordinances, etc.
Every local law, ordinance, rule, regulation, resolution and bylaw, together
with his certificate of the time and manner of the publication thereof, shall
be recorded by the city clerk in books provided by the city and kept for that
purpose.
Sec. 3.029. Abstracts of unpaid taxes, special assessments or
unpaid water rents against land.
It shall be the duty of the city clerk upon the request of any person therefor
to make careful search of the books and records in his office for any unpaid
taxes or local improvement assessments upon or against any parcel of land
and make a proper abstract thereof, showing the year in which each item
was levied, the amount of such item or sum and the amount required at the
date of the certification to pay the tax or assessment. The city clerk shall
also certify on such abstract the amount of any unpaid water rent to the
time that the last bill was rendered prior to the date of certification, if the
water bill is or may be a lien against the property. The city clerk shall certify
the abstract as the city clerk, and shall be entitled to a fee of $10 for each
separate parcel of land so searched. Such fee shall be paid by the party
requesting the search.
Sec. 3.030. Countersigning and recording permits and licenses.
The city clerk shall countersign all permits for sewer connections, gas
connections, street excavations or other licenses granted by the common
council, and shall keep an accurate record of all such licenses and permits
in books to be provided by the city for that purpose. Such record shall
specify the date of each license or permit, to whom issued, the amount paid
therefor and such other matters as may be required by the common council.
Sec. 3.031. Registrar of vital statistics.
The city clerk shall be the registrar of vital statistics.
Sec. 3.032. Treasurer of city.
The city clerk shall be the treasurer of the city.
Sec. 3.033. Duty to receive city money.
The city clerk shall receive from any officer or employee of the city any
money belonging to the city and receive all moneys belonging to the city
coming from any source whatever.
Sec. 3.027 OLEAN CODE Sec. 3.034
C:22
Sec. 3.034. Keeping account of and depositing money.
The city clerk shall keep an accurate account of all moneys received by him
belonging to the city and shall, the day immediately following receipts by
him of any such moneys, deposit the same in full in an official depository.
Sec. 3.035. Custodian of city money.
The city clerk shall be the custodian of all moneys of the city and of all
commissions and departments thereof, and shall keep and preserve the
same in such manner and in such banks or trust companies as shall be
determined by the common council.
Sec. 3.036. Transfers between depositories.
The city clerk may transfer any city moneys from one official depository to
another only upon check countersigned by the city auditor.
Sec. 3.037. Monthly statement of cash receipts.
The city clerk shall present to the common council once each month a
summary statement of all his cash receipts of the month preceding.
Sec. 3.038. How payments made.
Except as otherwise provided in this charter, the city clerk shall pay out
money only upon warrants issued by the city auditor under the authority
of the common council. The city clerk shall draw the moneys on deposit to
the credit of the city only for the payment of claims ordered to be paid by
the common council or pursuant to the lawful direction of some court. If the
city clerk draws or appropriates money for any other purpose, it shall be
deemed a malfeasance in office and cause for removal therefrom.
Sec. 3.039. Powers and duties in regard to taxes.
The city clerk shall possess all powers and perform all duties now possessed
and performed by town tax collectors, except as otherwise provided in this
charter. The city clerk shall collect and receive at his office all taxes and
assessments levied in the city and retain possession of all warrants and
assessment rolls delivered to him for collection.
Sec. 3.040. Collector of water revenues.
The city clerk shall be the collector of all water rents and miscellaneous
water revenues.
Sec. 3.041. through Sec. 3.050. (Reserved)
Sec. 3.034 CHARTER Sec. 3.041
C:23

DIVISION 3
CITY ATTORNEY
Sec. 3.051. Qualification.
The city attorney shall be an attorney at law, admitted to practice in the
state.
Sec. 3.052. Salary.
The city attorney shall receive such salary as the common council may fix.
Sec. 3.053. Counselor and advisor of city and departments.
The city attorney shall be the legal advisor of and attorney and counselor
for the city and for all officers and departments thereof in matters relating
to their official duties.
Sec. 3.054. Prosecuting and defending suits; preparation of
contracts, bonds and other instruments.
The city attorney shall prosecute and defend all suits for and on behalf
of the city and the departments thereof and such other suits, matters
and controversies as he shall by resolution or ordinance be directed to
prosecute or defend. The city attorney prepare all contracts, bonds and
other instruments in writing in which the city is concerned and shall indorse
on each his approval of the form and correctness thereof.
Sec. 3.055. through Sec. 3.070. (Reserved)
Sec. 3.051 CHARTER Sec. 3.055
C:25

DIVISION 4
CITY AUDITOR
Sec. 3.071. Compensation.
The city auditor shall receive such compensation as is fixed by the common
council.
Sec. 3.072. General duties.
The city auditor shall perform such duties as may be prescribed by the
mayor and such other duties as may be required by the general laws of the
state.
Sec. 3.073. Personnel management.
The city auditor shall collect and explain all personnel management and
human resources planning information pertaining to the city's past and
current work force.
Sec. 3.074. Chief fiscal and accounting officer.
The city auditor shall be the chief fiscal officer and the chief accounting
officer of the city.
Sec. 3.075. Books of financial and budgetary control over
departments and offices.
The city auditor shall keep, maintain, and operate all general financial
books of the city and shall maintain budgetary control over all departments
and offices of the city.
Sec. 3.076. Uniform system of accounts; annual report.
The accounting structure of the city shall be in accordance with the uniform
system of city accounts prescribed by the state department of audit and
control. The city auditor shall compile and file the annual report required
by General Municipal Law article 3 [§ 30 et seq.].
Sec. 3.077. Control of expenditures in relation to appropriations.
The city auditor shall exercise such accounting control over expenditures
that no department, bureau or officer of the city shall be permitted to
exceed its budget appropriations or to encumber such an appropriation
at a rate faster than allowed by the auditor under a quota or allotment
prescribed by him. It shall be the duty of the city auditor to maintain at
all times control over the expenditures of every department, bureau, officer
and financial activity of the city to the end that the amounts appropriated
therefor shall not be overexpended. The city auditor may exercise every
reasonable means by way of quotas or allotments or otherwise to so restrict
Sec. 3.071 CHARTER Sec. 3.077
C:27
expenditures that every department shall keep within its budget
appropriation.
Sec. 3.078. Budget transfers.
The city auditor may transfer part or all of any unencumbered balance of
an appropriation for an expense item from one line to another within any
given department, bureau or officer's appropriation but shall not transfer to
or from any appropriation for salaries or wages without securing authority
therefor by resolution adopted by the common council. The city auditor shall
not make or allow to be made any transfer from one department, bureau
or officer's appropriation to another department, bureau or officer without
being authorized so to do by resolution of the common council.
Sec. 3.079. Monthly statement of revenue and expenditures.
The city auditor shall submit to the common council each month a summary
statement of revenues and expenses for the fiscal year up to the close of
the preceding month, detailed as to revenues and appropriations in such
manner as to show the exact progress being made under the budget and the
exact financial condition of the city.
Sec. 3.080. Annual financial statement.
The city auditor shall submit once a year and more often if the common
council requires it, a complete financial statement showing the assets and
liabilities of the city.
Sec. 3.081. Prescribing books, records and accounts to be kept and
reports to be made.
The city auditor shall prescribe the books, records and accounts to be kept,
maintained and operated by the departments, bureaus and officers of the
city. The city auditor shall prescribe the scope and frequency of reports to
be submitted by such departments, bureaus and officers.
Sec. 3.082. Examination and approval of accounts and claims
against city.
The city auditor shall examine all accounts and claims against the city and
all the commissions and departments thereof and approve or disapprove the
same by written endorsement thereon prior to the presentation of the same
to the common council for action.
Sec. 3.083. Payment by warrants.
The city auditor shall issue all warrants for payment of money by the city
and all the commissions and departments thereof. Such warrants shall be
directed by the city clerk and be accompanied by a schedule or detailed
abstract certified by the clerk to be correct of all claims authorized by the
common council to be paid.
Sec. 3.077 OLEAN CODE Sec. 3.084
C:28
Sec. 3.084. Liability for approval of unauthorized bills or claims.
The city auditor and his sureties shall be personally liable to the city for the
amount of any bill or claim against the city that is not authorized by this
charter, or which is prohibited by this charter and which the auditor shall
wilfully or negligently approve.
Sec. 3.085. Accurate account of money; examination of records of
city clerk.
The city auditor shall keep an accurate account of all taxes and assessments
and of all moneys due to or receivable by the city. The auditor shall conduct
audits and examinations of the records and accounts of the city clerk in
order to prove the accuracy of the reported receipts of that office.
Sec. 3.086. Auditing books of officers, bureaus and departments;
report to council.
Sec. 3.087. Accounts and claims to be itemized, verified and
presented to auditor.
All accounts and claims against the city, including those for services
rendered or moneys expended by any officer or employee of the city whose
compensation is not otherwise provided for by this charter which would be
valid claim against the city if rendered or expended by an officer thereof,
shall be itemized, and certified by the creditor and presented to the city
auditor who shall inquire into the justice of such account and may send for
and compel the attendance of persons and production of books and papers
and may examine the claimant, claimants and others on oath in relation
thereto. The auditor shall report to the common council on all such accounts
before payment and if unfavorable give the reasons therefor.
Sec. 3.088. Report to common council on all accounts.
The city auditor shall report to the common council on all accounts and if
unfavorable give the reasons therefor.
(a) The city auditor shall examine and audit the books of accounts of the
various officers, bureaus and departments of the city and the records
thereof at least twice each year. The auditor shall on such examination
report to the common council whether such records and books of
account are true and correct and whether all moneys received and
disbursed have been fully and properly accounted for.
(b) Upon the death, resignation, removal or expiration of the term of any
officer or employee the city auditor shall audit the accounts of such
officer or employee. If such officer or employee shall be found indebted
to the city the auditor shall immediately give notice thereof to the
common council and to the city attorney.
Sec. 3.084 CHARTER Sec. 3.089
C:29
Sec. 3.089. Audit and payment of payrolls.
The city auditor shall audit the payrolls of the regular officers and
employees of the city. The payrolls when so audited shall have the same
force and effect as though audited by the common council and shall be paid
by the city clerk upon the warrant of the auditor.
Sec. 3.089 OLEAN CODE Sec. 3.089
C:30
ARTICLE IV
DEPARTMENTS
DIVISION 1
GENERALLY
Sec. 4.001. Appointment of department heads.
Sec. 4.002. Control generally.
The mayor shall establish rules and regulations for the government and
discipline of all city departments. The mayor may discipline members of city
departments in accordance with law.
Sec. 4.003. Certification of bills.
Each city officer and department head shall certify to the correctness of
the payrolls and contracts for work done or services performed within such
department head's or officer's jurisdiction and deliver same to the city
auditor for inspection and approval prior to payment.
Sec. 4.004. Uniform allowance for members of police and fire
departments.
All members of the police and fire departments who are required by police
or fire department rules or regulations to wear a uniform shall be paid a
yearly uniform allowance in a manner to be determined by the common
council.
Sec. 4.005. through Sec. 4.020. (Reserved)
(a) All department heads shall be appointed by the mayor subject to
confirmation by a 2/3 majority vote of the common council.
(b) Subsection (a) does not apply to any department head who is
designated by section 3.001 as an officer of the city.
Sec. 4.001 CHARTER Sec. 4.005
C:31

DIVISION 2
DEPARTMENT OF FIRE, BUILDING AND EMERGENCY SERVICES
Sec. 4.021. Created.
There is in city government a department to be known as the department of
fire, building and emergency services.
Sec. 4.022. Chief of fire, building and emergency services.
The chief of fire, building and emergency services is the department head
of the department of fire, building and emergency services.
Sec. 4.023. General powers and duties.
It shall be the duty of the department of fire, building and emergency
services to provide for fire safety and prevention, emergency services,
disaster preparedness, and enforcement of all building codes, including
inspections.
Sec. 4.024. through Sec. 4.030. (Reserved)
Sec. 4.021 CHARTER Sec. 4.024
C:33

DIVISION 3
POLICE DEPARTMENT
Sec. 4.031. Created.
There is in city government a department to be known as the police
department.
Sec. 4.032. Chief of police.
Sec. 4.033. Duties generally.
Sec. 4.034. Fees.
All fees received by members of the police department shall belong to and
be the property of the city and shall be accounted for to the common council
and paid over to the city clerk immediately upon receipt.
Sec. 4.035. through Sec. 4.040. (Reserved)
(a) The chief of police is the department head of the police department.
(b) The chief of police shall at least once each month make a detailed
report to the city auditor of the moneys received by the police officers
and the disposition of same.
(a) It shall be the duty of the police force to see that the police regulations
and the by-laws, local laws and ordinances of the city are observed and
to discover and report all violations thereof.
(b) The police force shall have such other duties as shall be prescribed by
resolution, order, bylaws, local laws, or ordinances of the common
council.
Sec. 4.031 CHARTER Sec. 4.035
C:35

DIVISION 4
(RESERVED)1
Sec. 4.041. through Sec. 4.050. (Reserved)
1. Editor’s Note: Local Law No. 1-98, § 1, adopted Jan. 13, 1998, repealed in their entirety §§
4.041—4.044 which comprised former Div. 4. Formerly, said sections pertained to the
department of parks and recreation. See the Charter Comparative Table.
Sec. 4.041 CHARTER Sec. 4.041
C:37

DIVISION 5
DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC WORKS
Sec. 4.051. Created.
There is hereby created in the city government a department to be known
as the department of public works.
Sec. 4.052. Director—Generally.
Sec. 4.053. Same—Powers and duties. [Local Law No. 1-98, § 2,
1-13-1998]
(a) The head of the department of public works shall be the director of the
department of public works and shall possess a professional engineer's
license issued by the state. The director shall possess a thorough
knowledge of the operation of a municipal public works department and
shall have had 10 years of progressively responsible municipal
employment experience in administrative and engineering work,
including street, sewer and building construction.
(b) The director of the department of public works shall receive such salary
as the common council may fix.
(a) Subject to the provisions of law and ordinance, the director of the
department of public works shall have cognizance, direction and
control of:
(1) The construction, maintenance, alteration, repair, care, cleaning,
paving, flagging and improving of the streets, highways, sidewalks
and public places of the city;
(2) The construction, alteration and repair of all city buildings and
bridges belonging to the city;
(3) All public sewers and drains and public works of the city;
(4) The construction and maintenance of water and sewage treatment
facilities and lines and the employment, control and supervision of
all persons employed upon such work;
(5) The maintenance of city parks;
(6) The city forester and all city tree and shrubbery programs for and
upon public lands and rights-of-way.
(b) The director of the department of public works shall inspect the
condition of the streets, avenues, highways, sidewalks, crosswalks,
area-ways, subways, curbing, paving, street lights, sewers, drains and
public works of the city with sufficient frequency to ascertain their
condition, and report at once to the common council whenever the
same shall not be in good repair and proper condition. The director
shall also have general supervision and control of all work performed
Sec. 4.051 CHARTER Sec. 4.053
C:39
Sec. 4.054. through Sec. 4.060. (Reserved)
under any contract of the city for local or other improvements to be
performed within or upon any of the public streets, ways or places,
or with reference to the public works and ways within the jurisdiction
of the department of public works and shall cause the same to be
performed in full compliance with the previsions of any contract
therefor.
(c) The director of the department of public works shall supervise the
collections and disposal of all garbage and rubbish in the manner
provided by the common council. The director shall have supervision
and control of the persons employed in connection with such work.
(d) The director shall, whenever a license or permit is required to connect
with any gas or water pipe, sewer, to excavate in a street, or do any
other act relating to streets or public works under his control,
countersign such license or permit and return the same to the
permittee or licensee before such work shall be commenced.
(e) The director of the department of public works shall, upon application
by any lot owner in the city furnish to such owner, the line of the street
upon which the lot abuts and the grade and line upon which sidewalks
abutting upon the property shall be laid. The director shall also perform
such surveying and engineering work and discharge such other duties
for the city as the common council may prescribe.
(f) The director of the department of public works shall devote his time
exclusively to the service of the city.
Sec. 4.053 OLEAN CODE Sec. 4.054
C:40
DIVISION 6
DEPARTMENT OF COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT
Sec. 4.061. Created.
There is hereby created a department within the city to be known as the
department of community development.
Sec. 4.062. Director.
Sec. 4.063. General duties.
(a) The head of the department of community development shall be the
director of community development. The director shall be a graduate of
an accredited college or university with a degree in regional or city
planning and a minimum of one year's experience in municipal direction
or planning, or a minimum of five years related experience in municipal
development and five years actual general business experience in
related and equivalent fields. The director's salary shall be provided in
the budget of the department of community development and shall be
fixed from time to time by the common council.
(b) The director may appoint and dismiss department personnel as
authorized by the mayor and common council.
(a) The department of community development shall coordinate,
implement, and execute the general policies and directives of the city
and of such state and federally funded programs as the city may elect to
participate in. The department shall develop and administer programs
for future rehabilitation of housing and neighborhood development
within the city. The department shall prepare and submit all
applications made by or on behalf of the city for specially funded
revenue sharing programs available to the city under federal, state or
private grants-in-aid and shall prepare and submit all applications for
any federal, state or private grant-in-aid programs that the city may be
eligible for and elect to participate in. The department shall furnish
information and assist in the financing, construction and maintenance
of all local programs including the construction and operation of public
offstreet parking facilities and any future housing construction
programs within the city.
(b) The department shall assist the zoning board of appeals in the orderly
development under the master plan of the city and shall make
appropriate recommendations as may be necessary to update the
master plan from time to time. The department shall carry on and
coordinate a comprehensive plan of code enforcement and enforcing all
local codes regulating the construction of dwellings, carrying on of
certain occupations and businesses and such other codes as may be
from time to time enacted by the common council. The department shall
assist in the orderly development of the central business district and in
promoting comprehensive and orderly industrial growth within the city.
Sec. 4.061 CHARTER Sec. 4.063
C:41
(c) All activities of the department shall be under the general supervision
of the director of community development. The department shall also
act as a general liaison between the city departments and furnish such
information as may be required to coordinate the orderly progress of
the city.
Sec. 4.063 OLEAN CODE Sec. 4.063
C:42
ARTICLE V
FINANCE, TAXATION AND ASSESSMENTS
DIVISION 1
GENERALLY
Sec. 5.001. Fiscal year.
The fiscal year of the city shall commence on June 1 of each year.
Sec. 5.002. Annual budget.
By February 15 of each year the mayor shall prepare and submit to the
common council a proposed budget for the next fiscal year. The common
council shall adopt a budget for the next fiscal year on or before April 15 of
each year.
Sec. 5.003. Transfer of unencumbered balances of funds.
Sec. 5.004. Passing upon accounts and claims.
(a) The common council may transfer any unencumbered balance of any
fund to any other fund with the approval of the mayor, but not
otherwise. Until so transferred no part of the money shall be diverted
from such funds or be used for any other purpose than that for which
the same was specifically set apart.
(b) Subsection (a) shall not apply to any fund which has been raised for any
local improvement unless approval of the qualified voters of such city is
first obtained. Such question may be submitted at any general election
or at a special election.
(a) Except as otherwise provided in this character, the common council
shall pass all accounts and claims against the city, subsequent to the
examination thereof and the report thereon by the city auditor, as a
board of auditors and shall possess the powers and duties of town
auditors. No unliquidated claim shall be received for audit by the
common council unless made out in detail specifying:
(1) Whether it is for labor or services;
(2) The time when, the place where, by whom and under whose
direction and by what authority it was performed;
(3) If for merchandise, materials or other articles furnished, the items
thereof, by whom ordered, and when and to whom delivered;
(4) That no payments have been made thereon and that no offsets exist
except those stated.
(b) All claims received by the city for audit shall be certified as true and
correct by the creditor.
Sec. 5.001 CHARTER Sec. 5.005
C:43
Sec. 5.005. Bond of bidders.
Bidders on city contracts shall be required to enter into such bond as the
common council may require for the faithful performance of the contract
and the common council may require such additional security as it sees fit.
Sec. 5.006. Majority vote and approval of mayor necessary for tax,
assessment.
No tax or assessment shall be made except by the concurring vote of a
majority of all the members of the common council in office. Except as
otherwise provided, no tax, levy, assessment, order, resolution or ordinance
shall take effect until after the same shall have been approved in writing by
the mayor.
Sec. 5.007. Lien for taxes and assessments; actions for collection.
All city taxes and assessments charged upon real estate, including those
for local improvements shall be a lien upon the same from the time of
completing the tax roll therefor. Such lien shall be prior and superior to
all other liens and incumbrances. All such taxes and assessments may also
be recovered in an action brought by the city against any person liable
therefor, and the lien thereof may be foreclosed by action in the same
manner and by the same proceedings as in an action for the foreclosure
of a mortgage upon real estate. In any action to recover any taxes or
assessments or to foreclose the lien thereof the assessment or tax roll shall
in all cases be prima facie evidence of the right of recovery of the amount of
such tax and assessment and interest and no property shall be exempt from
levy and sale for the payment of same.
Sec. 5.008. Power to issue bonds.
The common council shall have the power to issue bonds of the city for
any municipal purpose other than for current operating expenses of city
government.
Sec. 5.009. through Sec. 5.020. (Reserved)
Sec. 5.005 OLEAN CODE Sec. 5.009
C:44
DIVISION 2
PROPERTY TAXES
Sec. 5.021. Recapitulation in tax roll and certification to city
auditor.
When city taxes are fully apportioned and extended it shall be the duty of
the city assessor to insert in the tax roll a recapitulation or summary of the
footings of the several pages thereof, and certify to the city auditor the total
amount of the taxes so extended thereon.
Sec. 5.022. Time of payment and penalties.
The city clerk shall receive city property taxes during the month of May
without any additional fee or penalty whatever. On the first day of the month
following, there shall be added and collected a penalty of 1%. On the first
day of each successive month there shall be added to all such unpaid taxes,
and collected, an additional penalty of 1% for each month.
Sec. 5.023. Notice of time of payment and penalties.
The city clerk shall immediately upon receiving the property tax roll and
warrant cause a notice to be published once in each week for four
successive weeks. The notice shall be to the effect that he has received the
tax roll and warrant and that he will receive the taxes at his office, together
with penalties aforesaid within the times specified in section 5.022.
Sec. 5.024. Collection of unpaid taxes.
On August 1 of each year the property taxes remaining unpaid shall be
declared to be delinquent and the city clerk shall proceed in the same
manner as town collectors for the purpose of collecting such taxes, together
with all costs and charges thereon, except as otherwise provided in this
charter.
Sec. 5.025. Relaying delinquent taxes.
If the property tax shall remain uncollected at the time of making the next
general tax assessment roll thereafter, such tax may again be levied. It may
be levied as directed by the common council until it is finally paid. Any
delinquent tax so levied shall be designated upon the tax roll as delinquent
giving the time when the same became delinquent. Penalties thereon shall
be collected at the rate of 1% for each month from June 1 following the
publication of notice.
Sec. 5.026. Payment of unpaid taxes to city by county. [Local Law
No. 2-00, § 1, 3-28-2000]
(a) If any tax on real estate placed upon the tax list for city purposes and
duly delivered to the city clerk shall be unpaid at the time the city clerk
is required by law to return his warrant for the collection of state and
Sec. 5.021 CHARTER Sec. 5.026
C:45
county taxes the clerk shall deliver to the common council an account
of the taxes remaining due. The account shall contain a description of
the lands upon which such taxes were unpaid as the same were placed
upon the tax list and the amount of the tax so assessed. Upon making
oath before any officer authorized to administer oaths that the taxes
remaining in any such account remain unpaid, and that after diligent
efforts he has been unable to collect the same, the city clerk shall be
credited by the common council and the city auditor with the amount
thereof.
(b) Upon receiving any such account from the city clerk the common
council shall cause the city auditor to compare it with the original tax
list. If it is found to be a true transcript the auditor shall add to such
account his certificate to the effect that he has compared it with the
original tax list and found it to be correct and shall immediately present
the account, affidavit and certificate to the county treasurer.
(c) Out of the moneys in the county treasury raised for contingent expenses
or for the purpose of paying the amount of taxes so returned unpaid, the
county treasurer shall pay to the city clerk the amount of taxes and
penalties so returned as unpaid. If there are no moneys in the treasury
applicable to such purpose, the county legislature at the time of levying
such unpaid taxes, as provided in the subsection (d) shall pay to the city
clerk the amount thereof by voucher or draft on the county treasurer in
the same manner as other county charges are paid. The city clerk shall
immediately report such payment to the city auditor.
(d) Such account, affidavit and certificate shall be laid by the county
treasurer before the county legislature. The county legislature shall
cause the amount of such unpaid taxes, with 7% of the amount in
addition thereto, to be levied upon the lands upon which the same were
due. If imposed upon the lands of any corporation, then upon such
corporation. When collected the same shall be returned to the county
treasurer to reimburse the amount so advanced; together with the
expenses of collection.
(e) Any person whose lands are included in any such account may pay the
tax assessed thereon, with 5% added thereto, to the county treasurer, at
any time before the county legislature shall have directed same to be
levied.
(f) The same proceedings in all respects shall be had for the collection of
the amount so directed to be raised by the county legislature as are
provided by law in relation to the county taxes
Sec. 5.026 OLEAN CODE Sec. 5.026
C:46
ARTICLE VI
MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
Sec. 6.001. Municipal year.
The municipal year of the city shall begin on January 1.
Sec. 6.002. Service of notices.
Whenever any real property in the city is owned by two or more persons
jointly, or as tenants in common, a notice required by this charter served
on one of such persons shall be sufficient notice to all. Whenever an owner
does not reside within the city it shall be sufficient to serve such a notice on
the occupant or lessee of such real property or their agent or person who
has charge or control thereof. Any notice may be served upon a corporation
by serving any director, officer or managing agent thereof.
Sec. 6.003. Control of public buildings.
The mayor, city clerk and director of the department of public works shall
have the custody, control and management of the public buildings belonging
to said city.
Sec. 6.004. Liability for and recovery of expenses.
Whenever any act or thing may be done or caused to be done by the
common council or any officer of the city at the expense of any person as
provided in this charter, such expense may be recovered in an action by the
city against such person. Such person shall be liable therefor in addition to
any penalty that may be prescribed and the same may also be collected in
the manner that taxes are collected.
Sec. 6.005. Notice of defects in streets, sidewalks, etc.; notice of
injuries.
The city shall not be liable for any damage or injury sustained in
consequence of defects in, want of repair, or obstruction of any of the
highways, streets, alleys, sidewalks, crosswalks or public places of the city
unless notice in writing shall have been served upon the mayor or acting
mayor at least 24 hours before happening of the casualty from which such
injury or damage may have resulted and unless notice in writing shall have
been served upon the mayor within 48 hours in case injury is sustained
by a resident, and within five days in case the injury is sustained by a
nonresident, after the happening of the casualty from which such damage
or injury may have resulted. Each of such notices shall particularly state
such defect, want of care or obstruction, and the location thereof, and shall
be served by delivering to, and leaving the same with the mayor or acting
mayor personally.
Sec. 6.001 CHARTER Sec. 6.006
C:47
Sec. 6.006. Notice of claims for injury from defects in streets,
sidewalks, etc.
Sec. 6.007. Record of conveyances, wills, decrees and maps.
The city assessor shall keep a record of all land conveyances in the city.
Such record shall comprise the date and consideration of such transfer, the
names of the grantors and a sufficient description of the premises conveyed
so that the same may be identified therefrom. Every deed and will relating
to real property in the city, and every judicial decree establishing the right
of inheritance to real property in the city shall be presented at the office
of the city assessor and stamped, countersigned and numbered in sequence
by the city assessor before being recorded in the office of the county clerk.
Every map or plot of land within the city showing a subdivision of land into
blocks or lots shall together with an exact duplicate thereof be presented,
stamped, and countersigned and numbered, as hereinbefore required in
reference to conveyances before being recorded in the office of the county
clerk. The city assessor shall file the duplicate of such map or plot as a
record of the city.
(a) All claims for injury to person or property alleged to have been caused
or sustained by reason of defects in, want of repair or obstruction of any
of the highways, streets, street lights, alleys, sidewalks or crosswalks or
public places in the city, shall be presented in writing to the common
council within 30 days after the date of the alleged injury.
(b) Such statement in writing shall state the time, place, cause, nature and
extent of the alleged injuries as far as practicable, and shall be verified
by an affidavit of the claimant or his agent or attorney to the effect that
same is true to his knowledge or his best information and belief.
(c) The omission to present any such claim in the manner and within the
time limit in this section shall be a bar to any action against the city
therefor.
Sec. 6.006 OLEAN CODE Sec. 6.007
C:48
Chapter CHCT
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE
Sec. CHCT-1. Charter amendments.
Local Law
No.
Adoption
Date
Referendum
Date
Section this
Charter
1-98 1-13-1998 Rpld 4.041—4.044
2-00 3-28-2000 Added 4.053(a)(5), (6)
5.026(c)
Part II: Olean Code of Local Laws
Chapter LL1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
STATE LAW REFERENCES
Codification of local laws, Municipal Home
Rule Law § 20(3).
Penalties for violation of local laws, Municipal
Home Rule Law § 10(4)(b).
General Construction Law § 12.
General Construction Law §§ 13, 41.
General Construction Law § 13-a.
General Construction Law § 14.
General Construction Law § 15.
General Construction Law § 19.
General Construction Law § 20.
General Construction Law § 22.
General Construction Law § 23.
General Construction Law § 24.
General Construction Law § 25-a.
General Construction Law § 30.
General Construction Law § 31.
General Construction Law § 32.
General Construction Law § 33.
General Construction Law § 34.
General Construction Law § 35.
General Construction Law § 36.
General Construction Law § 37.
General Construction Law § 39.
General Construction Law § 40.
General Construction Law § 46.
General Construction Law § 51.
General Construction Law § 56.
General Construction Law § 58.
General Construction Law § 60.
General Construction Law § 80.
General Construction Law §§ 90-96.
Sec. 6.007 CHARTER Sec. LL1-1
C:49
Sec. LL1-1. Designation and citation of Code; short title for part.
The legislation embraced in this part II shall constitute and be designated
the "Olean Code of Local Laws" and may be so cited.
Sec. LL1-2. Definitions and rules of construction.
As used in all local laws, unless the context requires otherwise:
GENERALLY — The provisions shall be liberally construed to effect the
purposes expressed therein or implied from the expression thereof. In case
of doubt or ambiguity in the meaning of such provisions, the general shall
yield to the particular. Reference for interpretation and construction shall
tend to further the accomplishment of the elimination of the particular
mischiefs for which the provisions were enacted.
AFFIDAVIT — When an affidavit is authorized or required, it may be sworn
to before any officer authorized by law to take the acknowledgment of deeds
in this state unless a particular officer is specified before whom it is to be
taken.
ARMED FORCES OF THE UNITED STATES — The Army, Navy, Marine
Corps, Air Force, and Coast Guard, including all components of such forces,
and the National Guard, when in the service of the United States pursuant
to call, as provided by law. Pursuant to this definition, no person shall be
considered a member or veteran of the armed forces of the United States
unless service in an armed force is or was on a fulltime active duty basis
other than active duty for training.
BOND AND UNDERTAKING — A provision authorizing or requiring a bond
to be given shall be deemed to have been complied with by the execution of
an undertaking to the same effect.
CALENDAR DAY — A calendar day includes the time from midnight to
midnight. Sunday or any day of the week specifically mentioned means a
calendar day.
CHARTER — The Charter of the City of Olean, New York.
CHATTELS — Includes goods and chattels. Where "chattels" appears and
pertains to an action to recover the same, it includes all specific personal
property such as but not limited to certificates of stock, bonds, notes, or
other securities or obligations.
CITY — The City of Olean, New York.
CODE — The Olean Code of Local Laws, as established and designated in
section LL1-1.
COMMON COUNCIL — The common council of the city.
COMPUTATION OF DAYS — A number of days specified as a period from a
certain day within which, after which, or before which an act is authorized
or required to be done means the number of calendar days exclusive of the
calendar day from which the reckoning is made. If the period is a period
of two days, Saturday, Sunday, or a public holiday must be excluded from
Sec. LL1-1 OLEAN CODE Sec. LL1-2
C:50
the reckoning if it is an intervening day between the day from which the
reckoning is made and the last day of the period. In computing any specified
period of time from a specified event, the day upon which the event happens
is deemed the day from which the reckoning is made. The day from which
any specified period of time is reckoned shall be excluded in making the
reckoning.
COMPUTATION OF MONTHS — A number of months after or before a
certain day shall be computed by counting such number of calendar months
from such day, exclusive of the calendar month in which the day occurs,
and shall include the day of the month in the last month so counted having
the same numerical order in days of the month as the day from which the
computation is made, unless there are not so many days in the last month
so counted, in which case the period computed shall expire with the last day
of the month so counted.
CONFLICTING OR OVERLAPPING PROVISIONS — Local laws are the
minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of the public health,
safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare. Where a local law
imposes greater restrictions upon the subject matter than the other
provisions the provision imposing the greater restriction or regulation
controls. Local laws prevail over ordinances and resolutions.
CORPORATE LIMITS, CORPORATION LIMITS — The legal boundaries of
the city.
COUNTY — Cattaraugus County, New York.
DELEGATION OF AUTHORITY — A provision that requires a city officer or
city employee to do an act authorizes the officer or employee to delegate
and authorize subordinates to perform the required act.
EFFECT OF HOLIDAYS — When any period of time, computed from a
certain day, within which or after which or before which an act is authorized
or required to be done ends on a Saturday, Sunday or a public holiday, the
act may be done on the next succeeding business day, and, if the period
ends at a specified hour, the act may be done at or before the same hour
of the next succeeding business day. Where time is extended by virtue of
the provisions of this paragraph, the extended time shall not be included in
the computation of interest, except that when the period is specified as a
number of months, the extended time shall be included in the computation
of interest.
GENDER — Whenever words of the masculine or feminine gender appear,
unless the sense of the sentence requires otherwise, they shall be deemed
to refer to both male or female persons. This construction shall apply
to gender-indicative suffixes or prefixes as well as to gender-indicative
words. Whenever the reference is to a corporation, board, body, group,
organization or entity comprising more than one person or to an assemblage
of persons or to an inanimate object, the reference shall be construed to be
neuter in gender.
HERETOFORE OR HEREAFTER — When used in any provision, relates to
the time the provision takes effect.
Sec. LL1-2 CHARTER Sec. LL1-2
C:51
KEEPER OR PROPRIETOR — Includes persons, whether acting by
themselves or through servants, agents, or employees.
MAY — Is to be construed as being permissive.
MAYOR — The mayor of the city.
MONTH — A calendar month.
MUNICIPAL OFFICERS — A reference to several officers of the city holding
the same office or to a board of such officers shall refer to the single
officer holding the office, when but one person is chosen to fill the office in
pursuance of law.
MUST — Is to be construed as mandatory.
NEWSPAPERS — A newspaper customarily published on each business day
of the year, whether or not the newspaper is published on any other day. In
this paragraph "business day" does not include a Saturday, Sunday or legal
holiday.
NIGHTTIME — Includes the time from sunset to sunrise.
NONTECHNICAL AND TECHNICAL WORDS — Words and phrases shall be
construed according to the common and approved usage of the language,
but technical words and phrases and such others as may have acquired a
peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be construed and understood
according to such meaning.
NOTICE — When a notice is required to be given to a board or body, service
of the notice upon the clerk or chairperson of the board or body is sufficient.
NOW — In any provision referring to other ordinances or local laws in force,
or to a person in office or to any facts or circumstances as existing, relates
to the local laws or ordinances in force or to the person in office or to the
facts or circumstances existing, respectively, immediately before the taking
effect of the provision.
NUMBER — Words in the singular number include the plural and in the
plural number include the singular.
OATH, AFFIDAVIT, AND SWEAR — Includes every mode authorized by law
of attesting the truth of that which is stated. "Swear" includes every mode
authorized by law for administering an oath.
OR, AND — "Or" may be read "and," and "and" may be read "or" if the sense
requires it.
OWNER — As applied to a building or land, includes any part owner, joint
owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant or tenant by
the entirety, of the whole or of a part of the building or land.
PERSON — Includes a corporation and a joint stock association. When used
to designate a party whose property may be the subject of any offense,
"person" includes the state or any other state, government, or country
which may lawfully own property in the state.
Sec. LL1-2 OLEAN CODE Sec. LL1-2
C:52
PERSONAL PROPERTY — Includes chattels, money, things in action and
all written instruments themselves, as distinguished from the rights or
interests to which they relate, by which any right, interest, lien or
incumbrance in, to or upon property or any debt or financial obligation
is created, acknowledged, evidenced, transferred, discharged or defeated,
wholly or in part, and everything, except real property, which may be the
subject of ownership. Oil wells and all fixtures connected with oil wells,
situated on lands leased for oil purposes and oil interests, and rights held
under and by virtue of any lease or contract or other right or license to
operate for or produce petroleum oil, are deemed personal property for all
purposes except taxation.
PRECEDING, FOLLOWING — Next before and next after, respectively.
PROPERTY — Includes real property and personal property.
PUBLIC HOLIDAYS DESIGNATED — Includes the following days in each
year: January 1, known as New Year's Day; the third Monday in January
known as Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr., Day; February 12, known as Lincoln's
Birthday; the third Monday in February, known as Washington's Birthday;
the last Monday in May, known as Memorial Day; the second Sunday in
June, known as Flag Day; July 4, known as Independence Day; the first
Monday in September known as Labor Day; the second Monday in October,
known as Columbus Day; November 11, known as Veterans Day; the fourth
Thursday in November, known as Thanksgiving Day; and December 25,
known as Christmas Day; and, if any of such day except Flag Day is Sunday,
the next day thereafter; and each general election day and each day
appointed by the president of the United States or by the governor of this
state as a day of general thanksgiving, general fasting and prayer or other
general religious observances. "Half-holiday" includes the period from noon
to midnight of each Saturday which is not a public holiday.
PUBLIC PLACE — Any park, cemetery, schoolyard or open space adjacent
thereto, and all beaches, canals and other waterways.
PUBLIC WORKS DEPARTMENT, PUBLIC WORKS DIRECTOR, ETC. — The
terms "public works department" and "department of public works" are
synonymous. The terms "public works director," "director of public works"
and "director of the department of public works" are synonymous.
QUORUM AND MAJORITY — Whenever three or more public officers are
given any power or authority or three or more persons are charged with
any public duty to be performed or exercised by them jointly or as a board
or similar body, a majority of the whole number of such persons or officers,
at a meeting duly held at a time fixed by law or by any bylaw duly adopted
by the board or body or at any duly adjourned meeting duly held upon
reasonable notice to all of them shall constitute a quorum, and not less
than a majority of the whole number may perform and exercise such power,
authority or duty. In this paragraph "whole number" means the total number
which the board, commission, body, or other group of persons or officers
would have were there no vacancies and none of the persons disqualified
from acting. Any meeting referred to in this paragraph may be adjourned by
a less number than a quorum.
Sec. LL1-2 CHARTER Sec. LL1-2
C:53
REAL PROPERTY — Includes real estate, lands, tenements and
hereditaments, corporeal and incorporeal.
REFERENCES TO OFFICIALS, DEPARTMENTS, ETC. — References to
officers, employees, boards, departments and commissions are to be
interpreted as if followed by the words "of the city."
REFERENCES TO REPEALED PROVISIONS — If any legislation is repealed
and, in substance, reenacted, a reference to the repealed provision shall be
deemed a reference to the reenacted provision.
RESIDENCE — The place adopted by a person as the person's place of
habitation, and to which, whenever the person is absent, the person has
the intention of returning. When a person eats at one place and sleeps at
another, the place where the person sleeps is the person's residence.
SEAL — The city or corporate seal.
SHALL — Is to be construed as mandatory.
SIDEWALK — Any portion of a street between the curbline and the adjacent
property line intended for the use of pedestrians. "Sidewalk" does not
include a parkway.
SIGNATURE — Includes any memorandum, mark or sign written, printed,
stamped, photographed, engraved or otherwise placed upon any instrument
or writing with intent to execute or authenticate the instrument or writing.
STATE — The State of New York.
STREET — Includes any street, avenue, boulevard, road, alley, lane, viaduct
or other public highway in the city.
SUBWAY — That area of a city street lying between the vehicular traffic lane
and the dedicated street limit.
TENANT, OCCUPANT — As applied to a building or land, includes any
person holding a written or oral lease or who occupies the whole or a part
of the building or land, either alone or with others.
TENSE — Words used in the past or present tense include the future as well
as the past and present.
WEEK — Seven days.
WRITING AND WRITTEN — Includes every legible representation of letters
upon a material substance, except when applied to the signature of an
instrument.
YEAR — 365 days, but the added day of a leap year and the day immediately
preceding shall, for the purpose of such computation, be counted as one
day. "Year" means 12 months. "Half year" means six months. "Quarter of a
year" means three months.
Sec. LL1-3. Catchlines of sections, subsections, etc.; effect of
history notes, cross references, and state law references.
Sec. LL1-2 OLEAN CODE Sec. LL1-3
C:54
Sec. LL1-4. Effect of repeal of legislation.
Sec. LL1-5. Amendments or additions to Code.
(a) Catchlines for sections, subsections, paragraphs, or other portions of
this Code that are printed in boldface type are intended as mere
catchwords to indicate the contents and are not titles or part of the law,
nor shall they be so deemed when amended or reenacted.
(b) History or source notes appearing in parentheses after sections in this
Code are not intended to have any legal effect but are merely intended
to indicate the derivation of the matter contained in the section. Cross
references and state law references which appear after sections or
subsections of this Code, or which otherwise appear in footnote form,
are provided for convenience and have no legal effect.
(c) All references to chapters, articles, divisions, subdivisions, or sections
are to the chapters, articles, divisions, subdivisions, or sections of this
Code unless otherwise specified.
(a) The repeal of legislation includes any legislation amendatory of the
legislation repealed. The repeal of any provision which repeals any
provision of prior legislation does not revive such prior provision.
Provisions repealing prior legislation which are substantial
reenactments of provisions of the prior legislation shall be construed as
a continuation of the provisions of the prior legislation, modified or
amended according to the language employed, and not as new
enactments.
(b) The repeal of legislation or part thereof does not affect or impair any
act done, offense committed, or right accruing, accrued, or acquired or
any liability, penalty, forfeiture, or punishment incurred prior to the
time the repeal takes effect, but the same may be enjoyed, asserted,
enforced, prosecuted, or inflicted as fully and to the same extent as if
the repeal had not been effected. Unless otherwise specifically provided
by law, all actions and proceedings, civil or criminal, commenced under
or by virtue of any legislation so repealed and pending immediately
prior to the taking effect of the repeal may be prosecuted and defended
to final effect in the same manner as they might if the provisions were
not so repealed.
(c) When two numbers in a schedule of repeals are connected by a dash,
both such numbers are included as well as all intermediate numbers.
(a) Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code may be made by
amending such provisions by specific reference to the section number
of this Code in the following language: "Section _____ of the Olean Code
of Local Laws is hereby amended to read as follows: . . ." The new
provisions may then be set out in full as desired.
Sec. LL1-3 CHARTER Sec. LL1-5
C:55
Sec. LL1-6. Altering Code.
It shall be unlawful for any person in the city to change or amend by
additions or deletions any part or portion of this Code, to insert or delete
pages, or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with such Code in any
manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the city to be
misrepresented thereby.
Sec. LL1-7. Supplementation of Code.
(b) If a new section not heretofore existing in the Code is to be added, the
following language may be used: "The Olean Code of Local Laws is
hereby amended by adding a section, to be numbered _____, which
section reads as follows: . . ." The new section may then be set out in full
as desired.
(c) All chapters, articles, sections, subsections, paragraphs, or provisions
desired to be repealed should be specifically and expressly repealed by
chapter, article, section, subsection, or paragraph number, as the case
may be.
(a) By contract or by city personnel, supplements to this Code shall be
prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the city. A
supplement to the Code shall include all substantive permanent and
general parts of local laws of a general and permanent nature adopted
during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made
thereby in the Code. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered
that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary,
replace pages which have become obsolete or partially obsolete, and
the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted,
the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest
legislation included in the supplement.
(b) In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code which
have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the omission
thereof from reprinted pages.
(c) When preparing a supplement to this Code, the person authorized to
prepare the supplement may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in
ordinances and parts of local laws included in the supplement, insofar
as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified code. For
example, the person may:
(1) Organize the material into appropriate subdivisions;
(2) Provide appropriate catchlines, headings, and titles for sections
and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement, and
make changes in such catchlines, headings, and titles;
(3) Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to
be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new
material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers;
Sec. LL1-5 OLEAN CODE Sec. LL1-7
C:56
Sec. LL1-8. General penalty; continuing violations.
Sec. LL1-9. Prosecution where different penalties exist for same
offense.
In all cases where the same offense may be made punishable, or shall be
created by different clauses or sections of this Code, the prosecuting officer
may elect under which to proceed, but not more than one recovery shall be
had against the same person for the same offense.
(4) Change the words "this local law" or words of the same meaning to
"this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may
be, or to "sections _____ to _____," inserting section numbers to
indicate the sections of the Code which embody the substantive
sections of the local laws incorporated into the Code; and
(5) Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the
original meaning of local laws inserted into the Code; but, in no
case shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of
material included in the supplement or already embodied in the
Code.
(a) In this section "violation of this Code" means:
(1) Doing an act that is prohibited or made or declared unlawful or an
offense by local law or by rule or regulation authorized by local law;
(2) Failure to perform an act that is required to be performed by local
law or by rule or regulation authorized by local law; or
(3) Failure to perform an act if the failure is declared an offense, a
misdemeanor, or unlawful by local law, or by rule or regulation
authorized by local law.
(b) In this section "violation of this Code" does not include the failure of a
city officer or city employee to perform an official duty, unless it is
provided that failure to perform the duty is to be punished as provided
in this section.
(c) Except as otherwise provided, a person convicted of a violation of this
Code shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $250, imprisonment for
a term not exceeding 15 days, or any combination thereof. With respect
to violations that are continuous with respect to time, each day the
violation continues is a separate offense.
(d) The imposition of a penalty does not prevent revocation or suspension
of a license, permit, or franchise.
(e) Violations of this Code that are continuous with respect to time are a
public nuisance and may be abated by injunctive or other equitable
relief. The imposition of a penalty does not prevent equitable relief.
Sec. LL1-7 CHARTER Sec. LL1-10
C:57
Sec. LL1-10. Severability of parts of Code.
The sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses, and phrases of this part of the
Code are severable. If any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph, or section
is declared unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of a court of
competent jurisdiction, the unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the
remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs, and sections.
Sec. LL1-11. Provisions considered as continuation of existing
legislation.
The provisions appearing in this Code, so far as they are the same as
legislation existing at the time of the adoption of this Code, shall be
considered as a continuation of this part of the Code and not as new
enactments.
Sec. LL1-12. Legislation not affected by Code.
Nothing in this Code or the legislation adopting this Code shall affect
legislation:
Sec. LL1-13. Code does not affect prior offenses, rights, etc.
(1) Promising or guaranteeing the payment of money by or to the city,
authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the city or any evidence of the
city's indebtedness, or any contract or obligation assumed by the city;
(2) Appropriating funds, or establishing or relating to the annual budget;
(3) Imposing taxes which are not inconsistent with this Code;
(4) Establishing positions, classifying employees, or setting salaries not
codified in this Code;
(5) Dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, paving,
widening, or vacating any street or public way;
(6) Establishing or prescribing street grades;
(7) Providing for local improvements and assessing taxes therefor;
(8) Constituting or establishing or amending the charter;
(9) Which rezones specific property;
(10) Dedicating, accepting, or rejecting any plat or subdivision;
(11) Annexing or deannexing property;
(12) Whose purpose has been accomplished;
(13) Which is special although permanent in effect;
(14) Which is temporary although general in effect.
Sec. LL1-10 OLEAN CODE Sec. LL1-13
C:58
Chapter LL2
ADMINISTRATION
CROSS REFERENCES
Definitions and rules of construction
generally, § LL1-2.
ORDINANCE REFERENCES
Administration, Ch. 2. Officers and employees, § 2-101 et seq.
STATE LAW REFERENCES
Unconsol. L. § 9103 (McKinney).
Authority to authorize appearance tickets,
Municipal Home Rule Law § 10(4)(a).
Appearance tickets, Criminal Procedure Law
§ 150.10 et seq.
(a) Nothing in this Code or the legislation adopting this Code affects any
offense or act committed or done, any penalty or forfeiture incurred, or
any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of
this Code.
(b) The adoption of this Code does not authorize or allow any use or the
continuance of any use of a structure or premises in violation of any
legislation in effect on the date of adoption of this Code.
Sec. LL1-13 CHARTER Sec. LL1-13
C:59

ARTICLE I
IN GENERAL
Sec. LL2-1. through Sec. LL2-20. (Reserved)
Sec. LL2-1 CHARTER Sec. LL2-1
C:61

ARTICLE II
CONTINUITY OF GOVERNMENT IN EVENT OF PUBLIC DISASTER
Sec. LL2-21. Definitions. [L.L. No. 1-1964, § 2]
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:
ATTACK — Any attack, actual or imminent, or series of attacks by an
enemy or foreign nation upon the United States causing, or which may
cause, substantial damage or injury to civilian property or persons in the
United States in any manner by sabotage or by the use of bombs, shell fire,
or nuclear, radiological, chemical, bacteriological, or biological means, or
other weapons or processes.
DULY AUTHORIZED DEPUTY — A person authorized to perform all the
powers and duties of a public office if the office is vacant, or at such time
as it lacks administration, due to the death, absence, or disability of the
incumbent officer, where such authorization is provided pursuant to the
provisions of any general, special, or local law other than this local law.
EMERGENCY INTERIM SUCCESSOR — A person designated pursuant to
this local law for possible temporary succession to the powers and duties,
but not the office, of a city officer if neither such officer nor any duly
authorized deputy is able, due to death, absence from the city, or other
physical, mental, or legal reason, to perform the powers and duties of the
office.
PUBLIC DISASTER — A disaster, catastrophe, or emergency, actual or
imminent, of such unusual proportions or extent that:
A substantial number of the residents of the city either sustain injury,
become ill, are infected with disease, have their lives imperiled, are
killed, or die as the result of injury, disease, or exposure, or the property
of a substantial number of such residents is imperiled, damaged, or
destroyed; and
(a)
It is necessary and essential in the interest of public safety, health, and
welfare that the continuity of the government of the city be assured
in order that it be enabled to function properly and efficiently and to
exercise its essential powers in meeting emergency conditions. Such
disasters, catastrophes, and emergencies may include but shall not be
limited to conflagrations, explosions, earthquakes, or other convulsions
of nature, floods, tidal waves, pestilence, riots, insurrections, storms,
prolonged failure of electric power or essential transportation services,
or any incident or occurrence which causes or threatens to cause
danger to life, health, or property from exposure to noxious materials
or radiation.
(b)
Sec. LL2-21 CHARTER Sec. LL2-22
C:63
Sec. LL2-22. Intent of article. [L.L. No. 1-1964, § 1]
The state defense emergency act, in section 29-a thereof [Unconsol. L.
§ 9134.a (McKinney], authorizes political subdivisions of the state to provide
for the continuity of their governments in the event of an actual or imminent
attack upon the United States by an enemy or foreign nation. General
Municipal Law § 60 authorizes political subdivisions to provide for the
continuity of their governments in the event of other public disasters,
catastrophes, or emergencies. Based on the authority contained in such
laws, this local law is adopted so that on such occasions the government of
the city may continue to function properly and efficiently under emergency
circumstances.
Sec. LL2-23. Designation, status, qualifications, and terms of
designation of emergency interim successors. [L.L. No. 1-1964, § 3]
(a) Elective officers. Within 30 days after first entering upon the duties of
his office, each elective officer shall, in addition to any duly authorized
deputy, designate such number of emergency interim successors to the
powers and duties of his office and specify their rank in order of
succession after any duly authorized deputy so that there will be not
less than three duly authorized deputies, or emergency interim
successors, or combination thereof, to perform the powers and duties of
the office.
(b) Appointive officers. Each officer or body of officers empowered by law
to appoint officers shall within the time specified in subsection (a), in
addition to any duly authorized deputy, designate for each such
appointive officer such number of emergency interim successors to
such officers and specify their rank in order of succession after any duly
authorized deputy so that there will be not less than three duly
authorized deputies, or emergency interim successors, or combination
thereof, for each such officer. Where such a body of officers consists of
members having overlapping terms, such body of officers shall review
and, as necessary, revise the previous designations of emergency
interim successors by such board within 30 days after a new member
elected or appointed to such body of officers first enters upon the duties
of his office as a member of such body of officers.
(c) Review of designations. The incumbent in the case of those elective
officers specified in subsection (a) of this section, and the appointing
officer or body of officers specified in subsection (b) of this section shall
from time to time review and, as necessary, promptly revise the
designations of emergency interim successors to insure that at all times
there are at least three duly authorized deputies, or emergency interim
successors, or combination thereof, for each elective and appointive
officer of the city.
(d) Qualifications. No person shall be designated to, nor serve as, an
emergency interim successor unless he is legally qualified to hold the
Sec. LL2-22 OLEAN CODE Sec. LL2-23
C:64
Sec. LL2-24. Assumption of powers and duties of officer by
emergency interim successor. [L.L. No. 1-1964, § 4]
If, in the event of an attack or a public disaster, an officer described in
subsection (a) or subsection (b) of section LL2-23 of this local law, or his
duly authorized deputy, if any, is unable, due to death, absence from the
city, or other physical, mental, or legal reasons, to perform the powers
and duties of the office, the emergency interim successor of such officer
highest in rank in order of succession who is able to perform the powers
and duties of the office shall, except for the power and duty to discharge or
replace duly authorized deputies and emergency interim successors of such
officer, perform the powers and duties of such officer. An emergency interim
successor shall perform such powers and duties only until such time as the
lawful incumbent officer or his duly authorized deputy, if any, resumes the
office or undertakes the performance of the powers and duties of the office,
as the case may be, or until, where an actual vacancy exists, a successor is
duly elected or appointed to fill such vacancy and qualifies as provided by
law.
Sec. LL2-25. Recording and publication of designations. [L.L. No.
1-1964, § 5]
The name, address, and rank in order of succession of each duly authorized
deputy and emergency interim successor shall be filed with the city clerk,
and each designation, replacement, or change in order of succession of any
emergency interim successor shall become effective when the designator
files with such clerk the successor's name, address, and rank in order
of succession. Such clerk shall keep an up-to-date file of all such data
regarding duly authorized deputies and emergency interim successors, and
such file shall be open to public inspection. The clerk shall notify in writing
each designated person of the filing of his name as an emergency interim
successor, his rank in order of succession, and also shall notify in writing
any person previously designated who is replaced or whose place in order
of succession is changed.
office of the person to whose powers and duties he is designated to
succeed.
(e) Status of emergency interim successor. A person designated as an
emergency interim successor shall hold that designation at the pleasure
of the designator, and such a designation shall remain effective until
replaced by another by the authorized designator.
(f) Compensation. An emergency interim successor shall serve without
salary, unless otherwise provided by local law. He shall, however, be
entitled to reimbursement for actual expenses necessarily incurred in
the performance of his powers and duties.
Sec. LL2-23 CHARTER Sec. LL2-26
C:65
Sec. LL2-26. Qualification for taking office. [L.L. No. 1-1964, § 6]
At the time of their designation, or as soon thereafter as possible,
emergency interim successors shall take such oath and do such other
things, if any, as may be required to qualify them to perform the powers and
duties of the office to which they may succeed.
Sec. LL2-27. Quorum and vote requirements. [L.L. No. 1-1964, § 7]
In the event of an attack or a public disaster, the president of the common
council, or his emergency interim successor performing his powers and
duties, may suspend quorum requirements for the common council. If
quorum requirements are suspended, any local law, ordinance, resolution,
or other action requiring enactment, adoption, or approval by an affirmative
vote of a specified proportion of members may be enacted, adopted, or
approved by the affirmative vote of the specified proportion of those voting
thereon.
Sec. LL2-28. Committee chair approval of certain purchase orders.
[L.L. No. 117-96, 11-26-1996]
(a) Any provision of this chapter to the contrary notwithstanding,
whenever any purchase order is submitted by a department the
payment of which will exceed 80% of the budgeted line, the auditor
shall not approve such payment unless the mayor and chairman of the
common council committee having oversight for such department shall
each specifically authorize such expenditure by written approval
provided therefor to the auditor. In the event the mayor or committee
chair shall be unavailable to authorize the purchase order, the common
council president shall have the power to approve the expenditure on
behalf of one but not both of the unavailable parties.
(b) Approval by the mayor and the committee chair of the common council
committee having general oversight of any department of the city
required by this section shall not be required with respect to the
following purchases:
(1) Tree program;
(2) Budgeted equipment purchases (i.e. trucks, cars, etc.);
(3) Salt;
(4) Chemicals;
(5) Gasoline;
(6) Utilities including telephone;
(7) Personnel salaries, benefits, etc.;
(8) Leases and rentals.
Sec. LL2-26 OLEAN CODE Sec. LL2-29
C:66
Sec. LL2-29. through Sec. LL2-35. (Reserved)
Sec. LL2-29 CHARTER Sec. LL2-29
C:67

ARTICLE III
OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
Sec. LL2-36. Residency requirement — Established. [L.L. No.
2-1991, §§ 1—6, 7-23-1991; L.L. No. 5-08, 9-23-2008]
(a) Findings. Through adoption of this section, the common council makes
a legislative determination that those who are residents of the city take
a great interest in promoting the public safety, health and general
welfare of this community as do nonresidents who are employed by the
city. The common council further declares that ability, "work ethic" and
"a team player attitude" are the qualities most desirable of its
employees. The common council therefore concludes that residency by
its employees and officers within the community, while preferred, will
not be a requirement of employment. Candidate selection will follow
past practice in accordance with Civil Service Law and Rules with the
following exception: In the event there are two or more candidates with
the same qualifications and one is a city resident, the position will be
awarded to the city resident.
(b) Definition. Residency shall mean, for the purpose of this section, the
actual principal domicile of an individual, where he normally sleeps and
maintains usual personal and household effects.
(c) Residency for new employees. Except as otherwise provided by law, the
common council hereby establishes a residency requirement for all
prospective employees of the community. Every person initially
employed by the city on or after October 1, 1991, shall, as a
qualification of employment, become a resident of the city within six
months of the date of initial service for the city. During the time of
service of such employees, no individual shall cease to be a resident of
the city.
(d) Posting. A copy of this section shall be provided to all employees upon
initial appointment. However, the failure of the employer to do so shall
not affect the application of this section to any employee appointed
after its effective date. A copy of this law shall also be posted on all
notice boards normally used by the employer for employee
communications.
(e) Breach of residency requirement. Should it be alleged that an employee
is not in compliance with subsection (c) or (d) of this section, as the case
may be, the employee's supervisor, upon becoming aware of the
allegation, shall provide the employee written notice of his alleged
violation and shall allow the employee seven calendar days in which to
respond. Where there is failure to respond or where the response is not,
in the judgment of the employee's supervisor, sufficient to satisfy the
requirements of this section, the employee's supervisor shall set a
hearing date to hear the charge of nonresidency and to make a record
of this hearing. Should an employee establish residency to the
Sec. LL2-36 CHARTER Sec. LL2-36
C:69
Sec. LL2-37. Same—Waiver for building inspection/code
enforcement officer. [L.L. No. 2-1990, §§ 1—4]
satisfaction of the employee's supervisor prior to the hearing date, it
shall result in a cancellation of the hearing authorized by this section.
(f) Hearing. The employee shall be sent a notice of the hearing date at
least 15 days prior to the hearing. The hearing record and the
determination of the supervisor conducting the hearing as to whether
the employee is a nonresident in violation of this section shall be
referred to the mayor for his review and decision. Should the mayor
decide that an employee is a nonresident in violation of this section, the
employee shall be dismissed in accordance with the statutory and/or
contractual procedures, if any, applicable to him under such
circumstances. Upon re-establishing residency, an individual having so
resigned may apply for reinstatement to his position and shall be
reinstated in accordance with Civil Service Law and Rules if the
position is vacant.
(g) Waiver of requirements. If the common council determines by
resolution that it is in the best interests of the city to do so, the
provisions of subsections (c) and (d) of this section may be waived with
respect to an incumbent or incumbents of a particular title or titles in
accordance with the following standards:
(1) Lack of applicants. The requirement of residency may be waived in
those instances where the employer has difficulty hiring the most
qualified person because of the residency requirement.
(2) Necessity for nonresidency. The requirement of residency may be
waived in those instances where it is determined that residency is
not in the best interest of the municipality.
Such a waiver shall not in any way affect the application of
subsections (c) and (d) of this section with respect to any other
title or titles.
(a) Findings. The common council recognizes that positions in the building
inspection/code enforcement office require a high degree of
specialization and training, and that employees having such specialized
skills and capabilities will promote the health, safety, and general
welfare of the people of the city.
(b) Waiver of residency requirement. The common council makes a
legislative determination that the public health, safety, and welfare and
the future of this community will be enhanced by waiver of the
residency requirement for the hiring of building inspection/code
enforcement officers within the city.
(c) Definition of residency. Residency shall mean, for the purposes of this
local law, the actual principal place of domicile of an individual, where
he normally sleeps and maintains usual personal and household effects.
Sec. LL2-36 OLEAN CODE Sec. LL2-37
C:70
Sec. LL2-38. through Sec. LL2-50. (Reserved)
(d) Filling of position by county resident. Notwithstanding any other
provision of law, the position of building inspection/code enforcement
officer may be filled and held by a person otherwise qualifying residing
in the county.
Sec. LL2-37 CHARTER Sec. LL2-38
C:71

ARTICLE IV
APPEARANCE TICKETS
Sec. LL2-51. Definitions. [L.L. No. 3-1985, § 3]
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:
APPEARANCE TICKET — A written notice issued and subscribed by a
building inspector or by a code enforcement officer authorized pursuant to
this local law to issue such appearance ticket, and directing a designated
person to appear in the city court at a designated future time in connection
with the alleged commission of a designated offense.
Sec. LL2-52. Legislative findings. [L.L. No. 3-1985, § 1]
It is in the public interest that offenses and violations of local laws and
ordinances within the city be promptly and expeditiously enforced by those
persons who have the obligation under the charter of the city to enforce
the laws and ordinances of the city. In order to simplify and expedite the
effect of enforcement of the city's laws and ordinances, it is hereby found
to be reasonable to require certain public employees of the city to issue
appearance tickets relating to the enforcement of any local law, ordinance,
rule, or regulation within the city which affects the public health, safety, and
welfare.
Sec. LL2-53. Officers authorized to issue. [L.L. No. 3-1985, §§ 2, 10;
L.L. No. 2-02, § 1, 5-28-2002]
Sec. LL2-54. Issuance, service. [L.L. No. 3-1985, § 4]
A building inspector or a code enforcement officer may issue and serve an
appearance ticket under this article with respect to designated offenses of
less than felony grade when he has reasonable cause to believe that such
person has committed a misdemeanor or has committed a petty offense in
his presence.
(a) Building inspectors, code enforcement officers, and the fire chief are
authorized to issue appearance tickets as defined in the Criminal
Procedure Law § 150.10 relating to the enforcement of any local law,
ordinance, rule, or regulation of the City of Olean or New York State
Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code, which affects the public
health, safety, and welfare of the inhabitants of the city.
(b) A peace officer as defined by Criminal Procedure Law § 2.10 is
authorized under this local law to issue appearance tickets relating to
the enforcement of any local law, ordinance, rule, or regulation
affecting the public health, safety, and welfare of the inhabitants of the
city.
Sec. LL2-51 CHARTER Sec. LL2-55
C:73
Sec. LL2-55. Return. [L.L. No. 3-1985, § 5]
An appearance ticket served under this article must be made returnable in
the city court.
Sec. LL2-56. Personal service. [L.L. No. 3-1985, § 6]
An appearance ticket, other than one issued for a traffic infraction relating
to parking, must be served personally.
Sec. LL2-57. Filing of information or complaint. [L.L. No. 3-1985,
§ 7]
A building inspector or a code enforcement officer who has issued and
served an appearance ticket must, at or before the time such appearance
ticket is returnable, file or cause to be filed with the city court an
information, a simplified information, or a misdemeanor complaint charging
the person named in such appearance ticket with the offense specified
therein. Nothing contained in this section shall authorize the use of a
simplified information when not authorized by law.
Sec. LL2-58. Grounds for dismissal. [L.L. No. 3-1985, § 8]
If such accusatory instrument is not sufficient on its face, as prescribed in
Criminal Procedure Law § 100.40, and if the court is satisfied that on the
basis of the available facts or evidence it would be impossible to draw and
file an accusatory instrument which is sufficient on its face, it must dismiss
such accusatory instrument.
Sec. LL2-59. Grounds for warrant of arrest. [L.L. No. 3-1985, § 9]
If, after the serving of an appearance ticket and filing of a information
or misdemeanor complaint charging the offense designated therein, the
defendant does not appear in the city court at the time such appearance
ticket is returnable, the court may issue a summons or a warrant of arrest
based upon the information or misdemeanor complaint filed.
Sec. LL2-55 OLEAN CODE Sec. LL2-59
C:74
ARTICLE V
Sale or Franchise of City-Owned Property
[Adopted 10-25-2016 by L.L. No. 1-2016]
Sec. LL2-60. Vote required for sale, lease, or franchise of City real
property.
No sale or lease of City real estate or of any franchise belonging to or under
the control of the City shall be made or authorized except by vote of 3/4 of
all the members of the Common Council.
Sec. LL2-61. Sale of property acquired by foreclosure proceedings.
Sec. LL2-62. Sale of property not needed for public or municipal
purposes.
Notwithstanding the provisions of Subdivision 2b of § 23 of the General City
Law, or of any special act, local law or Charter, real property owned by the
City which is not needed for a public or municipal purpose may be leased or
sold at public sale or by private sale. In the event that the Common Council
determines that a private sale would be in the best interests of the City, then
a resolution shall be passed by a vote of at least 3/4 of all of the members
of the Common Council stating that the private sale is determined to be in
the best interest of the City and that the real property which is the subject
of the sale has no viable public purpose or municipal purpose. This section
shall be deemed not to apply to real property in which the City became the
owner by and through a tax sale for nonpayment of real estate taxes.
Sec. LL2-63. Franchise time limit; exception.
No franchise shall be granted or be operative for a period longer than 50
years. The Common Council may, however, grant to the owner or lessee of
an existing franchise, under which operations are being actually carried on,
such additional rights or extensions in the street or streets in which said
franchise exists, upon such terms as the interests of the City may require,
with or without advertisements, as the Common Council may determine;
provided, however, that no such grant shall be operative until also approved
by the Mayor.
(a) Whenever the City of Olean shall become vested with the title to real
property by virtue of as the result of a foreclosure proceeding either
directly or indirectly, the City of Olean is authorized to sell and convey
the real property so acquired, either with or without advertising for
bids, notwithstanding the provisions of any general, specific or local
law.
(b) No such sale shall be effective unless and until such sale shall have
been approved and confirmed by a 3/4 vote of the Common Council,
except that no such approval shall be required when the property is
sold at public auction to the highest bidder.
Sec. LL2-60 CHARTER Sec. LL2-64
C:75
Sec. LL2-64. Demand for referendum.
In case a demand is filed as hereinafter provided, the question whether such
proposed sale or lease of City real estate or a franchise belonging to or
under the control of the City shall be approved shall be submitted to the
voters of the City at a general or special election after public notice to be
published at least once each week for three weeks in the official paper. Such
a demand shall be subscribed and acknowledged by the voters of the City
equal in number to at least 10% of the total number of votes cast therein
at the last preceding general election and shall be filed in the office of the
Clerk before the adoption of the final ordinance or resolution approving and
authorizing such sale and lease. If such a demand is filed, as aforesaid, such
sale or lease of real estate or such franchise shall not take effect unless,
in addition to the foregoing requirements, a majority of the electors voting
thereon at such election shall vote in the affirmative.
Sec. LL2-64 OLEAN CODE Sec. LL2-64
C:76
Chapter LL2.5
BUILDINGS
Sec. LL2-64 CHARTER Sec. LL2-64
C:77

ARTICLE I
Foreclosure Inspections
[Adopted 5-12-2015 by L.L. No. 2-2015]
§ LL2.5-1. Purpose.
§ LL2.5-2. Title.
This article shall be known as the "Foreclosure Inspection Law" of the City
of Olean.
§ LL2.5-3. Definitions.
For the purposes of this article only, the following words shall be interpreted
and defined as follows:
BUILDING — Any building, structure or portion thereof used for residential,
commercial, or industrial purpose.
CERTIFICATE OF CONTINUED OCCUPANCY — That document issued by
the City of Olean upon determination by the Code Enforcement Office or its
designee that a dwelling is fit for human habitation in accordance with the
provisions of the ordinances of the City of Olean and the laws, rules and
regulations of the State of New York. This certificate shall be issued in the
same manner as a certificate of occupancy under Olean City Code Chapter
26.
DIRECTLY — A conveyance at a public sale under Article 13 of the New York
Real Property Actions and Proceedings Law or Article 11 of the New York
Real Property Tax Law.
FORECLOSED PROPERTY — Any property in the City of Olean that is being
transferred directly or indirectly as a result of a proceeding commenced
under Article 13 of the New York Real Property Actions and Proceedings
Law or Article 11 of the New York Real Property Tax Law.
(a) The City of Olean of Common Council has determined that unsafe and
blighted properties pose a threat to life and property in the City of
Olean. The Common Council has further determined that certain
economic conditions have led to an increase in real property
foreclosures under the New York Real Property Tax Law and Real
Property Actions and Proceedings Law and that many of these
foreclosed properties have become neglected and in violation of Olean
City Code Chapter 12. These violations create a continuing safety and
health menace to the persons and property in the City of Olean.
(b) It is the purpose of this article to provide for the safety, health
protection and the general welfare of the persons and property in the
City of Olean by requiring that foreclosed properties be inspected and
issued a certificate of continued occupancy by the Code Enforcement
Office prior to the indexing of the record of conveyance by the City
Assessor.
§ LL2.5-1 CHARTER § LL2.5-3
C:79
INDIRECTLY — A conveyance where the seller is a mortgagee conveying
title as a result of having acquired the same through a deed in lieu of a
foreclosure or judicially through a tax foreclosure under Article 11 of the
New York Real Property Tax Law.
RECORD OF CONVEYANCE — The procedure established under Chapter C,
Article VI, Section 6.007 of the Charter of the City of Olean for the indexing
and recording of all land conveyances in the City of Olean required before
the conveyance can be recorded in the office of the Cattaraugus County
Clerk.
§ LL2.5-4. Inspection and certificate of continued occupancy
required.
§ LL2.5-5. Application and fee.
The mortgagee or lienholder of a foreclosed property seeking to obtain or
transfer title to property for which a certificate of continued occupancy
is required under this article shall make application therefor to the City
of Olean Code Enforcement Office on application forms furnished for that
purpose. The fee for the inspection and certificate shall be as set forth
in Chapter 6 and shall be payable to the City of Olean in advance of the
inspection.
§ LL2.5-6. Effect of application and inspection.
(a) It shall hereafter be unlawful for a property conveyed directly or
indirectly under Article 13 of the New York Real Property Actions and
Proceedings Law or Article 11 of the New York Real Property Tax Law
without having first been inspected and issued a certificate of
occupancy under Chapter 26 of the City of Olean Code of Ordinances.
(b) The City assessor shall not stamp, countersign or otherwise record any
conveyance subject to this article unless such conveyance is
accompanied by a certificate of continued occupancy dated within 30
days of the proposed conveyance.
(a) Every property subject to this article shall be timely granted a
certificate of continued occupancy if such property and any building
thereon are in compliance with the Olean City Code and the laws, rules
and regulations of the State of New York.
(b) If such property is found not to be in compliance with the Olean City
Code and the laws, rules and regulations of the State of New York, a
notice of violation and order to remedy will be issued by the Code
Enforcement Office detailing the violations and corrective measures
necessary prior to the issuance of the certificate of continued
occupancy.
(c) If the Office of Code Enforcement or the Fire Chief, after an inspection,
determines that there is an imminent danger to person or property, the
City of Olean may take immediate action to secure the property for the
§ LL2.5-3 OLEAN CODE § LL2.5-6
C:80
§ LL2.5-7. Applicability of Chapter 26.
To the extent not specifically addressed herein, any party or property
subject to this article shall have all the procedural remedies available under
Chapter 26 of the Olean City Code of Ordinances.
public's safety, and any expense incurred in doing so shall be a lien
on the property enforceable in the same manner as a lien for the
nonpayment of water and sewer rents.
§ LL2.5-6 CHARTER § LL2.5-7
C:81
Chapter LL3
ELECTIONS
ORDINANCE REFERENCES
Common council, § 2-21 et seq. Elections, Ch. 7.
STATE LAW REFERENCES
Election Law § 1-100 et seq. Compensation of election inspectors, poll
clerks, etc., Election Law § 3-420.
Sec. LL3-1. Conduct of special elections. [L.L. No. 1-1983, §§ 2, 3]
Sec. LL3-2. Compensation of election officials. [L.L. No. 4-1967, § 1]
The compensation paid inspectors of election, ballot clerks, poll clerks, and
all other election personnel of the city shall be determined by the common
council by the passage of appropriate resolutions fixing the compensation
of the above entitled officials.
Sec. LL3-3. Election wards. [L.L. No. 1-1992, 4-28-1992; L.L. No.
1-2004, 2-24-2004]
(a) Whenever a special election not governed by the Election Law is called
under the authority of the Municipal Home Rule Law or any other law
permitting or requiring such a special election, the city clerk shall
request the county board of elections to conduct the special election of
the city at the city's expense, as if the special election were governed by
applicable provisions of the Election Law. If the county board of
elections declines to conduct the special election, the city clerk shall
conduct it as if it were governed by applicable provisions of the Election
Law, excepting that the statement of the result of such election and all
papers relating to such election as provided by the Election Law shall
be filed with and returned to the city clerk by such inspectors of
election.
(b) Voters may not vote in such a special election by absentee ballot.
(a) The following wards shall be the seven election wards of the city:
(1) Ward 1. District 1 shall comprise all that part of the city as follows:
Beginning at the intersection of the center line of North Union
Street Extension (Route 16) and the north line of the city; thence
east along the north line of the city approximately 1,800 feet to the
east line of the city; thence south along the east line of the city to
the center line of Genesee Street; thence west along the center line
of Genesee Street to the center line of Third Avenue; thence south
§ LL2.5-7 OLEAN CODE Sec. LL3-3
C:82
along the center line of Third Avenue to the center line of School
Street; thence west along the center line of School Street to the
east bank of Olean Creek; thence northwest along the east bank
of Olean Creek to the center line of North Union Street Extension
(Route 16); thence north along the center line of North Union
Street Extension (Route 16) to the north line of the city which is the
point of beginning.
Ward 1. District 2 shall comprise all that part of the city as follows:
Beginning at the intersection of the center line of Genesee Street
and the east line of the city; thence south along the east line
of the city approximately 1,350 feet to the north line of the city,
thence east along the north line of the city approximately 1,250
feet to the center line of Queen Street; thence south along the
center line of Queen Street to the center line of Prospect Avenue;
thence west along the center line of Prospect Avenue to the center
line of Alder Street; thence south and southwest along the center
line of Alder Street to the south line of the Norfolk Southern
Corporation right-of-way; thence northwest along the south line of
the Norfolk Southern Corporation right-of-way to the east bank of
Olean Creek; thence north along the east bank of Olean Creek to
a point, said point being the extension of the center line of School
Street; thence east along the center line of School Street to the
center line of Third Avenue; thence north along the center line
of Third Avenue to the center line of Genesee Street; thence east
along the center line of Genesee Street to the east line of the city
which is the point of beginning.
(2) Ward 2. District 1 shall comprise all that part of the city as follows:
Beginning at the intersection of the center line of Queen Street and
the north line of the city; thence east along the north line of the city
approximately 1,450 feet to the east line of the city; thence south
along the east line of the city approximately 1,100 feet to the north
line of the city; thence east along the north line of the city
approximately 1,300 feet to the center line of Cherry Street; thence
south along the center line of Cherry Street to the center line of
Brook Street; thence west along the center line of Brook Street to
the center line of Houghton Avenue; thence south along the center
line of Houghton Avenue to the center line of Seneca Avenue;
thence northwest along the center line of Seneca Avenue to the
center line of Alder Street; thence northeast and north along the
center line of Alder Street to the center line of Prospect Avenue;
thence east along the center line of Prospect Avenue to the center
line of Queen Street; thence north along the center line of Queen
Street to the north line of the city which is the point of beginning.
Sec. LL3-3 CHARTER Sec. LL3-3
C:83
Ward 2. District 2 shall comprise all that part of the city as follows:
Beginning at the center line of Brook Street and the center line
of Cherry Street; thence south along the center line of Cherry
Street and its extension to the south bank of the Allegheny River;
thence west, southwest and northwest along the south bank of
the Allegheny River approximately 4,300 feet to the east line of
the city; thence north along the east line of the city extended to
the north bank of the Allegheny River; thence northwest along the
north bank of the Allegheny River to the east bank of Olean Creek;
thence north along the east bank of Olean Creek to the south
line of the Norfolk Southern Corporation right-of-way; thence
southeast along the south line of the Norfolk Southern
Corporation right-of-way to a point, said point being the extension
of the center line of Alder Street; thence northeast along such
extension to the center line of Seneca Avenue; thence southeast
along the center line of Seneca Avenue to the center line of
Houghton Avenue; thence north along the center line of Houghton
Avenue to the center line of Brook Street; thence east along the
center line of Brook Street to the center line of Cherry Street
which is the point of beginning.
(3) Ward 3. District 1 shall comprise all that part of the city as follows:
Beginning at the intersection of the center line of South 7th Street
and the center line of West Greene Street; thence east along the
center line of West Greene Street to the center line of South 4th
Street; thence south along the center line of South 4th Street and
its extension to the north bank of the Allegheny River; thence
southeast and northeast along the north bank of the Allegheny
River to the west bank of Olean Creek; thence north along the west
bank of Olean Creek to the center line of East State Street (Route
417); thence east along the center line of East State Street (Route
417) to the east bank of Olean Creek; thence south along the east
bank of Olean Creek to the north bank of the Allegheny River;
thence southeast along the north bank of the Allegheny River
approximately 2,660 feet to a point, said point being the extension
of the east line of the city; thence south along such extension and
east line of the city approximately 1,980 feet to the south line of the
city; thence west along south line of the city approximately 2,400
feet to the east line of the city; thence south along the east line of
the city approximately 1,250 feet to the south line of the city;
thence west along the south line of the city approximately 4,300
feet to the west line of the city; thence north along the west line of
the city approximately 3,750 feet to the south bank of the Allegheny
River; thence southeast along the south bank of the Allegheny
River approximately 370 feet to a point, said point being the
extension of the center line of South 7th Street; thence north along
such extension to the center line of West Greene Street which is the
point of beginning.
Sec. LL3-3 OLEAN CODE Sec. LL3-3
C:84
Ward 3. District 2 shall comprise all that part of the city as follows:
Beginning at the intersection of the center line of West Greene
Street and the center line of South 4th Street; thence north along
the center line of South 4th Street to the center line of West
Henley Street; thence east along the center line of West Henley
Street to the center line of South Union Street (Route 16); thence
north along the center line of South Union Street (Route 16) to
the center line of East State Street (Route 417); thence east along
the center line of East State Street (Route 417) to the west bank
of Olean Creek; thence south along the west bank of Olean Creek
to the north bank of the Allegheny River; thence southwest and
northwest along the north bank of the Allegheny River to a point,
said point being the extension of South 4th Street; thence north
along such extension and center line of South 4th Street to the
center line of West Greene Street which is the point of beginning.
(4) Ward 4. District 1 shall comprise all that part of the city as follows:
Beginning at the intersection of the center line of North 7th Street
and the center line of Wayne Street; thence east along the center
line of Wayne Street to the west line of the Norfolk Southern
Corporation right-of-way; thence southeast along the west line of
the Norfolk Southern Corporation right-of-way to the east bank of
Olean Creek; thence south along the east bank of Olean Creek to a
point, said point being the extension of Laurel Avenue; thence west
along such extension and center line of Laurel Avenue to the center
line of North Clinton Street; thence north along the center line of
North Clinton Street to the center line of Tompkins Street; thence
west along the center line of Tompkins Street to the center line of
North Barry Street; thence north along the center line of North
Barry Street to the center line of Hamilton Street; thence west
along the center line of Hamilton Street to the center line of North
Union Street (Route 16); thence south along the center line of
North Union Street (Route 16) to the center line of Laurens Street;
thence west along the center line of Laurens Street to the center
line of North 4th Street; thence north along the center line of North
4th Street to the center line of Washington Street; thence west
along the center line of Washington Street to the center line of
North 7th Street; thence north along the center line of North 7th
Street to the center line of Wayne Street which is the point of
beginning.
Sec. LL3-3 CHARTER Sec. LL3-3
C:85
Ward 4. District 2 shall comprise all that part of the city as follows:
Beginning at the intersection of the extension of the center line
of Laurel Avenue and the east bank of Olean Creek; thence south
along the east bank of Olean Creek to the center line of East
State Street (Route 417); thence west along the center line of East
State Street (Route 417) to the center line of South Union Street
(Route 16); thence south along the center line of South Union
Street (Route 16) to the center line of West Henley Street; thence
west along the center line of West Henley Street to the center line
of South 7th Street; thence north along the center line of South
7th Street and North 7th Street to the center line of Washington
Street; thence east along the center line of Washington Street to
the center line of North 4th Street; thence south along the center
line of North 4th Street to the center line of Laurens Street; thence
east along the center line of Laurens Street to the center line of
North Union Street (Route 16); thence north along the center line
of North Union Street (Route 16) to the center line of Hamilton
Street; thence east along the center line of Hamilton Street to the
center line of North Barry Street; thence south along the center
line of North Barry Street to the center line of Tompkins Street;
thence east along the center line of Tompkins Street to the center
line of North Clinton Street; thence south along the center line of
North Clinton Street to the center line of Laurel Avenue; thence
east along the center line of Laurel Avenue and its extension to the
east bank of Olean Creek which is the point of beginning.
(5) Ward 5. District 1 shall comprise all that part of the city as follows:
Beginning at the intersection of the center line of North 12th Street
and the center line of Wayne Street; thence east along the center
line of Wayne Street to the center line of North 7th Street; thence
south along the center line of North 7th Street to the center line of
West State Street (Route 417); thence west along the center line of
West State Street (Route 417) to the center line of North 9th Street;
thence north along the center line of North 9th Street to the center
line of Washington Street; thence west along the center line of
Washington Street to the center line of North 12th Street; thence
north along the center line of North 12th Street to the center line of
Wayne Street which is the point of beginning.
Sec. LL3-3 OLEAN CODE Sec. LL3-3
C:86
Ward 5. District 2 shall comprise all that part of the city as follows:
Beginning at the intersection of the center line of West State
Street (Route 417) and the center line of South 7th Street; thence
south along the center line of South 7th Street to the center line
of West Henley Street; thence east along the center line of West
Henley Street to the center line of South 4th Street; thence south
along the center line of South 4th Street to the center line of West
Greene Street; thence west along the center line of West Greene
Street to the center line of South 7th Street; thence south along
the extension of the center line of South 7th Street to the south
bank of the Allegheny River; thence northwest along the south
bank of the Allegheny River approximately 1,960 feet to a point,
said point being the extension of South 13th Street; thence north
along the extension of the center line of South 13th Street to the
center line of Irving Street; thence east along the center line of
Irving Street to the center line of South 11th Street; thence north
along the center line of South 11th Street to the center line of West
State Street (Route 417); thence west along the center line of West
State Street (Route 417) to the center line of North 12th Street;
thence north along the center line of North 12th Street to the
center line of Washington Street; thence east along the center line
of Washington Street to the center line of North 9th Street; thence
south along the center line of North 9th Street to the center line
of West State Street (Route 417); thence east along the center line
of West State Street (Route 417) to the center line of South 7th
Street which is the point of beginning.
(6) Ward 6. District 1 shall comprise all that part of the city as follows:
Beginning at the intersection of the west line of the city and the
south line of the Southern Tier Extension Railroad Authority rightof-
way; thence northeast along the south line of the Southern Tier
Extension Railroad Authority right-of-way to the center line of
Buffalo Street; thence southeast and east along the center line of
Buffalo Street to the center line of North 12th Street; thence south
along the center line of North 12th Street to the center line of West
State Street (Route 417); thence west along the center line of West
State Street (Route 417) to the center line of North 18th Street;
thence north along the center line of North 18th Street to the
center line of Washington Street; thence west along the center line
of Washington Street to the center line of North 19th Street; thence
north along the center line of North 19th Street and its extension to
the center line of Two Mile Creek; thence southwest along the
center line of Two Mile Creek approximately 3,350 feet to the west
line of the city; thence north along the west line of the city
approximately 900 feet to the north line of the city; thence east
along the north line of the city approximately 1,360 feet to the west
line of the city; thence north along the west line of the city to the
south line of the Southern Tier Extension Railroad Authority rightof-
way which is the point of beginning.
Sec. LL3-3 CHARTER Sec. LL3-3
C:87
Ward 6. District 2 shall comprise all that part of the city as follows:
Beginning at the intersection of the center line of North 12th
Street and the center line of West State Street (Route 417); thence
east along the center line of West State Street (Route 417) to the
center line of South 11th Street; thence south along the center
line of South 11th Street to the center line of Irving Street; thence
west along the center line of Irving Street to the center line of
South 13th Street; thence south along the extension of South
13th Street to the south bank of the Allegheny River; thence
west and southwest along the south bank of the Allegheny River
approximately 5,580 feet to the west line of the city; thence north
along the west line of the city approximately 4,550 feet to the
center line of Two Mile Creek; thence northeast along the center
line of Two Mile Creek approximately 3,350 feet to a point, said
point being the extension of the center line of North 19th Street;
thence south along such extension and center line of North 19th
Street to the center line of Washington Street; thence east along
the center line of Washington Street to the center line of North
18th Street; thence south along the center line of North 18th
Street to the center line of West State Street (Route 417); thence
east along the center line of West State Street (Route 417) to the
center line of North 12th Street which is the point of beginning.
(7) Ward 7. District 1 shall comprise all that part of the city as follows:
Beginning at the intersection of the north line of the city and the
east bank of Olean Creek; thence southwest and southeast along
the east bank of Olean Creek to the north line of the city; thence
east along the north line of the city approximately 3,350 feet to the
center line of North Union Street Extension (Route 16); thence
south along the center line of North Union Street Extension (Route
16) to the center line of North Union Street; thence northwest
along the center line of North Union Street to the center line of
Gardiner Avenue; thence southwest along the center line of
Gardiner Avenue to the center line of Maple Street; thence
northwest along the center line of Maple Street to the center line of
West Forest Street; thence southwest along the center line of West
Forest Street to the center line of Spruce Street; thence northwest
along the center line of Spruce Street to the center line of West
Pine Street; thence southwest along the center line of West Pine
Street extended to the west line of the Norfolk Southern
Corporation right-of-way; thence northwest along the west line of
the Norfolk Southern Corporation right-of-way to the center line of
Franklin Street; thence southwest along the center line of Franklin
Street to the center line of Johnson Street; thence northwest and
north along the center line of Johnson Street to the northwest line
of the city; thence northeast along the northwest line of the city
approximately 4,700 feet to the north line; thence east along the
north line of the city approximately 820 feet to the east bank of
Olean Creek which is the point of beginning.
Sec. LL3-3 OLEAN CODE Sec. LL3-3
C:88
Chapter LL4
HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES
ORDINANCE REFERENCES
Health and human services, Ch. 10.
STATE LAW REFERENCES
Hearing held pursuant to local law on site
selection of community residential facilities,
Mental Hygiene Law § 41.34(c)(2).
Public Health Law § 1 et seq.
Local health organization, Public Health Law
§ 300 et seq.
Ward 7. District 2 shall comprise all that part of the city as follows:
Beginning at the intersection of the center line of North Union
Street Extension (Route 16) and the east bank of Olean Creek;
thence southeast and south along the east bank of Olean Creek to
the south line of the Norfolk Southern Corporation right-of-way;
thence northwest along the south line of the Norfolk Southern
Corporation right-of-way to the center line of Wayne Street; thence
west along the center line of Wayne Street to the center line of
Buffalo Street; thence west and northwest along the center line
of Buffalo Street to the south line of the Southern Tier Extension
Railroad Authority right-of-way; thence southwest along the south
line of the Southern Tier Extension Railroad Authority right-ofway
to the west line of the city; thence north along the west
line of the city approximately 1,880 feet to the northwest line
of the city; thence northeast along the northwest line of the city
approximately 3,350 feet to the center line of Johnson Street;
thence south and southeast along the center line of Johnson Street
to the center line of Franklin Street; thence northeast along the
center line of Franklin Street to the west line of the Norfolk
Southern Corporation right-of-way; thence southeast along the
west line of the Norfolk Southern Corporation right-of-way to a
point, said point being the extension of West Pine Street; thence
northeast along such extension to the center line of Spruce Street;
thence southeast along the center line of Spruce Street to the
center line of West Forest Street; thence northeast along the
center line of West Forest Street to the center line of Maple Street;
thence southeast along the center line of Maple Street to the
center line of Gardiner Avenue; thence northeast along the center
line of Gardiner Avenue to the center line of North Union Street;
thence southeast along the center line of North Union Street
to the center line of North Union Street Extension (Route 16);
thence north along the center line of North Union Street Extension
(Route 16) to the east bank of Olean Creek which is the point of
beginning.
Sec. LL3-3 CHARTER Sec. LL3-3
C:89
Sec. LL4-1. Hearing of response to proposed location of community
residential facility for mentally disabled. [L.L. No. 2-1982, § 2]
Whenever a sponsoring agency shall notify the mayor in writing that it
intends to establish a community residential facility for the mentally
disabled at a specified address within the city, the mayor may set the time
and place for a public hearing covering the sponsoring agency's notification
to the city. Such public hearing shall be held prior to the city's response
to the sponsoring agency and the commissioner of the office of mental
retardation and development disabilities.
Chapter LL4.5
PROCUREMENT POLICIES
Sec. LL3-3 OLEAN CODE Sec. LL4-1
C:90
ARTICLE I
Best Value for Public Works Contracts
[Adopted 11-24-2015 by L.L. No. 6-20152]
§ LL4.5-1. Legislative intent.
It is the intent of this article to enhance the City's ability to identify the
lowest responsible bidder on public works construction projects by
instituting more comprehensive submission requirements and an evaluation
system which is in compliance with New York State General Municipal
Law. The City, based upon its experience, has determined that quality
workmanship, efficient operation, safety, and timely completion of projects
are not necessarily assured by awarding a public works contract solely on
the basis of the low price. This article establishing uniformity of guidelines
for determining the responsibility of bidders will assure efficient use of
taxpayer dollars, will promote public safety, and is in the public interest.
§ LL4.5-2. Applicability.
This article shall apply to construction projects subject to the competitive
bidding requirements of General Municipal Law § 103 and advertised for
bids on or after the effective date.
§ LL4.5-2.1. Public works.
For purposes of this article, the term "public works" shall mean the
following: any constructing, altering, reconstructing, repairing,
rehabilitating, refinishing, refurbishing, remodeling, remediating,
renovating, custom fabricating, maintenance, landscaping, improving,
moving, wrecking, painting, decorating, demolishing, and adding to or
subtracting from any public building, structure, highway, roadway, street,
alley, bridge, sewer, drain, ditch, sewage disposal plant, water work,
parking facility, railroad, excavation, or other project, development, real
property, or improvement, or to any part thereof, whether or not the
performance of the work herein described involves the addition to, or
fabrication into, any structure, project or development, real property or
improvement herein described of any material or article of merchandise,
which is paid for out of public funds in an amount exceeding $250,000.
The term also includes any public works leased by the City under a lease
containing an option to purchase exceeding the threshold of $250,000
established hereby.
§ LL4.5-2.2. Responsible bidder questionnaire.
(a) New York State Vendor Responsibility Questionnaire. Before a public
works contract may be awarded pursuant to General Municipal Law
§ 103, contracting officials shall determine the responsibility of
2. Editor's Note: This local law also superseded former Art. I, Best Value for Public Works
Contracts, adopted 2-25-2014 by L.L. No. 1-2014.
§ LL4.5-1 CHARTER § LL4.5-2.2
C:91
§ LL4.5-2.3. Requirements.
All general bidders and sub-bidders (including sub-subbidders) for
construction projects funded by the City of Olean as set forth above in
§ LL4.5-2 shall, as a condition of the bid, agree, in writing, that they shall
comply with the obligations established by this article.
potential contractors and subcontractors by reviewing uniform
questionnaires submitted by each contractor and subcontractor for
the project. All bidders are required to submit the New York State
Vendor Responsibility Questionnaire For-Profit Construction (CCA-2)
form (hereinafter "uniform questionnaire") with appendices A, B, and C
to ascertain information as to integrity, responsibility and competence.
(b) List of subcontractors. Each bidder shall submit a list of the
subcontractors used in the calculation of the bid upon submission of the
uniform questionnaire.
(c) Conformity by subcontractors. Subcontractors shall complete the
uniform questionnaire and meet the same responsibility standards as
contractors to be eligible to work on public work contracts.
Questionnaires shall be completed by subcontractors no later than the
time and date of the award. The City reserves the right to reject the bid
on the basis of unsatisfactory questionnaire responses by a
subcontractor designated to perform work by the bidding general
contractor.
(1) The City shall require that all bidders fill out the uniform questionnaire
in order to ascertain the financial responsibility, accountability,
reliability, skill, judgment, and integrity of the apparent lowest bidder.
(2) The City shall utilize the Guidelines for Responsibility Determinations
as set forth in Executive Order No. 170 (9 NYCRR 4.170) in evaluating
the responsibility of contractors and determining the lowest
responsible bidder.
(3) Contractors and all subcontractors shall properly classify their workers
as employees rather than as independent contractors, unless those
workers meet the definition of "independent contractor" as defined by
the Internal Revenue Service, and shall treat said employees
accordingly for purposes of workers compensation insurance coverage,
unemployment insurance, employment taxes, and social security taxes.
(4) The contractors and all subcontractors shall require each employee to
sign in and out at the beginning and end of each day, and list next to his
or her name his or her craft, and to provide such information to the City
Director of Public Works ("the Director") on a biweekly basis. Such
information shall be kept in the Commissioner's office for a period of
three years, and copies of same shall be made available to the public
immediately upon Freedom of Information Law (FOIL) request.
§ LL4.5-2.2 OLEAN CODE § LL4.5-2.4
C:92
§ LL4.5-2.4. Procedure.
(a) The Director, or other department head soliciting public works bids,
shall distribute to all bidders a copy of this article and the uniform
questionnaire, and thereafter collect from bidders all information
required by this article, and keep such information in his/her offices for
a period of three years, review of which will be made available to the
public.
(b) If a bidder fails or refuses to provide all the information required by this
article, or provides false information, the bidder's bid will be rejected at
the bid opening.
(c) The Director shall post a list of the three low apparent bidders on the
City of Olean website five days after the bid opening.
(d) If the apparent lowest bidder is deemed not responsible, then the next
lowest bidder will be reviewed and so on until the lowest bidder is
deemed responsible and selected as the lowest responsible bidder. In
the event a bidder fails to furnish the requested information, the bidder
shall be deemed disqualified and determined to be not responsible, and
the next lowest bidder shall become the apparent lowest bidder.
(e) Not later than five calendar days prior to a final determination that the
apparent lowest bidder is not responsible, the City will notify the party
of same, in writing, stating the reasons and setting forth a reasonable
time, date and place for the apparent low bidder to appear and be
heard.
(f) If the bid of the lowest responsible bidder appears disproportionately
low when compared with estimates obtained by or on behalf of the City
and/or compared to other bids submitted (10% or greater disparity), the
City reserves the right to inquire further of the apparent lowest bidder
to determine whether the bid contains mathematical errors, omissions
and/or erroneous assumptions, and whether the apparent lowest bidder
has the capability to perform and complete the contract for the bid
amount.
(g) If a bidder is found to have willfully violated New York Labor Law § 220
within the previous five years, that bidder shall automatically be
deemed "not responsible," and his bid shall be rejected unless the
Commissioner, subject to review by the Public Works Committee of the
Olean City Legislature, determines otherwise. Otherwise, based on all
of the information collected pursuant to this article and any other factor
deemed relevant, the Commissioner of Public Works, or other
department heads soliciting public works bids, shall determine if the
apparent lowest bidder is in fact responsible.
(h) Credit toward bid award. The following criteria shall be used as a credit
toward a bid determining the lowest responsible bidder. If the City
applies any credit(s) towards a bid, the credit(s) will not reduce the
amount of a contract. EXAMPLE: $1,000,000 bid received a $50,000
§ LL4.5-2.4 CHARTER § LL4.5-2.4
C:93
§ LL4.5-2.5. Incomplete submissions by bidders and subcontractors.
It is the sole responsibility of the contractor to comply with all submission
requirements at the time it submits its bid to the City. The submission
requirements also apply to all subcontractors, except that the contractor
shall submit all subcontractor questionnaires to the City of Olean no later
than the date and time of the contract award. Contractor and/or
subcontractor submissions deemed nonresponsive will result in automatic
rejection of the bid.
§ LL4.5-2.6. Sanctions.
local bidder credit. For purposes of determining the lowest bidder, the
contractor's bid is $950,000. However, the contract price will remain
$1,000,000.
(1) The City shall apply a credit equal to 5% or $50,000, whichever is
less, based on the local bidder's bid. A local bidder is an individual
or business entity that establishes it has a place of business located
in the county where the work is to be performed for at least one
year prior to the deadline for submitting bids, and can demonstrate
for one year prior to the deadline for submitting bids that it has
paid a minimum of $5,000 in sales tax in the county where the work
is to be performed. In the event a local bidder does not bid on the
project, a bidder that establishes it has a place of business located
within an adjacent county in New York where the work is to be
performed for at least one year prior to the deadline for submitting
bids will receive a credit equal to 1%, or $10,000, whichever is less;
and
(2) The City shall apply a credit equal to 2% or $20,000, whichever is
less, towards the bid of a bidder with a local workforce. "Local
workforce" means at least 25% of the bidder's construction
employees reside in the county where the work is to be performed
or in a county adjacent to the county where the work is to be
performed. The bidder is not required to have a place of business in
the county where the work is to be performed for this credit to
apply.
(3) It is the sole responsibility of the bidder to request the credit based
upon any of the above criteria.
(a) Any bidder or subcontractor bidder who fails to comply with any of the
obligations described as determined by the Commissioner may, in the
sole discretion of the City, and only following an opportunity for the
bidder to be heard, be subject to one or more of the following sanctions:
(1) Temporary suspension of work on the project until compliance is
obtained; or
§ LL4.5-2.4 OLEAN CODE § LL4.5-2.6
C:94
§ LL4.5-2.7. Public records.
All information submitted by a contractor or subcontractor pursuant to this
article is a public record and shall be immediately available to any person
upon request made pursuant to the Freedom of Information Law (Public
Officers Law Article 6).
§ LL4.5-2.8. Materiality.
The requirements of this article are a material part of the bid documents,
and the contract and the successful bidder shall insert this article in all
subcontracts.
(2) Withholding by the City of payment due under the contract until
compliance is obtained; or
(3) Permanent removal from any further work on the project; or
(4) Liquidated damages payable to the City in an amount equal to 5%
of the dollar vahie of the general contract.
(b) In addition to the above sanctions, any contractor or subcontractor, or
principal officer who has been determined to have violated any of the
provisions of this article shall be barred from performing any work on
future contracts awarded by the City for six months for the first
violation, three years for the second violation, and permanently for the
third violation.
(c) Any sum collected as a penalty pursuant to this section shall be applied
toward enforcement and administration costs.
§ LL4.5-2.6 CHARTER § LL4.5-2.8
C:95

ARTICLE II
Best Value Procurement Policy
[Adopted 3-11-2014 by L.L. No. 2-2014]
§ LL4.5-3. Purpose.
The Olean City Common Council of the City of Olean hereby enacts the
following article pursuant to the State of New York General Municipal Law
Section 103(1) and of all other applicable laws.
§ LL4.5-4. Definition of best value.
§ LL4.5-5. Procurement policy.
The City of Olean shall update its procurement policy in accordance with
the provisions of this article.
(a) Accordingly, the City of Olean hereby authorizes the use of the best
value standard as part of the City procurement policies.
(b) Best value is defined in New York State Finance Law Section 163. When
awarding contracts under the best value standard, the City must
consider the overall combination of quality, price and other elements of
the required commodity or service that in total are optimal relative to
the needs of the City of Olean. Use of the best value standard must rely,
wherever possible, on objective and quantifiable analysis. The best
value standard may identify as a quantitative factor whether offers are
small businesses or certified minority- or women-owned business
enterprises as defined in New York Executive Law Section 310. The
best value standard may only be used for purchase contracts, which
includes contracts for service work, but excludes any purchase
necessary for the completion of a public works contract pursuant to
Article 8 of the Labor Law.
§ LL4.5-3 CHARTER § LL4.5-5
C:97
Chapter LL5
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
CROSS REFERENCES
Taxation and assessments, Ch. LL6.
§ LL4.5-5 OLEAN CODE § LL4.5-5
C:98
ARTICLE I
IN GENERAL
Sec. LL5-1. City constitutes separate highway district. [1971
Charter Laws, § 274; Laws of N.Y. (1915) ch. 535, § 91]
The city shall constitute a separate highway district, and the common
council shall have the superintendence thereof and within the limits thereof
shall have all the powers of commissioners of highways of towns, subject to
the provisions of this chapter.
Sec. LL5-2. Power of common council generally. [1971 Charter
Laws, §§ 276, 333; L.L. No. 3-1964, § 9; L.L. No. 6-1968, § 11]
Sec. LL5-3. Sec. LL5-15. (Reserved)
(a) The common council may discontinue any street or mapped street, and
lay out, widen, narrow, straighten, open, alter, change, and grade or
otherwise improve roads, avenues, streets, public parks or squares, and
lanes, crosswalks, and sidewalks within the city. For that purpose the
council may receive, accept, acquire, take, and appropriate any lands
within the city including such as may have been acquired or are now
used, held, or owned for cemetery, railroad, or other public uses or
purposes. Lands may be acquired for such purposes by the common
council in the manner provided by law.
(b) The common council may include in the annual budget such sums as
deemed necessary to defray the city's portion of the construction of new
pavements.
Sec. LL5-1 CHARTER Sec. LL5-3
C:99

ARTICLE II
IMPROVEMENTS
DIVISION 1
GENERALLY
Sec. LL5-16. Petition for general improvements. [1971 Charter
Laws, §§ 278-281; Laws of N.Y. (1915) ch. 535, § 92]
(a) Ten freeholders residing in the city may present to the common council
a petition in writing requesting it to consider the making of
improvements for any of the purposes stated in section LL5-2 and, when
lands are necessary to be acquired, it shall describe the land to be
taken, the names and residences of the owners thereof, when known,
and, if a street is to be narrowed or discontinued, the names of the
owners of the adjoining lands when known. The petition shall be filed in
the office of the city clerk.
(b) On presentation of such petition, the common council must meet and
examine such petition. If it decides that the improvement ought
probably to be made, it shall so decide by resolution. It may likewise so
decide upon its own motion and without such petition.
(c) Upon making such decision, the common council must fix a time when it
will meet and consider objections to the making of such improvement
and the taking of such land, if any is to be taken, and it shall thereupon
give at least 10 days notice by certified mail of the time and place of
such hearing. The notice must describe the land proposed to be taken,
the names of the owners thereof, when known, and if a street is to be
narrowed or discontinued, the names of the owners of the adjoining
lands, when known, and the general purpose of the improvement. The
notice must be given by certified mail as provided in this subsection to
the owner of the land, or in a case of narrowing or discontinuing a
street or mapped street, adjoining owners. The notice shall be mailed to
the last known place of residence of the owner. Any person interested
may be heard and introduce testimony before the common council upon
such hearing, and the common council may adjourn such hearing from
time to time as it shall deem necessary. If any person upon whom the
notice is served does not appear at the time specified and make
objections in writing to the petition and to the notice as to its form or
sufficiency or generally as to the proposed improvement, specifically
pointing out the facts, omissions, or objections thereto, the person shall
be deemed to have waived objections.
(d) The common council shall hear and determine the matter. If it shall
determine to make such improvements, it shall so declare by resolution
to be entered in its minutes, describing the lands if any are to be taken,
and thereupon it may proceed to take possession of such lands for such
purposes.
Sec. LL5-16 CHARTER Sec. LL5-17
C:101
Sec. LL5-17. Sidewalk construction. [L.L. No. 3-1990, § 1]
(a) The common council shall have the power to cause sidewalks on the
streets and highways in the city to be constructed upon notice to the
affected property owners, and after public hearing conducted by the
common council, and to determine and prescribe the manner and
location of construction, the materials to be used thereon, and the
quality of such materials, and direct that the whole cost of the work be
then assessed upon the property abutting the public street in front of
which the work is performed.
(b) If the construction of sidewalks shall be ordered by the common
council, the director of the department of public works shall notify the
owners of any premises in front of which such work shall be required to
be done that if such sidewalk construction is not done by the owners
within 20 days, such construction shall be done by the city, and the
expense thereof shall be assessed upon the premises.
(c) All notices by the city to landowners shall be served personally or by
mailing such notices in the manner prescribed for the mailing of taxes
due by the city assessor.
(d) If any such work shall not be done within the time specified, the
department of public works shall cause such work to be done, and the
full expense thereof shall be charged and a lien assessed upon such
premises in accordance with the charter. Notwithstanding the
provisions of this section, the expense assessed for such construction
shall not include the following:
(1) The expense of installing that portion of the sidewalk exceeding a
width of 10 feet;
(2) The expense of installing curbs or curb cuts when such work is
caused to be done pursuant to this article;
(3) The expense of ornamentation with trees when such work is caused
to be undertaken pursuant to this article; and
(4) The expense of constructing the superstructures over streams or
streambeds.
(e) If the city undertakes the ordered work utilizing bonded funds, the cost
of construction to be repaid by the owners shall be payable in equal
installments over the duration of the bond, not to exceed a five-year
period with interest charged at bonded interest, not to exceed 6% per
annum.
(f) In this section:
(1) Sidewalk means that portion of a street outside of the roadway
used or set aside for use of pedestrians.
Sec. LL5-17 OLEAN CODE Sec. LL5-17
C:102
Sec. LL5-18. through Sec. LL5-30. (Reserved)
(2) Street means the entire area conveyed, acquired, or dedicated to
public use and passage. The word "street" shall include in its
meaning the word "avenue," "alley," "drive," "place," or any other
words used to designate the public thoroughfare.
Sec. LL5-17 CHARTER Sec. LL5-18
C:103

DIVISION 2
MACADAMIZING, PAVING, CURBING, GUTTERING, OR FLAGGING
OF STREETS
Sec. LL5-31. Determination of resident property owners. [1971
Charter Laws, §§ 304, 305; Laws of N.Y. (1915) ch. 535, § 97; L.L. No.
18-1940, § 1; L.L. No. 3-1964, § 3; L.L. No. 6-1968, § 3)
Sec. LL5-32. Improvements by state. [1971 Charter Laws, § 329;
Laws of N.Y. (1915) ch. 535, § 97; L.L. No. 18-1940, § 1; L.L. No.
3-1964, § 7; L.L. No. 6-1968, § 9]
Whenever the state or any governmental agency or subdivision thereof
improves any road or street within the city, all of the provisions of this
division relating to the petition, assessment, and collection of taxes as to
that portion to be paid by the abutting property owners and by general tax
shall apply, and the common council shall pay to the proper governmental
agency such portion of the total expense that is to be borne by the city and
by the abutting property owners as may be equitable.
Sec. LL5-33. Installation of water and sewer lines as prerequisite.
[1971 Charter Laws, §§ 301, 308; Laws of N.Y. (1915) ch. 535, § 97;
L.L. No. 18-1940, § 1; L.L. No. 3-1964, §§ 2, 3; L.L. No. 6-1968, §§ 2,
3]
(a) In this division, "resident property owner" means an individual residing
in the city or a corporation having its principal place of business in the
city and who shall be at the time of signing a petition under this division
the owner of the legal title to land adjoining the street or section of a
street proposed by such petition to be improved. In the case of life
estates, the remainderman and not the life tenant shall be deemed to be
the owner of the legal title. In the case of joint tenancy, tenancy in
common, and tenancy by the entirety, all the joint tenants, tenants in
common, and tenants by the entirety owning any one parcel of real
property shall be deemed to be one property owner, and the signature
upon such petition of any one of such joint tenants in common or
tenants by the entirety shall have the same effect as if the petition had
been signed by all of such joint tenants, tenants in common, or tenants
by the entirety.
(b) The city shall be deemed a resident property owner of any public park,
square, or grounds adjoining the street in which any improvement
under this division shall be made, and the approval of any petition by
the common council shall be equivalent to the signing of a petition
under this division by the city as a resident property owner.
(a) No paving petition under this division shall be received by the common
council, nor shall it be acted upon until sanitary sewers and water
mains and laterals have been installed in the street which is the subject
of the petition.
Sec. LL5-31 CHARTER Sec. LL5-33
C:105
Sec. LL5-34. Ascertainment and apportionment of costs. [1971
Charter Laws, §§ 300, 333; Laws of N.Y. (1915) ch. 535, § 97; L.L. No.
18-1940, § 1; L.L. No. 3-1964, §§ 1, 9; L.L. No. 6-1968, §§ 1, 11]
Sec. LL5-35. Street paving specifications. [1971 Charter Laws,
§ 300; Laws of N.Y. (1915) ch. 535, § 97; L.L. No. 18-1940, § 1; L.L.
No. 3-1964, § 1; L.L. No. 6-1968, § 1)
Streets may be paved pursuant to this division in such manner and by the
use of such materials as the department of public works has prescribed
as minimum standards for street paving at the time of the presentation
of the petition. The department of public works shall have the right to
amend or alter any paving specifications from time to time as improved
engineering standards or methods become available. It shall be the duty
of the department of public works to file the current minimum paving
specifications in the office of the city clerk, and such specifications shall be
available for public inspection.
Sec. LL5-36. Petition to do work. [1971 Charter Laws, §§ 300, 302,
303, 306, 307; Laws of N.Y. (1915) ch. 535, § 97; L.L. No. 18-1940,
§ 1; L.L. No. 3-1964, §§ 1, 3; L.L. No. 6-1968, §§ 1, 3]
(b) No street shall be macadamized or paved until after the water main and
sewer pipes have been laid on such street or section of a street.
(a) The cost and expense of street macadamizing or paving including
curbing, guttering, flagging, engineering bonding indebtedness cost,
and all other costs reasonably incidental to the construction of such
work shall be computed and ascertained by the department of public
works. One-third of such entire cost and expense shall be charged to
the city at large, and the remaining 2/3 thereof shall be assessed by the
city among the owners or parcels of land lying along and adjoining such
street on each side thereof, except as otherwise provided in this
chapter.
(b) The city may include in the annual budget such sums as it deems
necessary to defray the city's portion of the construction of new
pavements.
(a) Upon the petition of resident property owners who own more than 1/2
of the lineal foot frontage of land owned by resident property owners
abutting on any street or section of a street, the common council shall
have power to cause such street or section of a street to be
macadamized or paved, curbed, guttered, or flagged.
(b) The signatures to such petition shall be irrevocable. Additional
signatures may be affixed to such petition at any time after such
petition has been presented to the common council by any resident
property owner who shall then own lands, provided that no prior owner
of such lands shall have signed such petition. The additional signatures
Sec. LL5-33 OLEAN CODE Sec. LL5-36
C:106
Sec. LL5-37. Performance of work without petition. [1971 Charter
Laws, § 309; L.L. No. 6-1968, § 4]
shall have the same effect as if they had been on the petition when the
petition was presented to the common council.
(c) Upon receiving a petition under this division, the common council shall
cause notice to be published once a week for two successive weeks in
some newspaper published in the city stating in substance that a
petition has been presented asking that the proposed improvements be
made and specifying the street or a portion of the street which it is
proposed to improve. The notice shall state a time and place for the
purpose of hearing objections thereto, which hearing may be adjourned
from time to time.
(d) Unless written objections are made to the sufficiency of the petition and
the grounds of objection specifically stated, the petition shall be
deemed sufficient both in form and amount of frontage to authorize the
proposed improvements.
(e) If the common council determines to make such improvement, it shall
approve the petition and direct the improvement to be made and
thereupon determine the probable cost thereof.
(a) Whenever the director of the department of public works shall submit a
written recommendation to the common council that any specific street
or section of a street, public alley, or way be paved, notwithstanding the
fact that no petition as provided for in this division or otherwise shall
have been presented to the common council, such recommendation
shall be considered by the common council which may approve such
recommendation. If the common council approves the paving upon the
recommendation of the director of public works, it shall cause notice to
be published once a week for two successive weeks in the official
newspaper of the city, stating in substance that a recommendation has
been presented and approved, subject to a public hearing and that the
recommendation is that the proposed improvements be made,
specifying the streets or portions of streets which it is proposed to
improve, and setting a time and place for the purpose of hearing
objections thereto, which hearing may be adjourned from time to time.
The common council shall also cause notices of the public hearing to be
mailed by certified mail to the owners of the land abutting upon the
street, section of the street, or public way or that portion thereof
proposed to be paved. Such notice shall be sent to their addresses as
the addresses may appear on the last assessment roll and shall notify
the owners of such proposed action of the common council regarding
the paving of such street or public way.
(b) The property owners shall have the right to appear and be heard
thereon before the common council at a public hearing. The hearing
shall be held not more than 10 days nor less than five days following the
last date of publication of notice of hearing in the official newspaper.
Sec. LL5-36 CHARTER Sec. LL5-37
C:107
Sec. LL5-38. Special assessment generally. [1971 Charter Laws,
§§ 315, 316; Laws of N.Y. (1915) ch. 535, § 97; L.L. No. 18-1940, § 1;
L.L. No. 3-1964, §§ 4-6; L.L. No. 6-1968, §§ 6-8]
Sec. LL5-39. Payment of taxes and assessments. [1971 Charter
Laws, § 321; Laws of N.Y. (1915) ch. 535, § 97; L.L. No. 18-1940, § 1]
The taxes and assessments which are to be levied for the purpose of paying
the expense of work done pursuant to this division shall be payable in the
same number of equal annual installments as the bonds or other obligation
which are to be issued in the payment of the expense of such work, with the
option and privilege to the owners to pay the whole of the taxes so assessed
within 15 days from the time of the completion of the assessment roll.
Such option or privilege may be exercised at the time when any installment
becomes due, provided the owner pays the whole amount of interest that
would accrue if such owner or owners paid the taxes and assessments in
equal annual installments.
Sec. LL5-40. Assessment as lien. [1971 Charter Laws, § 321; Laws of
N.Y. (1915) ch. 535, § 97; L.L. No. 18-1940, § 1; L.L. No. 3-1964, § 6;
L.L. No. 6-1968, § 8]
After correction and confirmation of such assessment, the assessment shall
be a lien and charge upon the property as provided in this division. The
The common council shall have the power after a hearing of property
owners or any interested parties, or in default of their appearance, by
a three-fourths vote to order by resolution that such street, way, or
portion thereof shall be paved, specifying in such resolution the type of
paving, the manner and form of the construction, and the width of the
paved portion.
(c) The cost and expense when completed shall be apportioned and
assessed as provided in section LL5-34.
(a) For the purpose of paying for improvements made pursuant to this
division, the city auditor shall proceed in the same manner as
prescribed for making sewer assessments, except as modified in this
division.
(b) Each lineal foot of property shall pay its proportion of the total cost, and
one lineal foot shall not be assessed a greater or lesser amount than
another. The cost and expense of that portion of any street improvement
which shall lie within the bounds of an intersecting street shall be a
charge upon the city and may be paid by the city by general taxation.
When such improvements have been completed, and at the time the city
auditor shall make the assessment therefor, the auditor shall determine
the expense of such improvement chargeable to the city and chargeable
to the owner of the lots or parcels of land adjacent to such street or
public ground so improved.
Sec. LL5-37 OLEAN CODE Sec. LL5-40
C:108
portion thereof to be paid by the property owner shall become a lien upon
the property.
Sec. LL5-41. Collection of taxes; delinquent taxes. [1971 Charter
Laws, § 323; Laws of N.Y. (1915) ch. 535, § 97; L.L. No. 18-1940, § 1;
L.L. No. 3-1964, § 6; L.L. No. 6-1968, § 8]
The common council shall cause the assessment levy made for work done
pursuant to this article to be collected in the same manner as other taxes
in the city, except as otherwise provided in this division. Immediately after
the correction and confirmation of the assessments, the common council
shall cause the warrant for the collection of the assessment to be delivered
to the city clerk, who shall publish in the official paper of the city a notice
that he has received such warrant and tax roll and that such taxes or any
installment thereof may be paid to him within 30 days without fee and
that upon expiration of such 30 days, the first installment of such taxes
will become delinquent and that each succeeding installment thereafter,
together with the interest on the whole amount of such taxes remaining
unpaid, will be payable one year after the time fixed for the payment of
the installment immediately preceding, and will become delinquent 30 days
thereafter. The city clerk shall act in accordance with the notice. Such
delinquent taxes shall be subject to the same fees and penalties as other
delinquent taxes on the city tax roll.
Sec. LL5-42. Use of assessment funds. [1971 Charter Laws, § 324;
Laws of N.Y. (1915) ch. 535, § 97; L.L. No. 18-1940, § 1; L.L. No.
3-1964, § 6; L.L. No. 6-1968, § 8]
The assessments levied to pay the cost and expense of all improvements
pursuant to this division shall become separate and apart from the other
funds of the city and used only for the retiring and paying of bonds. The
interest paid on any bond anticipation notes and interest on the amount
thereof for 90 days after the completion of the assessment of account of
such improvement shall be added to and considered a part of the expense
of the improvement.
Sec. LL5-43. through Sec. LL5-55. (Reserved)
Sec. LL5-40 CHARTER Sec. LL5-43
C:109

DIVISION 3
ALTERNATIVE PROCEDURE FOR SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION,
REPAIR, ETC.
Sec. LL5-56. Power of common council and expenses in general.
[1971 Charter Laws, § 334; Laws of N.Y. (1915) ch. 535, § 100; Laws
of N.Y. (1916) ch. 543, § 1; L.L. No. 3-1979, § 1; L.L. No. 1-1987, § 1;
L.L. No. 1-1989, § 1]
(a) The common council shall have power to cause sidewalks on the streets
and highways in the city to be constructed and cause them to be
altered, repaired, cleaned, or to otherwise improve the space between
the outside limits of the street, the curb or improved portion of the
street, and to determine and prescribe the manner of doing the same,
the materials to be used thereon, and the quality of such materials. The
council shall direct that the whole of any improvement of work be then
assessed upon the property deemed benefitted, or that the whole or
part thereof be charged to the city at large, and the remainder, if any,
assessed to the property deemed benefitted to the owner or occupant
and be collected in the same manner as other taxes are collected by
virtue of this act. Such expense shall be a lien on the land or lot. Such
expense assessed against the land deemed benefitted may be recovered
by action brought against such owner or occupant. Whenever the
common council shall determine to require such improvement to be
made, a notice thereof shall be served on such owner or occupant, or
the common council may cause to be published once in the official
paper a copy of the resolution requiring such improvement to be made,
stating a period of time of at least 20 days in which such improvement is
required to be made. If such improvement is not made within the
required time, the common council may make the improvement. The
expense thereof shall be payable by the owners or occupants and shall
also be a lien upon the lands or lots. If an owner or occupant elects to
make the improvements upon receiving the notice from the city as
provided in this section, the owner or occupant shall notify the city of
his election to do so before the improvement is commenced, and the
city shall be obligated to oversee the construction in order that the
improvement meets city specifications.
(b) Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (a) of this section, the
expense assessed any owner or occupant of real property pursuant to
this division shall not include the following:
(1) The expense of installing that portion of a sidewalk exceeding a
width of 10 feet.
(2) The expense of installing curbs or curb cuts when such work is
caused to be done pursuant to this division.
(3) The expense of ornamentation with trees when such work is caused
to be undertaken pursuant to this division.
Sec. LL5-56 CHARTER Sec. LL5-56
C:111
Sec. LL5-57. Making assessments. [1971 Charter Laws, § 335; Laws
of N.Y. (1915) ch. 535, § 100; Laws of N.Y. (1916) ch. 543, § 1; L.L.
No. 3-1979, § II; L.L. No. 1-1987, § II; L.L. No. 1-1989, § 1]
After the expense established in section LL5-56 shall be determined and
ascertained, the common council shall make or cause to make an
assessment. The roll thereof shall contain the name of the owner or
occupant, if known to the common council, a brief description of the
property sufficient for identification, and the amount of the expense.
Thereupon, for the purpose of making any such assessment or
improvement, the city auditor shall proceed in the same manner as
prescribed for making sewer assessments, except as modified in this
division.
Sec. LL5-58. Installment payments authorized. [1971 Charter Laws,
§ 336; L.L. No. 1-1989, § 1)
If bonds are to be issued to finance improvements pursuant to section
LL5-56, the assessments which are to be levied for the purpose of paying
the expense of such improvements shall be payable in annual equal
installments with the option and privilege to such owner or occupant to pay
the whole of such taxes so assessed without interest within 30 days from the
time of the completion of such assessment roll. The number of installments
shall equal the term, in years, of the bonds or certificates of indebtedness
pursuant to section LL5-60. Such option or privilege may also be exercised
at the time when any installment becomes due, provided that the owner
pays in addition the whole amount of interest that would accrue if the owner
paid the whole of such assessments in equal annual installments.
Sec. LL5-59. Repair and maintenance. [1971 Charter Laws, § 337;
L.L. No. 1-1989, § 1; L.L. No. 2-1989, § 1; Res. No. 67-96, 8-27-1996]
(4) The expense of constructing superstructures over streams or
streambeds.
(c) If owners or occupants shall, within the required time and at their own
cost and expense, elect to undertake and make the improvement which
the common council has caused to be required pursuant to this division,
the expense incurred by the owner or occupant for that portion greater
than 10 feet of sidewalk, curbs, curb cuts, or superstructures over
streams and streambeds shall be reimbursed to the owner and paid by
the city from the general fund of the city.
(a) In this section:
(1) Sidewalk means that portion of a street outside of the roadway
used, or set aside, for the use of pedestrians.
(2) Street means the entire area conveyed, acquired, or dedicated to
public use and passage. The word "street" shall include in its
Sec. LL5-56 OLEAN CODE Sec. LL5-59
C:112
meaning the words "avenue," "alley," "drive," "place," or any other
words used to designate the public thoroughfare.
(b) It shall be the duty of every owner of any premises abutting on any
public street to keep the sidewalk in front of the premises in good order
and repair.
(c) It is the privilege, and on notice from the department of public works, it
shall be the duty of any owner of any premises or parcel of land within
the city to repair and/or reconstruct the sidewalk in front of the
premises or parcel between the street line and the curb or improved
portion of the street.
(d) If the work shall be ordered by the city, the director of the department
of public works shall notify the owner of any premises in front of which
the work shall be required to be done, that if the work is not done by the
owner within 20 days, the work shall be done by the city, and the
expense thereof shall be assessed upon the premises. This notice shall
also notify the owner that he may, within 20 days, provide the director
of the department of public works a written statement specifying why
such work should not be done, it is needed, or can reasonably be
delayed. The director shall investigate and make a written final
determination including findings of fact and conclusions as to whether
such work shall be required. All notices by the city to the landowner
shall be served personally or by mailing the notices in the manner
prescribed for the mailing of notices and the mailing of taxes due by the
city assessor.
(e) If any such work shall not be done within the time specified, the
department of public works may cause such work to be done, and the
full expense thereof shall be charged against and a lien assessed upon
such premises. Notwithstanding the provisions of this section, the
expense assessed for such repairs and reconstruction shall not include
the following:
(1) The expense of installing that portion of a sidewalk exceeding a
width of 10 feet.
(2) The expense of installing curbs or curb cuts when such work is
caused to be done pursuant to this division.
(3) The expense of ornamentation with trees when such work is caused
to be undertaken pursuant to this division.
(4) The expense of repairing or reconstructing the superstructures
over streams or streambeds.
(5) Where sidewalk was originally constructed by the city utilizing
reinforced concrete and the sidewalk is an integral part of the
paved portion of the street, the expense in excess of the expense
which would be reasonably incurred for the repair of sidewalks
Sec. LL5-59 CHARTER Sec. LL5-59
C:113
Sec. LL5-60. Certificates of indebtedness or revenue
bonds—Issuance. [1971 Charter Laws, § 337A; L.L. No. 3-1979, § IV;
L.L. No. 1-1987, § IV]
which are not constructed of reinforced concrete and are not an
integral part of the paving.
(f) Whenever the relocation of any installed sidewalks meeting city
standards is necessitated because of the construction or a widening of
pavement on any street, the cost or expense therefor shall be paid
solely by the city from the general fund. No part of such cost or expense
shall be assessed against the premises upon which or abutting which
the sidewalk lies.
(g) If the city undertakes the ordered work utilizing bonded funds, the cost
of the reconstruction or repair to be repaid by the landowner shall be
payable in equal annual installments over the duration of the bond, not
to exceed a five-year period with interest charged at the bonded
interest, and not to exceed 6% per annum. If general funds of the city
are utilized, owners of property shall, or, if bonded funds are utilized,
owners of property may, pay the whole of such improvements so
assessed in the same manner as city taxes. Thereafter, the option to
prepay may be exercised at the time when any installment becomes
due, provided that such owner pay, in addition, the whole amount of
interest that would accrue if the owner paid the whole of such
assessments in equal installments.
(h) If the owner of any lands, the grade or level of which is above the
established grade of the sidewalk in front of his lands, shall neglect or
refuse to protect such land and to grade such land so as to prevent dirt,
earth, stones, or other material from falling, or after service upon him
of notice, the director of the department of public works shall cause
such work to be done in the same manner as provided in this division.
(a) For the purpose of paying the expense of improvements specified in this
article, including that portion to be borne by general tax, and in
anticipation of the collection of taxes, the common council shall issue
certificates of indebtedness or revenue bonds in anticipation of such
respective amounts and payable at such respective times, not
exceeding five years from the date of issue, as the common council may
deem advisable, with interest not exceeding 6% per annum.
(b) Such certificates of indebtedness or revenue bonds shall be sold to the
highest bidder for cash, at not less than par value.
Notice of such sale shall be published once a week for three successive
weeks in such newspaper, or as the common council may designate.
(c) The certificates of indebtedness or revenue bonds shall be signed by the
mayor and city auditor and countersigned by the city clerk.
Sec. LL5-59 OLEAN CODE Sec. LL5-61
C:114
Sec. LL5-61. Same—Payment. [1971 Charter Laws, § 337B; L.L. No.
3-1979, § V; L.L. No. 1-1987, § V]
If bonds are to be issued to finance improvements specified in this article,
the assessments which are to be levied for the purpose of paying the
expense of such improvement shall be payable in five annual equal
installments with the option and privilege to such owner or occupant to pay
the whole of such taxes so assessed without interest within 30 days from the
time of the completion of the assessment roll. Such option or privilege may
also be exercised at the time when any installment becomes due, provided
that the owner pays in addition the whole amount of interest that would
accrue if the owner paid the whole of such assessments in equal annual
installments.
Sec. LL5-62. Same—Collection. [1971 Charter Laws, § 337C; L.L.
No. 3-1979, § VI; L.L. No. 1-1987, § VI]
(a) After correction and confirmation of an assessment under this division,
the corrected or confirmed assessment shall be a lien and charge upon
the property as provided in this section. The portion thereof to be paid
by the property owner shall become a lien upon the property as
provided in this division.
(b) The common council shall cause the assessment levy to be collected in
the same manner as is provided for the collection of other taxes in the
city, except as otherwise provided. Immediately after the correction and
confirmation of such assessments, the common council shall cause the
warrant for the collection of such assessment to be delivered to the city
clerk, who shall publish in the official paper of the city a notice that he
has received such warrant and tax roll, that such taxes or any
installment thereof may be paid to him for 30 days without fee, that
upon expiration of such 30 days, the first installment of such taxes will
become delinquent, and that each succeeding installment thereafter,
together with the interest on the whole amount of such taxes remaining
unpaid, will be payable one year after the time fixed for the payment of
the installment immediately preceding, and will become delinquent 30
days thereafter. The clerk shall then proceed according to such notice.
Such delinquent taxes shall be subject to the same fees and penalties as
delinquent taxes on the city tax roll.
Sec. LL5-61 CHARTER Sec. LL5-62
C:115
Chapter LL6
TAXATION AND ASSESSMENTS
CROSS REFERENCES
Street and sidewalk improvements, § LL5-16
et seq.
Water sewage and sewage disposal, ch. LL7.
ORDINANCE REFERENCES
Finance, § 2-161 et seq.
Txation and assessments, Ch. 23.
Water, sewage and sewage disposal, ch. 27.
STATE LAW REFERENCES
General authority to levy taxes and
assessments, Municipal Home Rule Law
§ 10(1)(ii)(a)(8), (1)(ii)(a)(9), (1)(ii)(c)(2),
(1)(ii)(c)(3).
Utility tax authorized, General City Law
§ 20-b.
Sec. LL5-62 OLEAN CODE Sec. LL5-62
C:116
ARTICLE I
IN GENERAL
Sec. LL6-1. (Reserved)3
Sec. LL6-2. Sales tax, use tax, and compensating use tax.
Nothing in this Code or in the local law adopting this Code repeals the sales
tax, use tax or compensating use tax levied by L.L. No. 4-1968. Such local
law is recognized as continuing in full force and effect as if set out at length
in this Code.
Sec. LL6-3. through Sec. LL6-20. (Reserved)
3. Editor's Note: Former Sec. LL6-1, Veterans denied exemption under Real Property Tax
Law, section 458-a, was repealed 9-9-2008 by L.L. No. 1-08.
Sec. LL6-1 CHARTER Sec. LL6-3
C:117

ARTICLE II
UTILITY SERVICE TAX
Sec. LL6-21. Definitions. [L.L. No. 2-1937, § 1(2); L.L. No. 1-1938,
§ 1; L.L. No. 2-1941, § 2]
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:
GROSS INCOME — Includes receipts received in or by reason of any sale
made, conditional or otherwise, except sales referred to in this article with
respect to which it is provided that profits from the sale shall be included
in gross income, or service rendered for ultimate consumption or use by
the purchasers in the city, including cash, credits, and property of any kind
or nature, whether or not such sale is made or such service is rendered
for profit, without any deduction therefrom on account of the cost of the
property sold, the cost of the materials used, labor, or services or other
costs, interest, or discount paid, or any other expense whatsoever; also
profits from the sale of securities; also profits from the sale of real property
growing out of the ownership or use of or interest in such property; also
profit from the sale of personal property, other than property of a kind which
would properly be included in the inventory of the taxpayer if on hand at the
close of the period for which a return is made; also receipts from interest,
dividends, and royalties, derived from sources within the city other than
such as are received from a corporation, a majority of whose voting stock
is owned by the taxpaying utility, without any deduction therefrom for any
expenses whatsoever incurred in connection with the receipt thereof, and
also profits from any transaction, except sales for resale and rentals, within
the city whatsoever.
GROSS OPERATING INCOME — Includes receipts received in or by reason
of any sale, conditional or otherwise, made for ultimate consumption or use
by the purchaser of gas, electricity, steam, water, refrigeration, telephony,
or telegraphy; in or by reason of the furnishing for such consumption or use
of gas, electric, steam, water, refrigeration, telephone, or telegraph service
in the city, including cash, credits, and property of any kind or nature,
without any deduction therefrom on account of the cost of the property
sold, the cost of materials used, labor, services, or other costs, interest, or
discount paid; or any other expenses whatsoever.
PERSON — Persons, corporations, companies, associations, joint-stock
associations, copartnerships, estates, assignee of rents, any person acting
in a fiduciary capacity, or any other entity, and persons, their assignees,
lessees, trustees, or receivers, appointed by any court whatsoever, or by any
other means, except the state, municipalities, political and civil subdivisions
of the state or municipality, and public districts.
UTILITY — Includes every person subject to the supervision of either
division of the state department of public service, except persons engaged
in the business of operating or leasing sleeping and parlor railroad cars
or of operating railroads other than street surface, rapid transit, subway,
Sec. LL6-21 CHARTER Sec. LL6-21
C:119
and elevated railroads. Utility also includes every person, whether or not
such person is subject to such supervision, who sells gas, electricity, steam,
water, refrigeration, telephony, or telegraphy, delivered through mains,
pipes, or wires, or furnishes gas, electric, steam, water, refrigerator,
telephone, or telegraph service, by means of mains, pipes, or wires,
regardless of whether such activities are the main business of such person
or are only incidental thereto, or of whether use is made of the public
streets.
Sec. LL6-22. Gross operating income tax on utilities. [L.L. No.
2-1937, § 1(1); L.L. No. 1-1938, § 1; L.L. No. 2-1939, § 1; L.L. No.
24-1940, § 1; L.L. No. 2-1941, § 2; L.L. No. 1-1942, § 2; L.L. No.
1-1944, § 2; L.L. No. 1-1945, § 2; L.L. No. 2-1946, § 2; L.L. No.
1-1947, § 2; L.L. No. 2-1[8, § 2; L.L. No. 3-1949, § 2; L.L. No. 2-1950,
§ 2; L.L. No. 2-1955, § 2]
Pursuant to the authority granted by General City Law section 20-b, a
tax equal to 1% of its gross income is hereby imposed on every utility
doing business in the city which is subject to the supervision of the state
department of public service, which has a gross income for the 12 months
ending May 31 of this year or any subsequent year in excess of $500,
except motor carriers or brokers subject to such supervision under the
Transportation Law and a tax equal to 1% of its gross operating income is
hereby imposed for the same period upon every other utility doing business
in the city which has a gross operating income for the 12 months ending
May 31 in excess of $500, except omnibus corporations subject to the
supervision of the state department of transportation under Transportation
Law art. 7 [§ 150 et seq.] upon which omnibus corporations a tax equal
to 1/2 of 1% of its gross operating income during the aforesaid periods is
hereby imposed; the aforesaid taxes shall have application only within the
territorial limits of the city and shall be in addition to any and all other taxes
and fees imposed by any other provision of law for the same period. Such
taxes shall not be imposed on any transaction originating or consummated
outside of the territorial limits of the city, notwithstanding that some act be
necessarily performed with respect to such transaction within such limits.
Sec. LL6-23. Utility quarterly tax return. [L.L. No. 2-1937, § 1(4);
L.L. No. 1-1938, § 1; L.L. No. 2-1939, § 1; L.L. No. 24-1940, § 1; L.L.
No. 2-1941, § 2; L.L. No. 1-1942, § 2; L.L. No. 1-1944, § 2; L.L. No.
1-1945, § 2; L.L. No. 2-1946, § 2; L.L. No. 1-1947, § 2; L.L. No. 2-1[8,
§ 2; L.L. No. 3-1949, § 2; L.L. No. 2-1950, § 2; L.L. No. 2-1955, § 2]
Every utility subject to tax pursuant to this article shall file, on or before
September 25, December 25, March 25, and June 25, a return for the three
calendar months preceding each such return date including any period
for which the tax imposed hereby is effective, each of which returns shall
state the gross income or gross operating income for the period covered
by each such return. Returns shall be filed with the city auditor on a
form to be furnished by him for such purpose and shall contain such
other data, information, or matter as the city auditor may require to be
Sec. LL6-21 OLEAN CODE Sec. LL6-23
C:120
included therein. Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this section,
any utility whose average gross operating income, as the case may be, for
the aforesaid three-month period is less than $1,500, may file its return for
such period on June 25 of each and every year hereafter. The city auditor,
in order to insure payment of the tax imposed, may require at any time a
further or supplemental return, which shall contain any data that may be
specified by the city auditor. Every return shall have annexed thereto an
affidavit of the head of the utility making the return or of the owner or of
the co-partner thereof, or of a principal officer of the corporation, if such
business be conducted by a corporation, to the effect that the statements
contained therein are true.
Sec. LL6-24. Utility records. [L.L. No. 2-1937, § 1(3)]
Every utility subject to tax under this article shall keep such records of its
business and in such form as the city auditor may require, and such records
shall be preserved for a period of three years, except that the city auditor
may consent to their destruction within that period or may require that they
be kept longer.
Sec. LL6-25. Tax due with filing of return. [L.L. No. 2-1937, § 1(5)]
At the time of filing a return as required by this article, each utility shall pay
to the city auditor the tax imposed by this section for the period covered
by such return. Such tax shall be due and payable at the time of filing the
return or, if a return is not filed when due, on the last day on which the
return is required to be filed.
Sec. LL6-26. Insufficient return; notice of determination; appeal.
[L.L. No. 2-1937, § 1(6); L.L. No. 2-1939, § 2]
If any return filed pursuant to this section shall be insufficient or
unsatisfactory to the city auditor, and if a corrected or sufficient return
is not filed within 20 days after such return is required by notice from
the city auditor, or if no return is made for any period, the city auditor
shall determine the amount of tax due from such information as he is
able to obtain, and, if necessary, may estimate the tax on the basis of
external indices or otherwise. The city auditor shall give notice of such
determination to the person liable for such tax. Such determination shall
finally and irrevocably fix such tax, unless the person against whom it
is assessed shall, within 30 days after the giving of notice of such
determination, apply to the city auditor for a hearing, unless the city auditor
of his own motion shall reduce the tax. After such hearing, the city auditor
shall give notice of his decision to the person liable for the tax. The decision
of the city auditor may be reviewed by a proceeding under Civil Practice
Law and Rules art. 78 [§ 7801 et seq.], if application therefor is made within
30 days after the giving of notice of such decision. An order to review such
decision shall not be granted unless the amount of any tax sought to be
renewed with interest and penalties thereon, if any, shall be first deposited
with the city auditor, and an undertaking filed with him, in such amount
Sec. LL6-23 CHARTER Sec. LL6-26
C:121
and with such sureties as a justice of the supreme court shall approve, to
the effect that, if such proceeding be dismissed or the tax confirmed, the
applicant will pay all costs and charges which may accrue in the prosecution
of such proceeding, or at the option of the applicant, such undertaking may
be in a sum sufficient to cover the tax, interest, penalties, costs, and charges
aforesaid, in which event the applicant shall not be required to pay such
tax, interest, and penalties as a condition precedent to the granting of such
order.
Sec. LL6-27. Delivery of notice. [L.L. No. 2-1937, § 1(7)]
Any notice authorized or required under the provisions of this article may
be given by mailing such notice to the person for whom it is intended, in a
postpaid envelope, addressed to such person at the address given by him
in the last return filed by him under this section, or, if no return has been
filed, then to such address as may be obtainable. The mailing of such notice
shall be presumptive evidence of the receipt of the notice by the person to
whom addressed. Any period of time, which is determined according to the
provisions of this article by the giving of notice, shall commence to run from
the date of mailing of such notice.
Sec. LL6-28. Penalty for failure to file return, corrected return, or
tax. [L.L. No. 2-1937, § 1(8)]
Any person failing to file a return or corrected return, or to pay any tax or
any portion thereof, within the time required by this article shall be subject
to a penalty of 5% of the amount of tax due, plus 1% of such tax for each
month of delay or fraction thereof, excepting the first month, after such
return was required to be filed or such tax became due; but the city auditor,
if satisfied that the delay was excusable, may remit all or any portion of such
penalty.
Sec. LL6-29. Refund of tax or penalty. [L.L. No. 2-1937, § 1(9); L.L.
No. 2-1939, § 2]
If, within one year from the payment of any tax or penalty, the payer thereof
shall make application for a refund thereof and the city auditor or the
court shall determine that such tax or penalty or any portion thereof was
erroneously or illegally collected, the city auditor shall refund the amount so
determined. For like cause and within the same period, a refund may be so
made on the initiative of the city auditor. However, no refund shall be made
of a tax or penalty paid pursuant to a determination of the city auditor, as
provided in this article, unless the city auditor, after a hearing as provided
in this article, or of his own motion, shall have reduced the tax or penalty
or it shall have been established in a proceeding under Civil Practice Law
and Rules art. 78 [§ 7801 et seq.] that such determination was erroneous
or illegal. All refunds shall be made out of moneys collected under this
article. An application for a refund, made as provided in this article, shall be
deemed an application for the revision of any tax or penalty complained of
and the city auditor may receive additional evidence with respect thereto.
Sec. LL6-26 OLEAN CODE Sec. LL6-29
C:122
After making this determination, the city auditor shall give notice thereof to
the person interested, and he shall be entitled to an order to review such
determination under Civil Practice Law and Rules art. 78 [§ 7801 et seq.],
subject to the provisions contained in this article relating to the granting of
such an order.
Sec. LL6-30. Tax charged to utility not customers. [L.L. No. 2-1937,
§ 1(10)]
The tax imposed by this article shall be charged against and be paid by the
utility and shall not be added as a separate item to bills rendered by the
utility to customers or others but shall constitute a part of the operating
costs of such utility.
Sec. LL6-31. Failure to pay tax or penalty shall be made property
lien. [L.L. No. 2-1937, § 1(11)]
Whenever any person shall fail to pay any tax or penalty imposed by this
article, the city attorney shall, upon the request of the city auditor, bring
an action to enforce payment of the tax or penalty. The proceeds of any
judgment obtained in any such action shall be paid to the city auditor. Each
such tax and penalty shall be a lien upon the property of the person liable to
pay the same, in the same manner and to the same extent that the tax and
penalty imposed by Tax Law § 186-a is made a lien.
Sec. LL6-32. Power and duties of city auditor in administration and
enforcement of tax. [L.L. No. 2-1937, § 1(12)]
In the administration of this article, the city auditor shall have power to
make such reasonable rules and regulations, not inconsistent with law, as
may be necessary for the exercise of his powers and the performance of
his duties, and to prescribe the form of blanks, reports, and other records
relating to the administration and enforcement of the tax, to take testimony
and proofs, under oath, with reference to any matter within the line of his
official duty under this article, and to subpoena and require the attendance
of witnesses and the production of books, papers, and documents.
Sec. LL6-33. Divulging amount of gross income by city officers
prohibited; exception; penalty. [L.L. No. 2-1937, § 1(13)]
(a) Except in accordance with the proper judicial order as otherwise
provided by law, it shall be unlawful for the city auditor, or any agent,
clerk, or employee of the city to divulge or make known in any manner
the amount of gross income or gross operating income, or any
particulars set forth or discussed in any return under this article. The
officer charged with the custody of such returns shall not be required to
produce any of them or evidence of anything contained in them in any
action or proceeding in any court, except on behalf of the city in an
action of proceeding under the provisions of this article, or on behalf of
the state tax commission in an action or proceeding under the
Sec. LL6-29 CHARTER Sec. LL6-33
C:123
Sec. LL6-34. Taxes and penalties to be deposited in general fund of
city. [L.L. No. 2-1937, § 1(14); L.L. No. 1-1942, § 2; L.L. No. 1-1944,
§ 2; L.L. No. 1-1945, § 2; L.L. No. 2-1946, § 2; L.L. No. 1-1947, § 2;
L.L. No. 2-1948, § 2; L.L. No. 3-1949, § 2; L.L. No. 2-1950, § 2; L.L.
No. 2-1955, § 2]
All taxes and penalties received by the city auditor for taxes heretofore or
hereafter imposed under this article shall be credited and deposited by him
in the general fund of the city.
Sec. LL6-35. through Sec. LL6-40. (Reserved)
provisions of the Tax Law or on behalf of any party to any action or
proceeding under the provisions of this article when the returns or facts
shown thereby are directly involved in such action or proceeding, in
either of which events the court may require the production of, and
may admit in evidence, so much of the returns or of the facts shown
thereby, as are pertinent to the action or proceeding, and no more.
Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit the delivery to a
person, or his duly authorized representative, of a copy of any return
filed by him, nor to prohibit the publication of statistics so classified as
to prevent the identification of particular returns and the items thereof;
the publication of delinquent lists showing the names of persons who
have failed to pay their taxes at the time and in the manner provided
for by this section, together with any relevant information which in
the opinion of the city auditor may assist in the collection of such
delinquent taxes; or the inspection by the city attorney or other legal
representatives of the city of the return of any person who shall bring
action to set aside or review the tax based thereon, or against whom
an action has been instituted in accordance with the provisions of this
article.
(b) Any offense against the foregoing secrecy provisions shall be
punishable by a fine not exceeding $1,000 or by imprisonment not
exceeding six months, or both, and if the offender be an officer, agent,
clerk, or employee of the city he shall be dismissed from office and shall
be incapable of holding any office or employment in the city for a period
of five years thereafter.
(c) Notwithstanding any provisions of this section, the city auditor may
exchange with the chief fiscal officer of any other city in the state
information contained in returns filed under this article, provided such
other city grants similar privileges to the city, and provided such
information is to be used for tax purposes only, and the city auditor
shall, upon request, furnish the state tax commission with any
information contained in such returns.
Sec. LL6-33 OLEAN CODE Sec. LL6-35
C:124
ARTICLE III
COLD WAR VETERANS PROPERTY EXEMPTION
Sec. LL6-41. Property exemption granted. [L.L. No. 2-08, § 2,
9-9-2008)
The City of Olean hereby provides that qualifying residential real property
shall be exempt from city taxation to the extent of 15% of the assessed value
of such property; provided, however, that such exemption shall not exceed
$12,000 or the product of $12,000 multiplied by the latest state equalization
rate of the assessing unit, or, in the case of a special assessing unit, the
latest class ratio, whichever is less, for Cold War veterans as described in
New York State Real Property Tax Law Section 458-b.
Sec. LL6-42. through Sec. LL6-50. (Reserved)
Sec. LL6-41 CHARTER Sec. LL6-42
C:125

ARTICLE IV
VETERANS EXEMPTION
Sec. LL6-51. Recomputation of exemption with change in
assessment. [L.L. No. 3-08, § 1, 9-9-2008]
Effective July 20, 1994, upon adoption of a local law, a taxing jurisdiction is
authorized to increase or decrease each existing Section 458, Subdivision
1 or 2, veterans exemption in proportion to the change in level of all
assessments resulting from a revaluation or update:
Sec. LL6-52. through Sec. LL6-60. (Reserved)
(a) "5.(a) Notwithstanding the limitation on the amount of exemption
prescribed in subdivision one or two of this section, upon adoption of a
local law by the governing board of a county, city, town or village that
levies taxes or for which taxes are levied on an assessment roll, if the
total assessed value of the real property for which such exemption has
been granted increases or decreases as the result of a revaluation or
update of assessments, and a material change in level of assessment, as
provided in title two of article 12 of this chapter, is certified for the
assessment roll pursuant to the rules of the state board, the assessor
shall increase or decrease the amount of such exemption by multiplying
the amount of such exemption by the change in level of assessment
factor. If the assessor receives the certification after the completion,
verification and filing of the final assessment roll, the assessor shall
certify the amount of exemption as recomputed pursuant to this
paragraph to the local officers having custody and control of the roll,
and such local officers are hereby directed and authorized to enter the
recomputed exemption certified by the assessor on the roll."4
4. Editor's Note: See § 458, Subdivision 5(a), of the Real Property Tax Law.
Sec. LL6-51 CHARTER Sec. LL6-52
C:127

ARTICLE V
Home Improvement Exemption
[Adopted 11-12-2014 by L.L. No. 3-2014]
Sec. LL6-61. Exemption granted.
Real property in the City of Olean reconstructed, altered or improved
subsequent to the effective date of this local law, for residential purpose
shall be exempt from taxation and special ad valorem levies by the City of
Olean; as provided by Real Property Tax Law Section 421-f and to the extent
hereinafter provided.
Sec. LL6-62. Amount of exemption; requirements.
(a) Such real property shall be exempt for a period of one year to the extent
of 100% of the increase in assessed value thereof attributable to such
reconstruction, alteration or improvement and for an additional period
of seven years; provided, however, that the extent of such exemption
shall be decreased by 12 1/2% for each year during such additional
period of seven years and such exemption shall be computed with
respect to the increase in assessed value as determined in the initial
year of such eight-year period following the filing of an original
application; provided further, that such exemption shall be limited to
$80,000 in increased market value of the property attributable to such
reconstruction, alteration or improvement and any increase in market
value greater than such amount shall not be eligible for the exemption
granted therein. For the purpose of this section, the market value of the
reconstruction, alteration or improvements shall be equal to the
increased assessed value attributable to such reconstruction, alteration
or improvement divided by the most recently established state
equalization rate, except where the state equalization rate equals or
exceeds 95%, in which case the increase in assessed value attributable
to such reconstruction, alteration or improvement shall equal the
market value of such reconstruction alteration or improvement.
(b) No such exemption shall be granted unless:
(1) Such reconstruction, alteration or improvement was commenced
subsequent to the effective date of this section; and
(2) The value of such reconstruction, alteration or improvement
exceeds $3,000;
(3) The greater portion, as so determined by square footage, of the
building reconstructed, altered or improved is at least five years
old; and
(4) Such reconstruction, alteration or improvements requires the
issuance of a building permit; and either a certificate of occupancy
or a certificate of compliance evidencing that the reconstruction,
alteration or improvement is complete.
Sec. LL6-61 CHARTER Sec. LL6-62
C:129
Sec. LL6-63. Filing of application.
Such exemption shall be granted only upon application by the owner of such
real property on a form prescribed by the State Board of Real Property
Services, the original of which shall be filed with the City Assessor. Such
original application shall be filed on or before the taxable status date in the
year in which the certificate of occupancy or certificate of compliance was
issued. A copy of said application shall also be filed with the State Board of
Real Property Services.
Sec. LL6-64. Approval of application.
If the Assessor is satisfied that the applicant is entitled to an exemption
pursuant to this section, he/she shall approve the application and such real
property shall thereafter be exempt from taxation and special ad valorem
levies as herein provided commencing with the first assessment roll
prepared after the taxable status date as provided in the City Charter. The
assessed value of any exemption granted pursuant to this section shall be
entered by the Assessor on the assessment roll with the taxable property,
with the amount of the exemption shown in a separate column.
Sec. LL6-65. Applicability to one- and two-family dwellings only.
The provision of this article shall only apply to one- and two-family dwellings
used exclusively for residential purposes.
Sec. LL6-66. Transfer of exempt property.
In the event that real property granted an exemption pursuant to this article
is sold or transferred other than to the heirs or distributees of the owner,
the exemption granted hereunder shall cease.
Sec. LL6-67. through Sec. LL6-70. (Reserved)
(c) For purposes of this section, the terms "reconstruction," "alteration"
and "improvement" shall not include ordinary maintenance and repairs
necessary to preserve the real property's current assessed value.
Sec. LL6-62 OLEAN CODE Sec. LL6-67
C:130
Chapter LL7
WATER, SEWERS AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL
CROSS REFERENCES
Utility service tax, § LL6-21 et seq.
ORDINANCE REFERENCES
Finance, § 2-161 et seq.
Water, § 27-21.
Sewer rates and charges, § 27-166 et seq.
STATE LAW REFERENCES
Sewer rents, General Municipal Law § 450 et
seq.
Sec. LL6-67 CHARTER Sec. LL6-67
C:131

ARTICLE I
IN GENERAL
Sec. LL7-1. through Sec. LL7-20. (Reserved)
Sec. LL7-1 CHARTER Sec. LL7-1
C:133

ARTICLE II
WATER
Sec. LL7-21. Rents. [1971 Charter Laws, § 188; N.Y. Laws (1915) ch.
535, § 54; L.L. No. 3-1934, § 5]
The common council shall establish a scale of rents to be paid from time to
time, either in advance or at such time and times as the common council
shall prescribe, for the supply of water to be called water rents. Such
scale of rents shall be appropriated to different classes of buildings in the
city with reference to their dimensions, values, exposures to fires, ordinary
or extraordinary uses for dwellings, stores, shops, hotels, factories, livery
stables, barns, and all other buildings, establishments, and trades, yards,
number of families, or occupants or consumption of water as near as may
be practicable. The common council shall from time to time either modify,
amend, increase, or diminish, such rents; and such common council and
its respective employees shall be authorized at all times to enter into any
building or place where water is used from supply pipes to examine as to
water, quantity of water used, and manner of using it. The sum shall be
added to the annual budget for the purpose. Such rentals shall be a lien
upon the real property upon which the water is used, for 10 years from
the time of such use, superior to any mortgage, judgment, or other lien of
any nature, except general, city, or school taxes assessed upon the property,
and which shall be prior thereto. Any conveyance thereof shall not alter its
legality upon a subsequent grantee; provided, however, that a notice shall
be mailed to the owner of such real property, whenever the payment of any
water rent is delinquent, by the common council or its agents.
Sec. LL7-22. Rules and regulations; creation, modification, and
enforcement. [Added 5-12-2015 by L.L. No. 1-2015]
The City of Olean Department of Public Works shall make, publish and
enforce all rules and regulations in relation to and for the protection and
operation of the Water Department, water system, and all the property
and appurtenances thereof and in relation to the management thereof and
the supply of water thereby, whether to individuals or corporations, and
may alter and modify the same from time to time, and may fix a penalty
herein provided for the violation of any said rules and regulations. Rules and
regulations, and all amendments, shall be approved by resolution before
they shall take legal effect. These rules and regulations are adopted, and
specifications adopted hereunder shall be considered as part of the contract
between the City of Olean and every person, owner, customer or entity who
takes water supplied by the City. Such person using this service shall be
bound by this contract, including those using water on a renewable contract
basis, in which case the contract may stipulate any conditions which are
exceptions to these laws, regulations and specifications.
Sec. LL7-23. through Sec. LL7-40. (Reserved)
Sec. LL7-21 CHARTER Sec. LL7-23
C:135

ARTICLE III
SEWERS AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL
DIVISION 1
GENERALLY
Sec. LL7-41. throug Sec. LL7-55. (Reserved)
Sec. LL7-41 CHARTER Sec. LL7-41
C:137

DIVISION 2
SEWER CONSTRUCTION
Sec. LL7-56. Power to cause. [1971 Charter Laws, § 250; Laws of
N.Y. (1915) ch. 535, § 82]
The common council may cause sewers and drains to be constructed, relaid,
and repaired in the city at such places and times, in such manner, and of
such dimensions and materials as it shall direct and prescribe.
Sec. LL7-57. General conditions. [1971 Charter Laws, § 258; Laws of
N.Y. (1915) ch. 535, § 89; L.L. No. 1-1941, § 1]
The common council shall not construct any drain or sewer except:
Sec. LL7-58. Expenses. [1971 Charter Laws, §§ 251, 252; Laws of
N.Y. (1915) ch. 535, § 83]
Sec. LL7-59. Temporary loans. [1971 Charter Laws, § 253; Laws of
N.Y. (1915) ch. 535, § 84)
For the purpose of the payment of the expense of constructing a sewer,
the common council may make temporary loans as the work of such
construction progresses. In anticipation of the collection of taxes for the
payment of such improvement, the interest paid for such temporary loan
shall be added to and considered as part of the expenses of such
(1) Upon petition of a majority of the owners of property to be assessed
therefor, unless for an outlet to a drain or sewer constructed upon the
aforesaid petition, and then the shortest practical route shall be
adopted;
(2) Upon resolution as provided in section LL7-64;
(3) In order to comply with state or federal requirements; or
(4) As otherwise provided by law.
(a) The expense of constructing sewers or drains along any street or alley
shall be paid by the owners of the land and real property lying upon or
adjoining that portion of the public street or alley through which the
sewer or drain is constructed. The expense of constructing a sewer or
drain across any street or alley and over or through any land not within
any street or alley, together with all manholes, catchbasins, and flush
tanks located at the intersection of streets shall be a charge upon and
paid by the city by general tax. The public parks, market places, and all
other land and property belonging to or in use by the city shall bear and
be charged with its proportionate share of such expense. Such expense
shall be paid by the city by a general tax.
(b) The expense of repairing or relaying any drain or sewer in the city shall
be paid by a general tax.
Sec. LL7-56 CHARTER Sec. LL7-59
C:139
improvement. Such temporary loan and the certificates issued therefor
shall be a lien to the same extent as is provided for the lien of bonds for
permanent loans. The certificates for such temporary loan shall be signed
by the mayor and city auditor, countersigned by the city clerk, and payable
within one year from the date of issuance.
Sec. LL7-60. Purchase or condemnation of land necessary. [1971
Charter Laws, § 254; Laws of N.Y. (1915) ch. 535, § 85]
Sec. LL7-61. Assessments. [1971 Charter Laws, § 257; Laws of N.Y.
(1915) ch. 535, § 88]
(a) The common council may purchase and hold in the name of the city
such real estate as is necessary for drain and sewer purposes.
(b) If in the opinion of the common council it becomes necessary to
construct sewers or drains over or through lands not lying in any street
or alley and the consent of the owner of any such lands cannot be
obtained thereto, the right to use such lands for such purposes may be
obtained through the exercise of the power of eminent domain.
(a) The common council shall ascertain and determine the expense of the
construction of any sewer or drain along a street or alley. It shall be the
duty of the city auditor to proceed forthwith and assess such amount
upon the real property lying upon or adjoining that portion of street or
alley along which such sewer or drain has been constructed. Each lineal
foot of property shall pay its proportion of the total cost and one lineal
foot shall not be assessed a greater or less amount than another, except
that as to a corner lot abutting upon two streets, on one of which a
sewer has been laid and the expense thereof heretofore assessed upon
the lot, the auditor may make the assessment against the corner lot in
accordance with the benefits to it.
(b) Upon making an assessment under subsection (a) of this section, the
city auditor shall cause a notice to be posted in five public places in the
city, or published at least twice in some newspaper published in the city
that an assessment for sewerage purposes has been made, and that at a
specified time in such notice, which time shall be at least 10 days after
posting of the notice or the first publication thereof, he will be available
to the city for the purpose of correcting and confirming such
assessment, which he shall have power to do. After the correction and
confirmation of the assessment, the assessment shall be a lien and
charge upon the property so assessed, and the common council shall
cause such lien and charge to be collected in the same manner as is
provided for the collection of other taxes in the city.
Sec. LL7-59 OLEAN CODE Sec. LL7-62
C:140
Sec. LL7-62. Parks adjoining street on which proposed sewer is to
be constructed. [1971 Charter Laws, § 259; Laws of N.Y. (1915) ch.
535, § 89; L.L. No. 1-1941, § 1]
The city shall be deemed to be the owner of any public park adjoining the
street in which any such sewer or drain is proposed to be constructed, and
the approval of any petition for construction of a sewer by the common
council shall be deemed equivalent to the signing of the petition by the city.
Sec. LL7-63. Outlets not to be paid for by owners; permit required
when owner has paid no assessment. [1971 Charter Laws, § 260;
Laws of N.Y. (1915) ch. 535, § 89; L.L. No. 1-1941, § 1]
All drains and sewers constructed for an outlet to a sewer constructed
upon petition shall be paid for by the city by general tax, and shall not
be chargeable to abutting property owners. No connection shall be made
to any outlet sewer by any person or to a petition sewer by any person
on account of whose property no assessment was made to pay for such
sewer without the consent of the common council, and no such permission
shall be given without the payment of a reasonable charge therefor to be
determined by the regulations as the common council may prescribe.
Sec. LL7-64. Public health reasons. [1971 Charter Laws, § 262;
Laws of N.Y. (1915) ch. 535, § 90]
Sec. LL7-65. through Sec. LL7-80. (Reserved)
(a) Whenever the common council believes that the public health will be
promoted by the construction of a sewer in any public street, alley, or
thoroughfare of the city, it may adopt a resolution to such effect and
designate a time and place when it will meet to act on such resolution.
The common council shall give notice of the time and place of such
meeting. The notice must describe the sewer proposed to be
constructed and contain the names of the known owners of the lands
abutting upon the streets in which the sewer is to be constructed. The
notice must be published once a week for two consecutive weeks
immediately preceding the time of hearing.
(b) Any person interested may be heard and introduce testimony before the
common council upon the hearing on the resolution, and the common
council may adjourn such hearing from time to time as it may deem
necessary. The common council shall hear and determine the matter,
and, if it shall determine to make such improvements, it shall adopt the
resolution. If the common council shall so determine to construct such
sewer the same proceedings shall be had thereafter for the
construction of the sewer as if the sewer were constructed upon the
presentation of a petition. The expense of the construction of such
sewer shall be assessed and collected in the same manner as if the
sewer had been constructed upon petition.
Sec. LL7-62 CHARTER Sec. LL7-65
C:141

ARTICLE 3
SEWER RENTS
Sec. LL7-81. Established. [1971 Charter Laws, § 264; L.L. No.
1-1966, § 1]
There is hereby established a scale of rents pursuant to General Municipal
Law art. 14-F [§ 450 et seq.], such rents to be called "sewer rents."
Sec. LL7-82. Levied and assessed against premises; to be based on
metered consumption of water; disposition of revenue. [1971
Charter Laws, § 265; L.L. No. 1-1966, § 2]
Sewer rents are hereby levied and assessed against every lot, parcel of
land, building, or premises now or hereafter having any connection with
the sewer system of the city or otherwise discharging domestic sewage,
commercial, institutional, and industrial waste, water, or other liquids
either directly or indirectly into the sanitary sewer system of such city.
Sewer rents shall be based on the metered consumption of water to the
premises connected with and served by the sewer system or any part or
parts thereof. The revenue from sewer rents shall be used for the payment
of costs of operation, maintenance, and repairs of the sewer system or
such part or parts thereof for which sewer rents have been established and
imposed; the interest on and amortization of, or payment of, indebtedness
which has been or shall be incurred for the construction of the sewer
system; or such part or parts thereof for which sewer rents have been
established and imposed, other than indebtedness, and the interest thereon,
which is to be paid in the first instance from assessments upon benefited
real property; for the construction of sewage treatment and disposal works
with necessary appurtenances including pumping stations; or for the
extension, enlargement, or replacement of, or additions to, such sewer
systems, or part or parts thereof.
Sec. LL7-83. Amount. [1971 Charter Laws, § 266; L.L. No. 1-1966,
§ 3]
In addition to any and all fees and charges provided by law, the owner
of any parcel of real property within the city limits connected with the
sewer system of the city shall pay a sewer rent for the use of such sewer
system based upon the metered consumption of water to the premises in
an amount to be fixed and determined from time to time by the common
council of the city by ordinance. For the purpose of determining the charge
to be rendered, premises using the sewerage system whereon the water
used is derived in whole or in part from sources independent of the city,
the water used thereon supplied from private sources, shall be measured
by a city water meter or by a meter acceptable to the water department, to
be installed and maintained by the owner or occupant thereof, at his own
cost and subject to supervision and inspection by the water department.
The sewer rental charged against such property shall be determined by
the metered consumption of water used on the premises regardless of the
Sec. LL7-81 CHARTER Sec. LL7-83
C:143
source from which supplied. Such charge shall be at the rate established
by ordinance and shall be the same rate that the classification of the
premises warrants. Whenever the owner or occupant fails to install such
meter and in cases where the water department finds it impractical to
insist upon a special meter, the water department may accept the report
of the property owner as to the amount of water used on the premises,
or the water department may fix and determine the amount ordinarily
consumed upon the premises by such method as it may find practicable in
the light of the conditions and attendant circumstances of the case in order
to determine the sewer rental charge, all in accordance with corresponding
rates assessed against other similar property.
Sec. LL7-84. Due and payable; delinquency. [1971 Charter Laws,
§ 267; L.L. No. 1-1966, § 4]
In the case of premises whereon the water used is supplied by the city
through its department of public works, the sewer rental charge provided
in this division shall be added to the water bills rendered to the owners,
lessees, or occupants of such property and shall be paid at the time the
water bill is payable at the office of the city clerk. The bill shall be collected
with and addition to the water charge for water service, and no part of
the charge for water service shall be accepted without including therewith
the sewer rental charge. Such sewer rental charge shall be subject to the
same penalty provided for delinquent water bills, and it is hereby made
the duty of the city clerk to collect such penalty for failure to pay the
sewer rental charge when due. In cases of premises whereon water used
is not supplied by the city, the department of public works will render
quarterly to the owners, lessees, or occupants of such property, bills for
the amount of the sewer rental charged as set forth in this division. If such
charge is not paid when due, it shall be subject to the same penalty as is
provided for delinquent water bills, and the city clerk is hereby required to
collect such penalty. If the said bills for sewer rentals rendered for premises
whereon water is not supplied by the city is not paid within 30 days after
the rendering thereof, the department of public works shall certify the
same, together with such penalty and such bills shall be collected, and the
collection thereof enforced in the same manner in all respects as city taxes.
They shall be added to the taxes subject to like penalty, costs, and interest
charges. If the sewer rental bill remains unpaid for a period exceeding 30
days after the rendering thereof, city water service shall be terminated
to the premises and service shall not be restored to the premises until
all sewer taxes together with interest and penalty thereon together with
additional removal and installation costs are fully paid.
Sec. LL7-85. Payable, collectible, and enforceable in same manner
as water charges; collection when unpaid. [1971 Charter Laws,
§ 268; L.L. No. 1-1966, § 5]
All sewer rents for premises using city water shall be payable, collectible,
and enforceable in the manner provided by law for the payment, collection,
and enforcement of water charges and, if unpaid, shall be collected in the
Sec. LL7-83 OLEAN CODE Sec. LL7-85
C:144
same manner provided for the collection of city taxes. When remaining
unpaid, such rents shall be added to the annual city tax on the property to
and for which sewer service was furnished and rendered.
Sec. LL7-86. Power of department relative to collection, etc. [1971
Charter Laws, § 269; L.L. No. 1-1966, § 6]
The department of public works shall have power to make and enforce such
general rules and regulations, both as to public and private water supply,
for the collection, rebating, refunding, or adjustment of such charges for
any reason, including diversion of water from the sewer system, as may
be reasonably necessary to avoid injustice, to the end that all property
discharging sewage in the sewer system will bear its equitable
proportionate share with other property of the cost of operation,
maintenance, and repairs of the sewerage system or any extension,
enlargement, replacement, or additions to such sewer system, or any part
or parts thereof.
Sec. LL7-87. Real property exempt from water charges exempted.
[1971 Charter Laws, § 270; L.L. No. 1-1966, § 7]
Any real property which is entitled to an exemption from payment of water
rents or charges shall also be exempt from payment of the sewer rents or
charges imposed under this division.
Sec. LL7-88. Schedule of annual charges; power of council to
establish minimum and maximum charge, etc. [1971 Charter Laws,
§ 271; L.L. No. 1-1966, § 8]
The common council shall by ordinance establish a schedule of annual
charges under this law which charges shall be based on the consumption
of water on the premises connected with and served by the sewer system.
The ordinance shall provide for the periodic payment of the annual charge
and shall define the interest and penalty to be assessed for delinquent
payments. The common council shall also have the power to establish a
minimum and a maximum charge for sewer rent upon all real property
within the city limits and to classify all real property into classifications
based upon the uses to which the property is being put at the time.
Sec. LL7-89. Sewer fund. [1971 Charter Laws, § 273; L.L. No.
1-1966, § 10]
All revenues derived from the sewer rents imposed under this division,
together with all penalties and interest thereon, shall be kept by the city
clerk in a separate account to be known as the sewer fund.
Sec. LL7-85 CHARTER Sec. LL7-89
C:145
Part III: Code of Ordinances
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
STATE LAW REFERENCES
General Construction Law § 12.
General Construction Law § 13-a.
General Construction Law § 14.
General Construction Law §§ 13, 41.
General Construction Law § 15.
General Construction Law § 19.
General Construction Law § 20.
General Construction Law § 22.
General Construction Law § 23.
General Construction Law § 24.
General Construction Law § 25-a.
General Construction Law § 30.
General Construction Law § 31.
General Construction Law § 32.
General Construction Law § 33.
General Construction Law § 34.
General Construction Law § 35.
General Construction Law § 36.
General Construction Law § 37.
General Construction Law § 39.
General Construction Law § 40.
General Construction Law § 46.
General Construction Law § 51.
General Construction Law § 56.
General Construction Law § 58.
General Construction Law § 60.
General Construction Law § 80.
General Construction Law §§ 90-96.
Power of city to provide penalties, forfeitures
and imprisonment to punish violations of
ordinances, General City Law § 20(22).
Sec. 1-1. Designation and citation of Code. [Code 1971, § 1-1]
The ordinances embraced in this part III shall constitute and be designated
the "Code of Ordinances of the City of Olean, New York," and may be so
cited.
Sec. 1-2. Definitions and general rules of construction. [Code 1971,
§ 1-3]
As used in all ordinances unless the context requires otherwise:
GENERALLY — Provisions shall be liberally construed to effect the purposes
expressed therein or implied from the expression thereof. In case of doubt
or ambiguity in the meaning of such provisions, the general shall yield to
the particular. Reference for interpretation and construction shall tend to
further the accomplishment of the elimination of the particular mischiefs for
which the provisions were enacted.
Sec. LL7-89 OLEAN CODE Sec. 1-2
C:146
AFFIDAVIT — When an affidavit is authorized or required, it may be sworn
to before any officer authorized by law to take the acknowledgment of deeds
in this state unless a particular officer is specified before whom it is to be
taken.
ARMED FORCES OF THE UNITED STATES — The Army, Navy, Marine
Corps, Air Force, and Coast Guard, including all components of such forces,
and the National Guard when in the service of the United States pursuant
to call as provided by law. Pursuant to this definition, no person shall be
considered a member or veteran of the armed forces of the United States
unless service in an armed force is or was on a full-time active duty basis
other than active duty for training.
BOND AND UNDERTAKING — A provision authorizing or requiring a bond
to be given shall be deemed to have been complied with by the execution of
an undertaking to the same effect.
CALENDAR DAY — A calendar day includes the time from midnight to
midnight. Sunday or any day of the week specifically mentioned means a
calendar day.
CHARTER — The Charter of the City of Olean, New York.
CHATTELS — Includes goods and chattels. Where "chattels" appears and
pertains to an action to recover the same, it includes all specific personal
property such as, but not limited to, certificates of stock, bonds, notes or
other securities or obligations.
CITY — The City of Olean, New York.
CODE — The Code of Ordinances of the City of Olean, New York, as
established and designated in section 1-1.
COMMON COUNCIL — The common council of the city.
COMPUTATION OF DAYS — A number of days specified as a period from a
certain day within which or after which or before which an act is authorized
or required to be done means the number of calendar days exclusive of the
calendar day from which the reckoning is made. If the period is a period
of two days, Saturday, Sunday or a public holiday must be excluded from
the reckoning if it is an intervening day between the day from which the
reckoning is made and the last day of the period. In computing any specified
period of time from a specified event, the day upon which the event happens
is deemed the day from which the reckoning is made. The day from which
any specified period of time is reckoned shall be excluded in making the
reckoning.
COMPUTATION OF MONTHS — A number of months after or before a
certain day shall be computed by counting such number of calendar months
from such day, exclusive of the calendar month in which the day occurs,
and shall include the day of the month in the last month so counted having
the same numerical order in days of the month as the day from which the
computation is made, unless there are not so many days in the last month
so counted, in which case the period computed shall expire with the last day
of the month so counted.
Sec. 1-2 CHARTER Sec. 1-2
C:147
CONFLICTING OR OVERLAPPING PROVISIONS — Ordinances are the
minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of the public health,
safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare. Where an ordinance
imposes greater restrictions upon the subject matter than the other
provisions the provision imposing the greater restriction or regulation
controls. Ordinances prevail over resolutions.
CORPORATE LIMITS, CORPORATION LIMITS — Or "city limits" means the
legal boundaries of the city.
COUNTY — Cattaraugus County, New York.
DELEGATION OF AUTHORITY — A provision that requires a city officer or
city employee to do an act authorizes the officer or employee to delegate
and authorize subordinates to perform the required act.
EFFECT OF HOLIDAYS — When any period of time, computed from a
certain day, within which or after which or before which an act is authorized
or required to be done ends on a Saturday, Sunday or a public holiday, the
act may be done on the next succeeding business day, and, if the period
ends at a specified hour, the act may be done at or before the same hour
of the next succeeding business day. Where time is extended by virtue of
the provisions of this paragraph, the extended time shall not be included in
the computation of interest, except that when the period is specified as a
number of months, the extended time shall be included in the computation
of interest.
GENDER — Whenever words of the masculine or feminine gender appear,
unless the sense of the sentence requires otherwise, they shall be deemed
to refer to both male or female persons. This construction shall apply
to gender-indicative suffixes or prefixes as well as to gender-indicative
words. Whenever the reference is to a corporation, board, body, group,
organization or entity comprising more than one person or to an assemblage
of persons or to an inanimate object, the reference shall be construed to be
neuter in gender.
HERETOFORE OR HEREAFTER — When used in any provision, relates to
the time the provision takes effect.
KEEPER OR PROPRIETOR — Includes persons, whether acting by
themselves or through servants, agents or employees.
MAY — Is to be construed as permissive.
MAYOR — The mayor of the city.
MONTH — A calendar month.
MUNICIPAL OFFICERS — A reference to several officers of the city holding
the same office or to a board of such officers shall refer to the single
officer holding the office, when but one person is chosen to fill the office in
pursuance of law.
MUST — Is to be construed as mandatory.
Sec. 1-2 OLEAN CODE Sec. 1-2
C:148
NEWSPAPERS — "Daily newspaper" or "newspaper published each
business day" means a newspaper customarily published on each business
day of the year, whether or not the newspaper is published on any other
day. In this paragraph "business day" does not include a Saturday, Sunday
or legal holiday.
NIGHTTIME — Includes the time from sunset to sunrise.
NONTECHNICAL AND TECHNICAL WORDS — Words and phrases shall be
construed according to the common and approved usage of the language,
but technical words and phrases and such others as may have acquired a
peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be construed and understood
according to such meaning.
NOTICE — When a notice is required to be given to a board or body, service
of the notice upon the clerk or chairperson of the board or body is sufficient.
NOW — In any provision referring to other ordinances or local laws in force
or to a person in office or to any facts or circumstances as existing, relates
to the local laws or ordinances in force or to the person in office or to the
facts or circumstances existing, respectively, immediately before the taking
effect of the provision.
NUMBER — Words in the singular number include the plural and in the
plural number include the singular.
OATH, AFFIDAVIT, AND SWEAR — Includes every mode authorized by law
of attesting the truth of that which is stated. "Swear" includes every mode
authorized by law for administering an oath.
OR, AND — May be read "and," and "and" may be read "or" if the sense
requires it.
OWNER — As applied to a building or land, includes any part owner, joint
owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant, or tenant by
the entirety, of the whole or of a part of the building or land.
PERSON — Includes a corporation and a joint-stock association. When used
to designate a party whose property may be the subject of any offense,
"person" includes the state or any other state, government, or country
which may lawfully own property in the state.
PERSONAL PROPERTY — Includes chattels, money, things in action, and
all written instruments themselves, as distinguished from the rights or
interests to which they relate, by which any right, interest, lien or
incumbrance in, to or upon property or any debt or financial obligation
is created, acknowledged, evidenced, transferred, discharged or defeated,
wholly or in part, and everything, except real property, which may be the
subject of ownership. Oil wells and all fixtures connected with oil wells,
situated on lands leased for oil purposes and oil interests, and rights held
under and by virtue of any lease or contract or other right or license to
operate for or produce petroleum oil, are deemed personal property for all
purposes except taxation.
PRECEDING, FOLLOWING — Next before and next after, respectively.
Sec. 1-2 CHARTER Sec. 1-2
C:149
PROPERTY — Includes real property and personal property.
PUBLIC HOLIDAYS DESIGNATED — Includes the following days in each
year: January 1, known as New Year's Day; the third Monday in January
known as Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr., Day; February 12, known as Lincoln's
Birthday; the third Monday in February, known as Washington's Birthday;
the last Monday in May, known as Memorial Day; the second Sunday in
June, known as Flag Day; July 4, known as Independence Day; the first
Monday in September known as Labor Day; the second Monday in October,
known as Columbus Day; November 11, known as Veterans Day; the fourth
Thursday in November, known as Thanksgiving Day; and December 25,
known as Christmas Day and, if any of such day except Flag Day is Sunday,
the next day thereafter, and each general election day and each day
appointed by the president of the United States or by the governor of this
state as a day of general thanksgiving, general fasting and prayer or other
general religious observances. "Half-holiday" includes the period from noon
to midnight of each Saturday which is not a public holiday.
PUBLIC PLACE — Any park, cemetery, schoolyard or open space adjacent
thereto, and all beaches, canals and other waterways.
PUBLIC WORKS DEPARTMENT, PUBLIC WORKS DIRECTOR, ETC. — The
terms "public works department" and "department of public works" are
synonymous. The terms "public works director," "director of public works"
and "director of the department of public works" are synonymous.
QUORUM AND MAJORITY — Whenever three or more public officers are
given any power or authority or three or more persons are charged with any
public duty to be performed or exercised by them jointly or as a board or
similar body, a majority of the whole number of such persons or officers, at a
meeting duly held at a time fixed by law or by any bylaw duly adopted by the
board or body or at any duly adjourned meeting of the board or body or at
any meeting duly held upon reasonable notice to all of them shall constitute
a quorum. Not less than a majority of the whole number may perform and
exercise such power, authority, or duty. In this paragraph "whole number"
means the total number which the board, commission, body, or other group
of persons or officers would have were there no vacancies and none of the
persons disqualified from acting. Any meeting referred to in this paragraph
may be adjourned by a less number than a quorum.
REAL PROPERTY — Includes real estate, lands, tenements and
hereditaments, corporeal and incorporeal.
REFERENCES TO OFFICIALS, DEPARTMENTS, ETC. — References to
officers, employees, boards, departments and commissions are to be
interpreted as if followed by the words "of the city."
REFERENCES TO REPEALED PROVISIONS — If any legislation is repealed
and, in substance, reenacted, a reference to the repealed provision shall be
deemed a reference to the reenacted provision.
RESIDENCE — The place adopted by a person as the person's place of
habitation, and to which, whenever the person is absent, the person has
Sec. 1-2 OLEAN CODE Sec. 1-2
C:150
the intention of returning. When a person eats at one place and sleeps at
another, the place where the person sleeps is the person's residence.
SEAL — The city or corporate seal.
SHALL — Is to be construed as mandatory.
SIDEWALK — Any portion of a street between the curbline and the adjacent
property line intended for the use of pedestrians. "Sidewalk" does not
include a parkway.
SIGNATURE — Includes any memorandum, mark or sign written, printed,
stamped, photographed, engraved or otherwise placed upon any instrument
or writing with intent to execute or authenticate the instrument or writing.
STATE — The State of New York.
STREET — Includes any street, avenue, boulevard, road, alley, lane, viaduct
or other public highway in the city.
SUBWAY — That area of a city street lying between the vehicular traffic lane
and the dedicated street limit.
TENANT, OCCUPANT — As applied to a building or land, includes any
person holding a written or oral lease or who occupies the whole or a part
of the building or land, either alone or with others.
TENSE — Words used in the past or present tense include the future as well
as the past and present.
WEEK — Seven days.
WRITING AND WRITTEN — Includes every legible representation of letters
upon a material substance, except when applied to the signature of an
instrument.
YEAR — 365 days, but the added day of a leap year and the day immediately
preceding shall, for the purpose of such computation, be counted as one
day. "Year" means 12 months. "Half year" means six months. "Quarter of a
year" means three months.
Sec. 1-3. Catchlines of sections, subsections, etc.; effect of history
notes, and cross references and state law references. [Code 1971,
§ 1-2]
(a) Catchlines for sections, subsections, paragraphs, or other portions of
this Code that are printed in boldface type are intended as mere
catchwords to indicate the contents and are not titles or part of the law,
nor shall they be so deemed when amended or reenacted.
(b) History or source notes appearing in parentheses after sections in this
Code are not intended to have any legal effect but are merely intended
to indicate the derivation of the matter contained in the section. Cross
references and state law references which appear after sections or
subsections of this Code or which otherwise appear in footnote form are
provided for convenience and have no legal effect.
Sec. 1-2 CHARTER Sec. 1-3
C:151
Sec. 1-4. Effect of repeal of legislation. [Code 1971, § 1-5]
Sec. 1-5. Amendments or additions to Code.
(c) All references to chapters, articles, divisions, subdivisions, or sections
are to the chapters, articles, divisions, subdivisions, or sections of this
Code unless otherwise specified.
(a) The repeal of legislation includes any legislation amendatory of the
legislation repealed. The repeal of any provision which repeals any
provision of prior legislation does not revive such prior provision.
Provisions repealing prior legislation which are substantial
reenactments of provisions of the prior legislation shall be construed as
a continuation of the provisions of the prior legislation, modified or
amended according to the language employed, and not as new
enactments.
(b) The repeal of legislation or part thereof does not affect or impair any
act done, offense committed, or right accruing, accrued, or acquired or
any liability, penalty, forfeiture, or punishment incurred prior to the
time the repeal takes effect, but the same may be enjoyed, asserted,
enforced, prosecuted, or inflicted as fully and to the same extent as if
the repeal had not been effected. Unless otherwise specifically provided
by law, all actions and proceedings, civil or criminal, commenced under
or by virtue of any legislation so repealed and pending immediately
prior to the taking effect of the repeal may be prosecuted and defended
to final effect in the same manner as they might if the provisions were
not so repealed.
(c) When two numbers in a schedule of repeals are connected by a dash,
both such numbers are included as well as all intermediate numbers.
(a) Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code may be made by
amending such provisions by specific reference to the section number
of this Code in the following language: "Section _____ of the Code of
Ordinances of the City of Olean, New York, is hereby amended to read
as follows: . . ." The new provisions may then be set out in full as
desired.
(b) If a new section not heretofore existing in the Code is to be added, the
following language may be used: "The Code of Ordinances of the City of
Olean, New York, is hereby amended by adding a section, to be
numbered _____, which section reads as follows: . . ." The new section
may then be set out in full as desired.
(c) All chapters, articles, sections, subsections, paragraphs, or provisions
desired to be repealed should be specifically and expressly repealed by
chapter, article, section, subsection, or paragraph number, as the case
may be.
Sec. 1-3 OLEAN CODE Sec. 1-6
C:152
Sec. 1-6. Altering Code. [Code 1971, § 1-6]
It shall be unlawful for any person in the city to change or amend by
additions or deletions, any part or portion of this Code, or to insert or
delete pages, or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with such Code
in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the city to be
misrepresented thereby.
Sec. 1-7. Supplementation of Code.
(a) By contract or by city personnel, supplements to this Code shall be
prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the city. A
supplement to the Code shall include all substantive permanent and
general parts of ordinances of a general and permanent nature adopted
during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made
thereby in the Code. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered
that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary,
replace pages which have become obsolete or partially obsolete. The
new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the
Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest
legislation included in the supplement.
(b) In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code which
have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the omission
thereof from reprinted pages.
(c) When preparing a supplement to this Code, the person authorized to
prepare the supplement may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in
ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar
as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified code. For
example, the person may:
(1) Organize the material into appropriate subdivisions;
(2) Provide appropriate catchlines, headings, and titles for sections
and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement, and
make changes in such catchlines, headings, and titles;
(3) Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to
be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new
material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers;
(4) Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning
to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may
be, or to "sections _____ to _____" (inserting section numbers to
indicate the sections of the Code which embody the substantive
sections of the ordinances incorporated into the Code); and
(5) Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the
original meaning of ordinances inserted into the Code; but, in no
case, shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of
Sec. 1-6 CHARTER Sec. 1-7
C:153
Sec. 1-8. General penalty; continuing violations. [Code 1971, § 1-7]
Sec. 1-9. Prosecution where different penalties exist for same
offense. [Code 1971, § 1-8]
In all cases where the same offense may be made punishable, or shall be
created by different clauses or sections of this Code, the prosecuting officer
may elect under which to proceed; but not more than one recovery shall be
had against the same person for the same offense.
Sec. 1-10. Severability of parts of Code. [Code 1971, § 1-10]
The sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses, and phrases of this Code are
severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph, or section of this
Code shall be declared unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of
the court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality shall not affect
material included in the supplement or already embodied in the
Code.
(a) In this section, violation of this Code means:
(1) Doing an act that is prohibited or made or declared unlawful or an
offense by ordinance or by rule or regulation authorized by
ordinance;
(2) Failure to perform an act that is required to be performed by
ordinance or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance; or
(3) Failure to perform an act if the failure is declared an offense, a
misdemeanor, or unlawful by ordinance or by rule or regulation
authorized by ordinance.
(b) In this section, violation of this Code does not include the failure of a
city officer or city employee to perform an official duty unless it is
provided that failure to perform the duty is to be punished as provided
in this section.
(c) Except as otherwise provided, a person convicted of a violation of this
Code shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $1,000, imprisonment
for a term not exceeding 15 days, or any combination thereof. With
respect to violations that are continuous with respect to time, each day
the violation continues is a separate offense. [Amended 10-27-2015
by Res. No. 95-15]
(d) The imposition of a penalty does not prevent revocation or suspension
of a license, permit, or franchise.
(e) Violations of this Code that are continuous with respect to time are a
public nuisance and may be abated by injunctive or other equitable
relief. The imposition of a penalty does not prevent equitable relief.
Sec. 1-7 OLEAN CODE Sec. 1-10
C:154
any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs, and sections
of this Code.
Sec. 1-11. Provisions considered as continuation of existing
legislation.
The provisions appearing in this Code, so far as they are the same as
legislation existing at the time of the adoption of this Code, shall be
considered as a continuation of this part of the Code and not as new
enactments.
Sec. 1-12. Legislation not affected by Code.
Nothing in this Code or the legislation adopting this Code shall affect
legislation:
Sec. 1-13. Code does not affect prior offenses, rights, etc.
(1) Promising or guaranteeing the payment of money by or to the city,
authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the city or any evidence of the
city's indebtedness, or any contract or obligation assumed by the city;
(2) Appropriating funds or establishing or relating to the annual budget;
(3) Imposing taxes which are not inconsistent with this Code;
(4) Establishing positions, classifying employees, or setting salaries not
codified in this Code;
(5) Dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, paving,
widening, or vacating any street or public way;
(6) Establishing or prescribing street grades;
(7) Providing for local improvements and assessing taxes therefor;
(8) Which rezones specific property;
(9) Dedicating, accepting, or rejecting any plat or subdivision;
(10) Annexing or deannexing property;
(11) Whose purpose has been accomplished;
(12) Which is special although permanent in effect;
(13) Which is temporary although general in effect.
(a) Nothing in this Code or the legislation adopting this Code affects any
offense or act committed or done, any penalty or forfeiture incurred, or
any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of
this Code.
Sec. 1-10 CHARTER Sec. 1-13
C:155
Chapter 2
ADMINISTRATION
CROSS REFERENCES
Definitions and rules of construction
generally, § 1-2.
Promotion and marketing committee, § 2-46
Boards, commissions, etc., § 2-81 et seq.
Board of ethics, § 2-118
Code review committee, § 6-27
Elections, Ch. 7.
Ambulance board, § 10-27
Historic preservation commission, § 11-21 et
seq.
Housing board of appeal, § 12-121 et seq.
Licenses, permits and miscellaneous business
regulations, Ch. 13
Planning board, § 18-21 et seq.
Police, Ch. 19.
Tree board, § 21-56
Taxation and assessments, Ch. 23.
Zoning board of appeal, § 28-46 et seq.
LOCAL LAW REFERENCES
Administration, ch. LL2.
Officers and employees, § LL2-37 et seq.
Elections, Ch. LL3.
Taxation and assessments, Ch. LL6
Sewer fund, § LL7-89
STATE LAW REFERENCES
Local Finance Law § 1.00 et seq.
Municipal finances, General Municipal Law
§ 3 et seq.
General Obligations Law, § 5-328.
Records management officer, Arts and
Cultural Affairs Law § 57.19.
Expenses of attending conferences, etc.,
General Municipal Law § 77-b.
Authority to so provide, General Municipal
Law § 85
Public contracts, General Municipal Law
§ 100 et seq.
Regulations for procurement without bids,
General Municipal Law § 104-b.
General Municipal Law § 800.
General Municipal Law §§ 803, 805-a.
Local codes of ethics authorized, General
Municipal Law § 806.
General Municipal Law § 806(2).
Board of Ethics, General Municipal Law § 808.
(b) The adoption of this Code does not authorize or allow any use or the
continuance of any use of a structure or premises in violation of any
legislation in effect on the date of adoption of this Code.
Sec. 1-13 OLEAN CODE Sec. 1-13
C:156
ARTICLE I
IN GENERAL
Sec. 2-1. City offices open to public. [Code 1971, § 2-1]
All the City offices located in the municipal building, except the Youth
Bureau, shall be open weekdays, except Saturday, from 9:00 a.m. until 5:00
p.m.
Sec. 2-2. Identification of City vehicles. [Code 1971, § 2-6]
Sec. 2-3. Accessibility of public meetings of the City. [Res. No. 6-92,
§ 2, 3-10-1992]
It is the policy of the City to ensure that all citizens of the community,
including members of the public with disabilities, wishing to attend any
public meeting or activity of the City shall have full accessibility to such
meeting or activity, and shall be able to participate and communicate as
effectively as possible. This shall include, without limitation, the furnishing
of auxiliary aids and services where necessary. In determining the type
of auxiliary aid or service that is necessary or appropriate, the City shall
give primary consideration to the request of the individual with a disability.
In implementing this policy, the Common Council adopts the following
guidelines with respect to all public meetings and activities conducted by or
on behalf of the City. However, in doing so, the Common Council specifically
acknowledges such guidelines are intended to address those circumstances
which reasonably are anticipated to occur, but such guidelines are not
expected to be an exhaustive itemization of responses which may be
required as a result of the requests of individuals with disabilities. The
guidelines are as follows:
(a) All City automobiles and trucks shall have the name of the appropriate
City department thereon in letters at least two inches in height.
(b) All police cars shall be lettered OLEAN POLICE DEPARTMENT on their
doors, in white, with letters not less than six inches in height or suitable
for the size of the door.
(c) This section does not apply to police cars designated by the Chief of
Police.
(1) In connection with any public meeting or activity in which a visually
disabled individual desires to participate and upon 48 hours request
and notice to the City Clerk, sufficient copies of all documents
distributed to the public in connection with such meeting shall be
enlarged for distribution to the visually disabled person.
(2) Upon 48 hours notice given to the City Clerk prior to any public meeting
by a hearing impaired person desiring that an interpreter provide sign
interpretation of a meeting, the City, at its sole cost and expense, shall
provide one or more sign interpreters.
Sec. 2-1 CHARTER Sec. 2-4
C:157
Sec. 2-4. Enforcement response plan. [Res. No. 153-91, 12-10-1991]
The enforcement response plan for the City pretreatment program attached
to Res. No. 153-91 is adopted by the City as the City of Olean Enforcement
Response Plan.
Sec. 2-5. through Sec. 2-20. (Reserved)
Sec. 2-4 OLEAN CODE Sec. 2-5
C:158
ARTICLE II
COMMON COUNCIL
DIVISION 1
GENERALLY
Sec. 2-21. Record of ordinances kept by City Clerk in book. [Code
1971, § 1-9]
All ordinances passed by the Common Council shall be recorded by the City
Clerk in a proper book, with indexes. The originals shall be filed in the City
Clerk's office, and due proof of the publication of all ordinances requiring
publication, by the certificate of the publisher or printer, shall be procured
by the Clerk, attached thereto, or written and attested upon the face of the
record of such ordinance.
Sec. 2-22. through Sec. 2-35. (Reserved)
Sec. 2-21 CHARTER Sec. 2-22
C:159

DIVISION 2
RULES OF PROCEDURE5
Sec. 2-36. Roberts Rules of Order. [Res. No. 11-94, 3-8-1994]
On all points of order not governed by these rules, the general rules of
parliamentary practice as outlined in Robert's Rules of Order, Revised, shall
be referred to for guidance. The City Attorney shall be the parliamentarian
for the City.
Sec. 2-37. Organizational meeting. [Res. No. 11-94, 3-8-1994]
Sec. 2-38. Regular meetings of the Common Council; meeting time
and place. [Res. No. 11-94, 3-8-1994; Res. No. 8-00, 2-22-2000; Res.
No. 73-00, 8-8-2000; amended 7-10-2012 by Res. No. 52-12]
Regular meetings of the Common Council shall be held in the Council
Chambers, Municipal Building, on the second and fourth Tuesday of each
month to proceed after the Committee of the Whole. The Common Council
shall hold regular meeting s at least twice in each month. At any regularly
scheduled meeting attended by 2/3 of the Aldermen in office, the Council
may, by majority vote, set the time and place of the next regularly scheduled
meeting. When such Council vote is taken, the following regular meeting
shall be held at that time and place stated and the succeeding meetings
shall be as otherwise provided by this rule.
Sec. 2-39. Special meetings. [Res. No. 11-94, 3-8-1994]
Special meetings (called meetings) may be called pursuant to the Charter
of the City of Olean by the Mayor, Common Council President or any three
Aldermen. Special meetings may be called with notice given by the Clerk at
least 24 hours before the time of meeting by:
(a) The organizational meeting of the Common Council shall be held at the
first meeting of the Common Council in each year. The incumbent
Mayor shall call the first meeting to order and the first order of business
shall be the Mayor's state of the City message.
(b) At the organizational meeting of the Common Council the members
shall elect a President of the Common Council.
(1) Delivering written notice to each member of the Common Council; or
(2) Delivering written notice to a person of mature age and discretion at a
place of residence of each member; or
5. Editor's note—Res. No. 11-94, adopted March 8, 1994, amended Div. 2, in its entirety, to
read as herein set out in §§ 2-36—2-66. Prior to inclusion of said resolution, Div. 2
pertained to similar subject matter. See the Code Comparative Table.
Sec. 2-36 CHARTER Sec. 2-39
C:161
Sec. 2-40. Regular meetings; order of business. [Res. No. 11-94,
3-8-1994; Res. No. 13-98, 2-24-1998]
The business of all regular meetings of the Common Council shall be
transacted in the following order:
Sec. 2-41. Standing committees. [Res. No. 11-94, 3-8-1994; Res. No.
4-95, § 1, 2-14-1995; Res. No. 13-98, 2-24-1998; Res. No. 12-99,
2-23-1999; Res. No. 2-00, 1-25-2000; Res. No. 3-01, 1-23-2001; Res.
No. 04-02, 2-12-2002; Res. No. 08-07, 2-13-2007; Res. No. 03-09,
1-27-2009; Res. No. 04-10, 1-26-2010]
(3) Enclosing written notice in a securely postpaid wrapper directed to
each member at his post office address or place of residence at least
five days prior to the special meeting.
(1) Roll call;
(2) Invocation;
(3) Pledge;
(4) Reading, correcting and approving previous minutes;
(5) Committee reports and unfinished Council business;
(6) Communications from the Mayor;
(7) Miscellaneous communications and petitions;
(8) Reports from other City officials;
(9) Proposed legislation and referrals;
(10) Public comment/input;
(11) Finance/bills;
(12) Motions/resolutions;
(13) Adjourn.
(a) Standing committees. The standing committees of the Common Council
shall be as follows:
Number of Members
(1) City Operations 5
(2) Public Safety 7
(3) Division of Youth and Recreation 5
(4) Strategic Planning 5
(5) Finance Committee 7
(6) Labor Relations Committee 4
Sec. 2-39 OLEAN CODE Sec. 2-41
C:162
Sec. 2-42. Subcommittees and boards. [Res. No. 11-94, 3-8-1994]
Subcommittees may be appointed by the President of the Common Council
as deemed appropriate. Unless otherwise provided, subcommittee
appointments shall be for a term of one year.
Sec. 2-43. Special committees. [Res. No. 11-94, 3-8-1994]
Special committees may be authorized at any legal meeting of the Common
Council. They shall be appointed by the Mayor with the consent of the
Common Council. Any resolution creating any special committee shall
specify the powers and duties of the committee and the number of its
members.
Sec. 2-44. Advisory committees. [Res. No. 11-94,3-8-1994]
Advisory committees may be authorized by resolution. Members of such
committee shall be appointed by the Mayor with the consent of the Common
Council. Members of the public may be appointed to serve on advisory and
special purpose committees. Any resolution creating an advisory committee
shall specify the powers and duties of the committee and the number of its
members.
Sec. 2-45. Committee of the Common Council as a whole. [Res. No.
11-94, 3-8-1994]
In order to consider a matter by the Common Council as a whole the
Common Council may resolve itself in to a committee of the whole on any
Number of Members
(7) Committee of the Whole 7
The President of the Common Council shall appoint the chairman and
members of all standing committees. All standing committees shall
be appointed for one year. No person shall continue to serve as a
committee member after ceasing to be a member of the Common
Council.
(b) Standing committee chairmen; voting. Chairmen of the standing
committee shall have a vote on all matters considered by their
committee.
(c) Regular standing committee meetings. The Common Council shall
establish a standing meeting night for each committee.
(d) Called meetings. The following may call committee meetings: The
Mayor; the President of the Council; the chairman of the committee; or
two members of the committee. Meetings of the standing committees
may be called upon 24 hours' notice by notifying each committee
member of the meeting either by telephone or in writing, advising the
time and place of the meeting.
Sec. 2-41 CHARTER Sec. 2-45
C:163
subject before it. The rules of the Common Council shall be observed by this
committee insofar as they are applicable, except that the number of times a
member may speak shall not be limited.
Sec. 2-46. Referral to committees; proposed legislation (PL). [Res.
No. 11-94, 3-8-1994; Res. No. 13-98, 2-24-1998; Res. No. 77-98,
9-22-1998]
Sec. 2-47. Committees in general. [Res. No. 11-94, 3-8-1994]
(a) Referral of matters. All petitions, communications, budget adjustments,
reports, resolutions, motions, local laws, etc., requiring action of the
Common Council shall be referred by the presiding officer, without
motion:
(1) To the appropriate committee; or
(2) To the Mayor for administrative action unless otherwise ordered by
the Common Council by a majority vote.
(b) Initiation of new legislative matters. All legislation shall be initiated by
the submission to the Common Council President the proposed
legislation. The proposed legislation shall be prepared, signed and
submitted by a Common Council member or the Mayor and shall
contain a general summary of the proposed legislation. The PL shall be
numbered and referred to committee at the next regular meeting or
work session of the Common Council.
(c) Referral of proposed legislation. All PL's must be turned in to the
journal clerk prior to 12:00 noon Thursday prior to any regular session
or work session of the Common Council in order to be referred at the
Tuesday meeting.
(a) Committee adjournment. No committee meeting shall be adjourned
until announced by the chair of the committee after majority vote of the
members present.
(b) Committee quorum. Action on any matter properly before any
committee shall be taken only while a majority of the committee is
present and in session. If the Common Council President is in
attendance at a committee meeting he shall be counted for the purpose
of establishing a quorum if necessary. In such event, the Common
Council President shall have a vote as if a member of such committee.
(c) Committee vacancy. Any vacancy on a committee shall be filled by the
Common Council President without delay.
(d) Committee minutes. Each committee chair shall be responsible for
assuring minutes of his or her committee are kept. The minutes shall
contain a brief summary of the business conducted by the committee,
together with a record of the decisions made by the committee as well
as the time, place and persons present and any other pertinent
Sec. 2-45 OLEAN CODE Sec. 2-47
C:164
Sec. 2-48. Presiding officer. [Res. No. 11-94, 3-8-1994; amended
12-9-2014 by Res. No. 110-14]
The Common Council President shall be the presiding officer for regular and
special meetings of the Common Council.
information. The minutes of committee meetings shall be filed with the
journal clerk within one week after each meeting.
(e) Committee member attendance. The committee chair must report to
the President of the Common Council all situations where a members's
attendance at regularly scheduled meetings in the preceding six-month
period falls below 75%. The Common Council President shall thereupon
remove such member from the committee unless the member shall
demonstrate extenuating circumstance to the committee which shall by
majority vote request the Common Council not remove such member.
(f) Committee meetings open to public. All committee meetings shall be
open and subject [to] the provisions of Article 7 of the Public Officers
Law. Should a committee desire to go into executive session it shall
comply with Article 7 of the Public Officers Law and the provisions
governing executive sessions contained in this division (see section
2-107).
(g) Committee minute book. It shall be the duty of the City Clerk to provide
each committee chairman with an appropriate permanent minute book.
This book shall remain the property of the City of Olean and shall be
kept by the journal clerk. The minute book shall be surrendered to the
City Clerk upon the expiration of the chairman's tenure in committee
office. It shall be the duty of each committee chairman to assure that
appropriate written records in the prescribed format of each committee
meeting and of all committee acts and discussions. The Mayor or any
member of the Common Council may inspect the minute books of the
committees created under this rule.
(h) Who may speak. Only the Mayor, the sponsor, the cosponsor, committee
members or department head(s) concerned with a question may
address any question during a committee session unless the committee
chairman shall otherwise direct.
(i) Formal report to Council. All legislation and other matters referred to
committee shall be formally reported on by the committee with
recommendation, including majority and minority report, if applicable,
or status, with reason for delay within 45 days of referral.
(1) In the event of the temporary absence of the Common Council
President, the Common Council shall designate by majority vote a
member to act as presiding officer. In the event of the failure of the
Common Council to designate a presiding officer by majority vote, the
parliamentarian shall act as chairman pro term to appoint the presiding
officer.
Sec. 2-47 CHARTER Sec. 2-48
C:165
Sec. 2-49. Request for the floor. [Res. No. 11-94, 3-8-1994]
A member desiring the floor during a regular or called meeting of the
Common Council shall request the chair for the privilege. When two or more
persons seek the floor, the presiding officer shall designate the member who
is to speak. The member designated by the chair shall address himself or
herself to the Council, confining his or her remarks only to those questions
under debate and avoiding personalities or extraneous matters. Those
deviating from this rule will be called to order and the privilege of the floor
may be withdrawn by the presiding officer.
Sec. 2-50. Motions and their precedence. [Res. No. 11-94, 3-8-1994]
Any proposed action given orally from the floor shall be deemed a motion.
When any question is under debate, only the following motions shall be
entertained, and they shall have precedence in the order stated:
Undebatable:
(2) In the event of a permanent vacancy for the position of Common
Council President, the Common Council, after all Council vacancies
having been filled, shall elect a President of the Common Council until
the next organizational meeting of the Common Council.
(3) In the absence of the Common Council President from other than a
regular or special meeting (for example, a work session or a hearing),
the President may designate a member of the Common Council to act as
presiding officer for such meeting.
(4) The presiding officer for regular or special meetings of the Common
Council, work sessions of the Common Council, or committee meetings
shall preserve order and decorum. He or she shall decide questions of
order subject to appeal.
(1) Motion to adjourn.
(2) Motion to take recess.
(3) Motion to lay on the table.
(4) Motion to call the question (for the previous question).
(5) Motion to limit or to extend limits of debate.
(6) Point of order. Debatable:
(7) Motion to postpone to a certain time.
(8) Motion to commit or refer.
(9) Motion to amend.
(10) To postpone indefinitely.
Sec. 2-48 OLEAN CODE Sec. 2-51
C:166
Sec. 2-51. Rules for debate. [Res. No. 11-94, 3-8-1994]
Sec. 2-52. Resolutions. [Res. No. 11-94, 3-8-1994]
Sec. 2-53. Resolutions approving payment of audited bills, inquiries
concerning bills. [Res. No. 11-94, 3-8-1994]
On auditing bills or accounts against the City, a roll call vote shall be taken
and a record kept on the same. Questions regarding specific bills may be
directed to responsible City officials on the floor of the Council meeting
(a) Debate. No debate shall be in order until the pending question has been
stated by the chair.
(b) Questions. If any question being debated contains several distinct
propositions, the same shall be divided by the chair at the request of
any member, to the end that a vote may be taken on each proposition.
(c) Priority of business. All questions relating to the priority of business
(the priority of one question or subject matter over another) shall be
decided by the chair without debate.
(a) [Defined.] The term resolution shall mean a formal proposed action, in
writing.
(b) Numbering. The journal clerk upon receipt of a resolution to be
referred to the Common Council for vote shall assign a number. All
resolutions shall be numbered in chronological order as received by the
journal clerk and shall retain the same number permanently. All
resolutions shall be considered and referred to by number in any
discussion or action taken by Council.
(c) Prior approval by City Attorney. All resolutions shall be approved by the
City Attorney as to form prior to vote on the resolution by any
committee or the Common Council if the matter is not referred to
committee. The City Attorney shall indicate approval as to form of the
resolution by initialling the original copy of the resolution.
(d) Sponsorship. All resolutions shall contain the name of its sponsor and
cosponsor and a short title setting forth the purpose of the proposed
action. Committee chairmen are responsible to assure that all
resolutions recommended for action by the committee have
sponsorship. Resolutions without sponsorship shall not be placed on the
Common Council agenda.
(e) Submission deadline. All resolutions must be tuned in to the journal
clerk prior to 12:00 noon Thursday prior to any regular session of the
Common Council in order to be on the agenda at the Thursday meeting.
(f) Termination of resolutions. All resolutions in committee or reported on
by committee and not acted on by committee or the Common Council
shall die and the same shall not hold over in the year of reorganization.
Sec. 2-51 CHARTER Sec. 2-53
C:167
by Common Council members only in accordance with the following rule:
Barring extraordinary circumstances, and so a City official may prepare
a timely response, inquiries concerning bills shall be communicated by
Council members to the approving City official prior to noon on the day the
Common Council meeting which will approve the bill.
Sec. 2-54. Resolutions involving the expenditure of money. [Res.
No. 11-94, 3-8-1994]
Upon the introduction of any resolution involving the expenditure of money,
unless the Common Council shall direct otherwise by majority vote, shall be
referred to the appropriate committee without debate; however, immediate
vote without referral shall be permitted:
Sec. 2-55. Roll call vote and voice vote procedure. [Res. No. 11-94,
3-8-1994]
(1) For resolutions covering claims and accounts against the City approved
by the auditor; or
(2) For authority to advertise for bid for purchase or public works approved
and contained in the budget for the current fiscal year; or
(3) For the expenditure of a sum of less than $100 (i.e., a placement of
block ad to communicate to the public).
(a) Roll call votes. A roll call vote shall be taken:
(1) Upon the confirmation of officers or employees nominated by the
Mayor;
(2) Upon all acts requiring a super majority for passage;
(3) Upon all amendments to the Code of Ordinances and local laws;
(4) Upon the borrowing or the expenditure of any money; or
(5) Upon any other question before the Common Council upon request
of any member.
(b) Voice votes. Unless otherwise requested by any member, a voice vote
will be called by the presiding officer where the vote does not fall into
one of the following categories:
(1) A vote for the expenditure of money;
(2) A vote requiring a super majority for passage (i.e., a bond act);
(3) A vote adopting, amending or repealing an ordinance or local law;
(4) A vote for an appointment of a City official or employee that will be
paid; or
Sec. 2-53 OLEAN CODE Sec. 2-55
C:168
Sec. 2-56. Official minutes. [Res. No. 11-94, 3-8-1994]
Minutes of the previous meeting shall not be read, unless requested by
any Common Council member, by motion duly made, seconded and adopted
by majority vote. The official minutes shall be taken by the journal clerk
in summary form, shall be signed by the City Clerk and Common Council
President, and retained by the City Clerk as permanent record of the affairs
of the City.
Sec. 2-57. Filing reports, resolutions, ordinances, etc.; prefiling
deadline; suspension of the rule. [Res. No. 11-94, 3-8-1994]
All committee reports, proposed resolutions, ordinance or any matter
requiring Council action by vote shall be in writing and shall be filed
with the journal clerk on or before noon on the Thursday preceding each
regularly scheduled meeting. No resolution, ordinance, report or other
matter may be considered by the Common Council at any regularly
scheduled meeting unless properly prefiled, or unless by act of the Common
Council by two-thirds-vote shall suspend this rule.
Sec. 2-58. Filing miscellaneous communications. [Res. No. 11-94,
3-8-1994]
All miscellaneous communications and petitions shall be filed with the
journal clerk on or before noon on the Thursday preceding each regularly
scheduled meeting. The Common Council shall not consider any
miscellaneous communications or petitions unless duly filed with the City
Clerk. The Mayor or Common Council President may, however, introduce
any letter, communication or notice which shall not be required to be prefiled
with the journal clerk.
Sec. 2-59. Delivery of Council agenda. [Res. No. 11-94, 3-8-1994]
It shall be the duty of the City Clerk to prepare and cause to be delivered
to the Olean Police Department for pick up by each Alderman, a list of
all matters filed in his office for consideration at any regularly scheduled
meeting, on the Friday preceding each regularly scheduled meeting.
Sec. 2-60. Non-Council members comment/input at regularly
schedules meeting of the Common Council. [Res. No. 11-94,
3-8-1994]
Any person not a member of the Common Council who desires the privilege
of the floor shall at a regular or special meeting of the Common Council
shall request recognized by the presiding officer during the "public
comment/input" portion of the meeting. The presiding officer, in his
discretion, may grant the privilege of the floor to the person desiring the
same. Any person securing the floor shall give his name and address and
(5) For any action in which the Mayor or any member of the Common
Council requests that there be a roll call vote.
Sec. 2-55 CHARTER Sec. 2-60
C:169
briefly state his purpose. He shall address his remarks to such issue(s)
however shall not discuss personalities. The time limit for any such remarks
shall be five minutes unless the Common Council after majority vote
thereon, raised by point of order from the floor, extends the limit that such
person may be allowed in addressing the Common Council. Any such vote
shall specify the length of such extension.
Sec. 2-61. Sergeant at Arms. [Res. No. 11-94, 3-8-1994]
The Chief of Police, or acting Chief of Police of the City of Olean shall be ex
officio Sergeant at Arms of the Common Council.
Sec. 2-62. Suspending or rescinding Council rules. [Res. No. 11-94,
3-8-1994]
No rule of the Common Council or procedure established by this division
shall be suspended or rescinded except by act of the Common Council in
which 2/3 of all members present shall vote favorably.
Sec. 2-63. Smoking policy. [Res. No. 11-94, 3-8-1994]
Smoking of cigarettes, cigars or pipes shall be prohibited during regular
and special meetings of the Common Council or during any work session,
committee or subcommittee meeting.
Sec. 2-64. Permits granted at work sessions. [Res. No. 11-94,
3-8-1994; Res. No. 10-99, 2-23-1999; Res. No. 101-00, 10-10-2000]
At any regular work session of the Common Council, upon motion made and
seconded and after an opportunity for comment therein by any one desiring
to make comment, the Common Council shall have the authority to grant by
majority vote of the entire Council (i.e. four votes) or deny any permit for:
(1) (Reserved)6
(2) Utilization of City streets for an event(s);
(3) Parades;
(4) Private use or improvement on or over a right-of-way; and
(5) Such other type of permit request in which 2/3 of all members of the
Common Council (i.e. five votes) shall agree to consider at such work
session.
6. Editor’s Note: Former Subsection (1), regarding curb cuts, was repealed 2-9-2016 by Res.
No. 05-16.
Sec. 2-60 OLEAN CODE Sec. 2-64
C:170
Sec. 2-65. Executive session. [Res. No. 11-94, 3-8-1994]
In the event there are not sufficient votes to grant a permit during
the work session the matter shall be referred for action at a regular
session of the Council.
Any permit granted by the Common Council at a work session shall
be subject to conditions established by the Mayor, Common Council,
committee, and/or department head(s) involved. Granting of permits
pursuant to this section shall be strictly limited to the matters provided
for by this section. For each matter acted upon by the Common
Council, the Common Council President shall make explicit record
of the motion, its sponsor, its second and the votes of each member
thereon.
The rule is not intended to bypass committee review, if appropriate,
and should be utilized only in unusual circumstances. All such permits
granted pursuant to this section shall be read as a report at the next
regular session of the Common Council.
(a) [Generally.] All meetings of the Common Council, whether in regular
session or work session are covered by the Open Meetings Law as
contained in Article 7 of the Public Officers Law of the State of New
York. In addition, all meetings of any of the committees of the Common
Council are subject to the Open Meetings Law.
(b) Notice.
(1) Notice for meetings planned at least one week in advance shall be
given:
(a) To the news media; and
(b) By means of posting notice of the meeting at least 72 hours in
advance.
(2) Notice for meetings scheduled less than one week in advance shall
be given:
(a) Notice shall be given to the news media, to the extent
practicable; and
(b) Must be posted a reasonable time prior to the meeting.
(c) Executive session. The Common Council or a committee of the Common
Council may close a meeting upon the declaration of executive session.
Procedure for going into executive session is as follows:
(1) Executive sessions may only be entered into as part of an open
meeting. A motion must be made, during an open meeting, to enter
into an executive session. The person making the motion must
specify the subject area which qualifies for executive session and
Sec. 2-64 CHARTER Sec. 2-65
C:171
Sec. 2-66. Journal clerk; City Clerk. [Res. No. 11-94, 3-8-1994]
The journal clerk [shall be] responsible for day to day management of the
legislative system as provided by these rules.
The City Clerk shall record all votes and shall permanently retain all
correspondence, local laws, resolutions, memorandum, committee minutes,
the motion must be carried by a majority vote of the total
membership of the body.
(2) The following constitutes a complete list of the area for which a
public body may enter into executive session:
(a) Matters which will imperil the public safety if disclosed;
(b) Matters which may disclose the identity of a law enforcement
agent or informer;
(c) Information regarding a current or future investigation or
prosecution of a criminal offense which would imperil effective
law enforcement, if disclosed;
(d) Discussion of proposed, pending or current litigation;
(e) Collective negotiations pursuant to the Taylor Law;
(f) The medical, financial, credit or employment history of a
particular person or corporation, or matters leading to the
appointment, employment, promotion, demotion, discipline,
suspension, dismissal or removable of a particular person or
corporation;
(g) The preparation, grading, or administration of examinations;
(h) The proposed acquisition, sale or lease of real property or the
proposed acquisition or securities, or sale or exchange or
securities held by a public body, but only when publicity would
substantially affect the value thereof.
The Common Council or any committee of the Common
Council may vote in executive session on any of the abovenoted
issues, however, no vote shall be permitted on any
appropriation of public funds while in executive session.
(d) Minutes. Minutes of executive session must be kept. Executive session
minutes need not contain the contents of discussion, but must include a
record or summary (including the date and vote) of any final
determination. If no determination is made, there need not be minutes.
Executive session minutes must be available to the public within one
week of the meeting. The executive session minutes may be taken by a
member of the Common Council or the body may choose to allow a clerk
to be present to take minutes.
Sec. 2-65 OLEAN CODE Sec. 2-66
C:172
and Common Council minutes. The City Clerk shall certify all minutes of
regular meetings of the Common Council.
Sec. 2-67. through Sec. 2-80. (Reserved)
Sec. 2-66 CHARTER Sec. 2-67
C:173

ARTICLE III
BOARDS, COMMISSIONS, ETC.
Sec. 2-81. through Sec. 2-100. (Reserved)
Sec. 2-81 CHARTER Sec. 2-81
C:175

ARTICLE IV
OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
DIVISION 1
GENERALLY
Sec. 2-101. Attendance of schools, conventions and conferences.
[Res. No. 120-90, §§ 1, 2, 3a, 3b, 9-10-1990]
(a) The following executive officers within the City are authorized and
empowered to approve attendance of City employees under their
supervision and control at conferences, conventions, and schools upon
a determination that attendance will be of benefit to the community:
(1) City Clerk;
(2) Auditor;
(3) Assessor;
(4) Youth Bureau Director;
(5) Community Development Director;
(6) Director of Public Works;
(7) Head of Parks Department;
(8) Police Chief;
(9) Fire Chief.
Such authorization must be made in writing with a copy of such
approval duly filed with the City Clerk's office prior to attendance.
(b) The Mayor is authorized and empowered to approve attendance of City
department heads at conferences, conventions, and schools upon
determination such attendance will be a benefit to the community. Such
authorization must be in writing with a copy of such approval filed with
the City Clerk prior to attendance.
(c) No claim or expense shall be audited, allowed, or paid unless there shall
be attached thereto a travel order or similar document and voucher
signed by the department head or the Mayor, as the case may be,
authorizing the claimant to attend such conference, convention, or
school.
(d) No conference, convention, or school shall be authorized without the
consent of the Common Council by resolution and the approval of the
Mayor when the proposed expenditure shall exceed the amount
approved for travel, training, and education by such City department in
the budget of the City for the fiscal year in which the expenditure will
occur.
Sec. 2-101 CHARTER Sec. 2-102
C:177
Sec. 2-102. Records management officer; creation of position;
duties. [Code 1971, § 2-57]
There is hereby created the position of records management officer to
be designated by the Mayor with the approval of the Common Council,
whose duties shall be to implement records management as required from
time to time by the state in implementation and application of the Local
Government Records Law [Arts and Cultural Affairs Law § 57.13 et. seq.]
and all rules and regulations promulgated pursuant thereto.
Sec. 2-103. through Sec. 2-115. (Reserved)
Sec. 2-102 OLEAN CODE Sec. 2-103
C:178
DIVISION 2
CODE OF ETHICS
Sec. 2-116. Established. [Code 1971, § 2-40]
A code of ethics is hereby established to govern the conduct of the officers
and employees of the City, as provided in this division.
Sec. 2-117. Definitions. [Code 1971, § 2-41]
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:
INTEREST — A direct or indirect pecuniary or material benefit accruing
to a municipal officer or employee as the result of a contract with the
municipality which such officer or employee serves. For the purposes of this
division, a municipal officer or employee shall be deemed to have an interest
in the contract of:
Sec. 2-118. Board of ethics established. [Code 1971, §§ 2-12, 2-13]
(1) His spouse, minor children, and dependents, except a contract of
employment with the municipality which such officer or employee
serves;
(2) A firm, partnership, or association of which such officer or employee is
a member or employee;
(3) A corporation of which such officer or employee is an officer, director,
or employee; and
(4) A corporation any stock of which is owned or controlled directly or
indirectly by such officer or employee.
MUNICIPAL OFFICER OR EMPLOYEE — An officer or employee of the
City, whether paid or unpaid, including members of any administrative
board, commission, or other agency thereof. No person shall be deemed
to be a municipal officer or employee solely by reason of being a
volunteer fireman or civil defense volunteer, except a Fire Chief or
assistant Fire Chief.
(a) Members. There is hereby established a board of ethics consisting of
three members to be appointed by the Mayor and confirmed by the
Common Council and who shall serve without compensation at the
pleasure of the Mayor and Common Council. A majority of such
members shall be persons other than officers or employees of the City.
(b) Powers and duties. The board of ethics shall have the powers and duties
prescribed by General Municipal Law art. 18 [§ 800 et seq.] and shall
render advisory opinions to the officers and employees of the City with
respect to such article and any code of ethics adopted pursuant to such
article, under such rules and regulations as the board may prescribe.
Sec. 2-116 CHARTER Sec. 2-118
C:179
Sec. 2-119. Standards of conduct. [Code 1971, § 2-42]
Every officer or employee of the City shall be subject to and abide by the
following standards of conduct:
(c) Recommendations for ethics code. In addition, the board may make
recommendations with respect to the drafting and adoption of a code of
ethics or amendments thereto upon the request of the Common
Council.
(1) Gifts. He shall not directly or indirectly solicit any gift or accept or
receive any gift having a value of $75 or more, whether in the form of
money, services, loan, travel, entertainment, hospitality, thing, or
promise, or any other form, under circumstances in which it could
reasonably be inferred that the gift was intended to influence him;
could reasonably be expected to influence him, in the performance of
his official duties; or was intended as a reward for any official action on
his part.
(2) Confidential information. He shall not disclose confidential information
acquired by him in the course of his official duties or use such
information to further his personal interest.
(3) Representation before one's own agency. He shall not receive or enter
into any agreement, express or implied, for compensation for services
to be rendered in relation to any matter before any municipal agency of
which he is an officer, member, or employee, or of any municipal agency
over which he has jurisdiction, or to which he has the power to appoint
any member, officer, or employee.
(4) Representation before any agency for a contingent fee. He shall not
receive or enter into any agreement, express or implied, for
compensation for services to be rendered in relation to any matter
before any agency of his municipality, whereby his compensation is to
be dependent or contingent upon any action by such agency with
respect to such matter, provided that this subsection shall not prohibit
the fixing at any time of fees based upon the reasonable value of the
services rendered.
(5) Disclosure of interest in legislation. To the extent that he knows thereof,
a member of the Common Council and any officer or employee of the
City, whether paid or unpaid, who participates in the discussion or gives
official opinion to the Common Council on any legislation before the
Common Council shall publicly disclose on the official record the nature
and extent of any direct or indirect financial or other private interest he
has in such legislation.
(6) Investments in conflict with official duties. He shall not invest or hold
any investment directly or indirectly in any financial, business,
commercial, or other private transaction which creates a conflict with
his official duties.
Sec. 2-118 OLEAN CODE Sec. 2-119
C:180
Sec. 2-120. Distribution of copies of code of ethics. [Code 1971,
§ 2-44]
The Mayor of the City shall cause a copy of this code of ethics to be
distributed to every officer and employee of the City before such officer or
employee entering upon the duties of his office or employment.
Sec. 2-121. Right to file claim, account, demand, or suit against
City or agency thereof, preserved. [Code 1971, § 2-43]
Nothing in this division shall be deemed to bar or prevent the timely filing
by a present or former municipal officer or employee of any claim, account,
demand, or suit against the City, or any agency thereof, on behalf of himself
or any member of his family arising out of any personal injury or property
damage or for any lawful benefit authorized or permitted by law.
Sec. 2-122. Penalties for violation by officer or employee. [Code
1971, § 2-45]
In addition to any penalty contained in any other provision of law, any
person who shall knowingly and intentionally violate any of the provisions of
this code may be fined, suspended, or removed from office or employment,
as the case may be, in the manner provided by law.
Sec. 2-123. Sexual harassment. [Res. No. 4-94, 2-8-1994]
(7) Private employment. He shall not engage in, solicit, negotiate for, or
promise to accept private employment or render services for private
interests when such employment or service creates a conflict with or
impairs the proper discharge of his official duties.
(8) Future employment. He shall not, after the termination of service or
employment with such municipality, appear before any board or agency
of the City in relation to any case, proceeding, or application in which
he personally participated during the period of his service or
employment or which was under his active consideration.
(a) It is the policy of the City that there be no discrimination against any
employee, or any applicant for employment, on the basis of sex. In
keeping with the policy, the City does not tolerate sexual harassment by
anyone, including non-employees.
(b) Sexual harassment is a violation of the City's rules of conduct. It can
also constitute a violation of state and federal law. Unwelcome sexual
advances, requests for sexual favors, and other verbal or physical
conduct of a sexual nature constitute sexual harassment when:
(1) Submission to the conduct is made either an explicit or implicit
condition of employment;
(2) Submission to or rejection of the conduct is used as the basis for an
employment decision affecting the harassed individual; or
Sec. 2-119 CHARTER Sec. 2-123
C:181
Sec. 2-124. through Sec. 2-140. (Reserved)
(3) The comments or conduct is found to be offensive and/or
intimidating by the person to whom it is directed, even if the person
making the comment or engage in the conduct does not appear to
intend it to be offensive or intimidating (e.g., inter alia, sexual
joking and innuendo, the use of sexually explicit language, or the
display of sexually oriented jokes, posters, or other material on
bulletin boards in offices, lockers and work areas.
(c) Any person who feels he or she has been subjected to any form of sexual
harassment should report such incident(s) to his or her supervisor, or
the Mayor, or the secretary to the Mayor without fear of reprisal.
(d) All reports of alleged sexual harassment will be investigated by the
Mayor or the secretary to the Mayor as dictated by the specific
circumstances. Investigations will be conducted in as confidential a
manner as possible. Any individual making a complaint will be advised
of the results of the investigation and of any action taken.
(e) Any person who engages in sexual harassment will be subject to such
corrective action and/or penalty as is deemed warranted by the City.
Such action may include discipline or discharge.
Editor's note: Res. No. 4-94, adopted Feb. 8, 1994, did not specifically
amend the Code; hence, inclusion herein as § 2-123 was at the
discretion of the editor.
Sec. 2-123 OLEAN CODE Sec. 2-124
C:182
ARTICLE V
EMPLOYEE BENEFITS
Sec. 2-141. Workers' compensation. [Code 1971, § 2-31]
The City shall provide workers' compensation benefits for all City
employees.
Sec. 2-142. Additional pension benefits. [Code 1971, §§ 2-33, 2-34]
The Common Council does hereby elect to provide:
Sec. 2-143. through Sec. 2-160. (Reserved)
(1) The benefits of Retirement and Social Security Law § 60-b, as presently
or hereafter amended, effective with the payroll period beginning on
July 2, 1973.
(2) The career retirement plan of Retirement and Social Security Law
§ 75-g, as presently or hereafter amended, for employees of
participating employers, effective with the payroll period beginning on
July 2, 1973.
(3) The benefits of the Retirement and Social Security Law § 360-b, as
presently or hereafter amended, effective with the payroll period
beginning on June 11, 1973.
(4) The career retirement plan of Retirement and Social Security Law
§ 375-g, as presently or hereafter amended, for employees of
participating employers, effective with the payroll period beginning on
June 11, 1973.
(5) The additional pension benefits of the Retirement and Social Security
Law § 75-e, as presently or hereafter amended, and entitled
"guaranteed retirement benefits for employees of participating
employers." This election shall become effective with the payroll period
beginning on June 1, 1972.
(6) The additional pension benefits of Retirement and Social Security Law
§ 375-e, as presently or hereafter amended, and entitled "guaranteed
retirement benefits for employees of participating employers." This
election shall become effective with the payroll period beginning on
June 11, 1973.
Sec. 2-141 CHARTER Sec. 2-143
C:183

ARTICLE VI
FINANCE
DIVISION 1
GENERALLY
Sec. 2-161. Service charge on returned checks. [Code 1971, § 2-14;
Res. No. 50-92, 4-14-1992]
The City shall charge a service of $20 on checks tendered to the City which
are subsequently returned for insufficient funds by the City's depository
bank.
Sec. 2-162. Department of Community Development City's clearing
house for grant applications. [Code 1971, § 2-91]
The Department of Community Development shall act as a clearing house
for all City grant applications. Each department shall continue to have
autonomous, independent authority with the consent and approval of the
Common Council and the Mayor to submit application for all grants as
may from time to time be deemed appropriate and necessary. However,
the department submitting such grant shall, upon submission of such grant
application, provide to the Director of the Department of Community
Development a copy of such grant application submitted. The Department of
Community Development shall maintain City-wide record keeping in order
to inform the Common Council of the City's realization upon all applied for
grants.
Sec. 2-163. Sale or lease of City real estate. [Code 1971, § 2-5]
Sec. 2-164. Adjustment of fees. [Res. No. 75-92, 5-12-1992]
License fees, permit fees and other user fees for the City-provided services,
collectively hereinafter referred to as "City fees," shall be periodically
adjusted to assure that they remain current with the cost of living. The
auditor of the City shall, as a mandatory portion of the budget preparation
process, annually provide to the Common Council proposed adjustments
in all City fees as will cause them to be increased or decreased, as the
(a) The Common Council is hereby empowered to sell or lease any real
estate belonging to or under the control of the City when authorized by
a three-fourths vote of all the members of the Common Council and
approved by the Mayor.
(b) Any sale of City real estate shall be made at public auction to the
highest bidder after public notice of the sale is published at least once
each week for three weeks in the official paper.
(c) At the time of the sale of City real estate, at least 10% of the sale price
shall be paid by the purchaser and the balance upon the delivery of the
deed by the City.
Sec. 2-161 CHARTER Sec. 2-164
C:185
case may be, in an amount equivalent to the annual percentage increase
or decrease in the U.S. Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics,
Consumer Price Index, or other similar published index.
Sec. 2-165. through Sec. 2-170. (Reserved)
Sec. 2-164 OLEAN CODE Sec. 2-165
C:186
DIVISION 2
INSURANCE ADMINISTRATION
Sec. 2-171. Auditor in charge of management and oversight
generally. [Res. No. 153-93, § 1, 10-26-1993]
The auditor of the City is designated as the officer of the City responsible
for oversight and management of all City insurance coverages for the City.
Upon recommendation of the auditor, the Common Council shall adopt
policies and procedures in connection with such oversight.
Sec. 2-172. Department heads responsible for getting information
to the auditor. [Res. No. 153-93, § 2, 10-26-1993]
Each department head shall be obligated and responsible to assemble,
maintain and provide from time to time in accordance with policies to
be established by the auditor and adopted by resolution of the Common
Council, such information as may be necessary or useful to assure that
the auditor is keeping the agent/insurance company aware of all facts
and changes thereto, which may have impact on the cost of insurance
premiums.
Sec. 2-173. through Sec. 2-180. (Reserved)
Sec. 2-171 CHARTER Sec. 2-173
C:187

ARTICLE VII
PURCHASES
DIVISION 1
GENERALLY
Sec. 2-181. Function of purchasing system. [Res. No. 25-91,
3-12-1991]
The function of the purchasing system is to provide internal control
measures in the purchasing and payment for services and products for
the City. The system will lessen the possibility of over-expenditures or any
attempt to expend funds that are not available. Through the aid of periodic
reports, the auditor and department heads will be able to budget funds in
such a way to prevent the lack of funds when needed toward year's end. The
system will also provide a check to verify authority for purchases.
Sec. 2-182. Generation of purchase orders. [Res. No. 25-91, § A,
3-26-1991; Res. No. 69-92, 4-28-1992]
(a) All purchase requests for goods and services in excess of $100 must
begin with a purchase order (p.o.). Before a p.o. is released to a supplier
or contractor, a notice of the proposed encumbrance must be filed with
the City auditor by the administrative unit incurring the liability. This
notice must be signed by the department head or his designee and must
state the nature and amount, or estimate, of the encumbrance and the
appropriate account to be charged.
(b) If a sufficient unencumbered appropriation balance is available, the
City auditor will enter the encumbrance against the appropriation
account affected and indicate his approval by signing and numbering
the p.o. In case a proposed commitment exceeds the balance available,
the encumbrance cannot be entered, and the p.o. must be returned to
the unit without approval. The department head must then request
additional funding from the ways and means committee, which in turn
will provide a recommendation for approval or rejection of the request
to the full Council. Final approval or disapproval of a request for
additional funding will come from a vote of the Common Council. A vote
on approval or disapproval of a request for additional funding will occur
within 30 calendar days of the date requested.
(c) Emergency purchases must be followed up with a confirming p.o. as
soon as possible, next business day.
(d) Exceptions to the purchase order procedures are utility services,
monthly service contracts, minor purchases of less than $50, real estate
tax bills, court ordered payments, any payments which could provide
penalties or assessments for delinquencies, debt service payments, and
other possible add-ons.
Sec. 2-181 CHARTER Sec. 2-183
C:189
Sec. 2-183. Payment preparation. [Res. No. 25-91, § B, 3-26-1991]
Sec. 2-184. Requests for non-budgeted equipment, capital projects,
and capital items. [Res. No. 25-91, § C, 3-26-1991]
If there are requests for transfer of funds for non-budgeted equipment,
capital projects, and capital items, the auditor shall notify the department
head of the unavailability of funds. To request an increase in his
appropriation account, the department head shall proceed as follows:
Sec. 2-185. Budget amendments. [Res. No. 25-91, § D, 3-26-1991]
In the event of an unanticipated revenue shortfall or other condition or
situation arising which effects the City's ability to meet its previously
budgeted financial obligations, the Common Council, by resolution, may
direct the department heads to curtail, limit, or restrict spending to levels
less than previously budgeted or appropriated by means of an amendment
to the budget. The ways and means committee of the Common Council
shall recommend to the Common Council the amendment to the budget
identifying reductions by line item and account number, after consultation
with the department heads involved.
Sec. 2-186. Auditor's review committee of the Common Council.
[Res. No. 25-91, § E, 3-26-1991]
The auditor's review committee of the Common Council shall review and
recommend to the Common Council approval or disapproval of all
(a) This section deals with the receipt of goods and services and the
approval of vouchers for payment.
(b) The present policy is for processing vouchers for payment at the second
Common Council meeting of the month. All present procedures remain
in effect.
(c) Invoices returned with vouchers indicating purchases by subordinates
without purchase orders should be initialed by the immediate
supervisor authorizing the purchase.
(1) The request for transfer, or increase in appropriations, shall be in
writing and directed to the auditor.
(2) An explanation as to why the purchase is necessary must be included in
the request.
(3) The amount needed and the code involved must be indicated. After
accumulating all the related information, the auditor shall submit the
request to the ways and means committee for its action. On approval of
the necessary Common Council resolution, the auditor shall notify the
requisitioner who shall resubmit the purchase order. Notice shall also
be given if the Common Council disapproved the request.
Sec. 2-183 OLEAN CODE Sec. 2-186
C:190
expenditures of the City prior to Council action on warrants recommended
by the auditor at the second Common Council meeting of the month.
Sec. 2-187. Competitive bidding. [Res. No. 19-92, 2-25-1992]
Competitive bidding for purchase contracts or for public works may be
initiated by advertising for bids when required by state law without
separate Common Council approval if the Common Council has specifically
authorized the procurement in the adopted budget.
Sec. 2-188. Requests for proposals. [Added 7-10-2012 by Res. No.
50-12]
Sec. 2-189. through Sec. 2-205. (Reserved)
(a) Requests for proposals (RFP) for professional services and insurance
shall be solicited via public advertisement, where required, or a
comprehensive list of potential vendors can be compiled with vendors
contacted directly and provided with the RFP.
(b) The RFP shall provide detailed information concerning the type of
service to be provided, including minimum requirements and, where
applicable, the evaluation criteria that will govern the contract award.
The evaluation criteria may include factors in addition to price; in such
case, the criteria and any weighting or ranking of the importance of
those criteria shall be set forth in the RFP.
(c) The RFP process shall be based on a fair and equitable review and
evaluation or ranking of the proposals.
Sec. 2-186 CHARTER Sec. 2-189
C:191

DIVISION 2
PROCUREMENT CODE
Subdivision I. General Provisions
Sec. 2-206. Definitions. [Res. No. 57-97, § 1(A), 4-14-1992]
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning: Responsible official or
purchaser means each official having authority to initiate a purchase
utilizing City funds.
Sec. 2-207. Applicability. [Res. No. 57-92, § 9, 4-14-1992]
This division will be reviewed annually. This division does not supersede
division 1 of this article; however, if there is inconsistency between that
division and this division, this division shall prevail.
Sec. 2-208. Determining type of contract. [Res. No. 57-92, § 1(A),
4-14-1992]
Each responsible official of the City shall determine whether the proposed
purchase constitutes a purchase contract or a public works contract. If
there is doubt as to whether a contract is a purchase contract or a public
works contract, the City Attorney should be consulted.
Sec. 2-209. Purchases subject to competitive bidding. [Res. No.
57-92, § 1(B), 4-14-1992; amended 3-11-2014 by Res. No. 16-14]
The responsible official shall next make a good faith determination whether
it is known or expected that the aggregate amount to be spent on the item in
the current fiscal year is subject to competitive bidding taking into account
past City-wide purchases. All purchases shall be presumed to be subject to
competitive bidding except the following:
(1) Purchase contracts under $20,000;
(2) Public works contracts under $35,000;
(3) Emergency purchases;
(4) Certain municipal hospital purchases;
(5) Goods purchased from agencies for the blind or severely handicapped;
(6) Goods purchased from correctional institutions
(7) Purchases under state and county contracts;
(8) Surplus and secondhand purchases from another governmental entity.
Sec. 2-206 CHARTER Sec. 2-210
C:193
Sec. 2-210. Duties of responsible official. [Res. No. 57-92, § 2,
4-14-1992]
If it is determined that a procurement is subject to competitive bidding,
the responsible official shall proceed with the procurement in accordance
with the General Municipal Law of the state. If it is determined that a
procurement is not subject to competitive bidding, the responsible official
shall proceed with the procurement in accordance with this division.
Sec. 2-211. through Sec. 2-225. (Reserved)
Subdivision II. Purchases Without Competitive Bids
Sec. 2-226. Documentation of purchases. [Res. No. 57-92, § 3,
4-14-1992]
A decision that a purchase is not subject to competitive bidding shall
be documented in writing by the individual making the purchase. This
documentation may include, without limitation:
Sec. 2-227. Procedure for procurement; exceptions. [Res. No.
57-92, § 4, 4-14-1992; amended 5-13-2014 by Res. No. 38-14]
(1) Written quotes from vendors;
(2) Notation of oral quotes from vendors;
(3) A memo from the responsible official;
(4) A copy of the contract indicating the source which makes the item or
service exempt;
(5) A memo from the purchaser detailing the circumstances which led to an
emergency purchase; and
(6) Any other written documentation that is appropriate.
(a) Goods and services that are not subject to competitive bidding will be
purchased in accordance with this division by use of written requests
for proposals, written quotations, verbal quotations, or such other
method that assures that goods will be purchased at the lowest price,
taking quality, timeliness of delivery and service into account, or best
value as defined by New York State Finance Law § 163, as authorized by
L.L. No. 2-2014.7
(b) Best value is defined in the New York State Finance Law § 163. When
awarding contracts under the best value standard, the City must
consider the overall combination of quality, price and other elements of
the required commodity or service that in total are optimal relative to
the needs of the City of Olean. Use of the best value standard must rely,
7. Editor's Note: See Ch. LL4.5, Art. II.
Sec. 2-210 OLEAN CODE Sec. 2-227
C:194
Sec. 2-228. Minimum documentation required. [Res. No. 57-92, § 5,
4-14-1992; amended 5-13-2014 by Res. No. 39-14]
wherever possible, on objective and quantifiable analysis. The best
value standard may identify as a quantitative factor whether offers
are small businesses or certified minority- or women-owned business
enterprises as defined in New York Executive Law § 310. The best
value standard may only be used for purchase contracts, which includes
contracts for service work, but excludes any purchase necessary for the
completion of a public works contract pursuant to Article 8 of the Labor
Law.
(c) The following circumstances shall be the only exceptions to the
requirements of this provision:
(1) Purchase contracts over $20,000;
(2) Public works contracts over $35,000;
(3) Goods purchased from agencies for the blind or severely
handicapped pursuant to the State Finance Law § 175-b;
(4) Goods purchased from correctional institutions pursuant to the
Correction Law § 186;
(5) Purchases under state contracts pursuant to the General Municipal
Law § 104;
(6) Purchases under county contracts pursuant to the General
Municipal Law § 103(3);
(7) Purchases pursuant to Section 2-229 of this division which detail
procedures for procurement of professional services, emergency
procurement and procurement of items having a price of less than
$500.
(a) The following minimum documentation type shall be required for
procurement not requiring competitive bidding pursuant to this policy:
(1) Estimated Amount of Purchase Contract
Method/Minimum Documentation
$50 to $499 Purchase order
$500 to $4,999 Two verbal quotations with written record
of each quote
$5,000 to $19,999 Three written/fax quotations or written
request for proposals
(2) Estimated Amount of Public Works Contracts
Sec. 2-227 CHARTER Sec. 2-228
C:195
Sec. 2-229. Forms of documentation. [Res. No. 57-92, § 6,
4-14-1992]
Documentation is required of each action taken in connection with each
procurement not requiring competitive bidding. Documentation includes
Common Council resolutions, memoranda, published current state bid price
material, written quotes, telephone logs (for verbal quotes), request for
proposals and other appropriate forms of documentation including check
lists and flow charts.
Sec. 2-230. Documentation when not awarding to lowest
responsible bidder. [Res. No. 57-92, § 7, 4-14-1992]
Documentation and a justifying explanation is required with each
procurement not requiring competitive bidding whenever a procurement is
awarded to other than the lowest responsible bidder. This documentation
will include a complete explanation of how the award will nevertheless
achieve savings or how the offeror was not responsible. The City Attorney
shall be contacted in each such circumstance.
Sec. 2-231. When solicitation of alternative proposals or quotations
not required. [Res. No. 57-92, § 8, 4-14-1992; amended 5-13-2014
by Res. No. 40-14]
The solicitation of alternative proposals or quotations shall not be required
by this division in the following circumstances:
Method/Minimum Documentation
$50 to $499 Purchase order
$500 to $2,999 Two verbal quotations with written record
of each quote
$3,000 to $9,999 Two written/fax quotations
$10,000 to $34,999 Three written/fax quotations or written
request for proposals
(b) For purchases or public works less than $500, purchases shall be
subject to a good faith decision made in the best interest of the
community, avoiding favoritism.
(c) In all cases where verbal quotes are requested, a good faith effort shall
be made to obtain a reasonable number of proposals or quotations.
(d) If the purchaser is unable to obtain more than one proposal or
quotation, the purchaser will document the attempt made by obtaining
other proposals. The failure to obtain more than one proposal shall not
be considered a bar to the procurement.
(1) Procurement of professional services or services requiring special or
technical skill, training or expertise. The individual or company must be
chosen based on accountability, reliability, responsibility, skill,
Sec. 2-228 OLEAN CODE Sec. 2-231
C:196
education and training, judgment, and integrity. These qualifications
will not always be found in the individual or company that offers the
lowest price as the nature of these services are such that they do
not readily lend themselves to competitive procurement procedures. In
determining whether a service fits into this category, the determination
shall take into consideration the following guidelines:
(a) Whether the services are subject to state licensing or testing
requirements;
(b) Whether substantial formal education or training is a necessary
prerequisite to the performance of the services; and
(c) Whether the services require a personal relationship between the
individual and municipal officials.
Professional or technical services shall include but not be limited
to the following: services of an attorney; services of a physician;
technical services of an engineer engaged to prepare plans, maps,
and estimates; securing insurance coverage and/or services of an
insurance broker; services of a certified public accountant;
investment management services; printing services involving
extensive writing, editing, or artwork; management of municipally
owned property; and computer software or programming services
for customized programs, or services involved in substantial
modification and customizing of prepackaged software.
(2) Emergency purchased pursuant to General Municipal Law § 103(4).
Due to the nature of this exception, these goods or services must be
purchased immediately, and a delay in order to seek alternative
proposals may threaten the life, health, safety or welfare of the
residents or City employees. This section does not preclude alternate
proposals if time permits.
(3) Services and goods under $500. The time and documentation required
by this policy may be more costly that the item itself or wasteful and
therefore would not be in the best interests of the taxpayer.
(4) Procurement where the price obtained is equal to or less than the state
bid price. Procurements which are equal to or less than state bid prices
shall be presumed acceptable for purchase contracts which do not
otherwise require competitive bidding. Current state bid price material
shall be required as documentation supporting the purchase.
Sec. 2-231 CHARTER Sec. 2-231
C:197
Chapter 3
ADVERTISING AND SIGNS
CROSS REFERENCES
Definitions and rules of construction
generally, § 1-2.
Buildings, building regulations and fire
prevention, ch. 6
Licenses, permits and miscellaneous business
regulations, ch. 13.
Planning and development, ch. 18
Streets and sidewalks, ch. 21
Zoning, ch. 28.
STATE LAW REFERENCES
Authority to legislate for the public peace,
health, safety and welfare, General City Law
§ 20(13).
Billboards, General Municipal Law § 74-c.
Billboard removal, General Municipal Law
§ 74-c.
Sec. 2-231 OLEAN CODE Sec. 2-231
C:198
ARTICLE I
IN GENERAL
Sec. 3-1. Consent of property owner. [Code 1971, § 3-3]
It shall be unlawful for any person to paint, post, place, or affix any business
or commercial advertisement, or cause the same to be done, on or to
any wall, window, door, fence, gate, advertising structure, building, or
other object, which is the property of another, without first securing the
written consent of such owner thereof. Nothing in this section shall apply
to any notice required by ordinance or legal notices by public officers and
attorneys in the manner and place prescribed by law, or in the circulation
and distribution of any daily newspapers throughout the city.
Sec. 3-2. — Sec. 3-20. (Reserved)
Sec. 3-1 CHARTER Sec. 3-2
C:199

ARTICLE II
SIGNS
DIVISION 1
GENERALLY
Sec. 3-21. Intent of article. [Code 1971, § 3-15]
The purpose of this article is to promote and protect the public health,
welfare and safety by regulating existing and proposed outdoor advertising,
outdoor advertising signs and outdoor signs of all types. It is intended to
protect property values, create a more attractive economic and business
climate, enhance and protect the physical appearance of the community,
preserve the scenic and natural beauty of designated areas, and provide a
more enjoyable and pleasing community. It is further intended hereby to
reduce sign or advertising distractions and obstructions that may contribute
to traffic accidents, reduce hazards that may be caused by signs
overhanging or projecting over public rights-of-way, provide more open
space, and curb the deterioration of natural beauty and community
environment.
Sec. 3-22. Scope of article. [Code 1971, § 3-16]
This article by its terms applies to all signs within the city excepting those
signs erected and maintained in the neighborhood development area of the
urban renewal plan for the city.
Sec. 3-23. Definitions. [Code 1971, § 3-17]
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:
SIGN — Any device for visual communication that is used for the purpose of
bringing the subject thereof to the attention of the public.
SIGN, ADVERTISING — A sign which directs attention to a business
commodity, service or entertainment conducted, sold or offered elsewhere
than on the same lot. This shall include billboards.
SIGN, BUSINESS — A sign which directs attention to a business or
profession conducted or to products sold upon the same lot. A "For Sale"
sign relating to the lot on which it is displayed should be deemed a business
sign.
SIGN, IDENTIFICATION OR PROFESSIONAL — A sign showing the name
and profession, occupation, or pursuit conducted on the premises.
ZONING DISTRICTS — The terms R-9 residential, R-4 residential, R-C
commercial, B-1 business, B-2 business, I industrial, and CR commercial
recreational. All references to zoning districts are defined as those terms
Sec. 3-21 CHARTER Sec. 3-23
C:201
which are defined and used pursuant to the zoning ordinance of the city as
it may from time to time be amended or modified.
Sec. 3-24. Restricted. [Code 1971, § 3-18]
Sec. 3-25. Billboards and off-premises advertising. [Code 1971,
§ 3-53]
Billboards shall be permitted by special use permit only and shall be
permitted only in industrial districts. Off-premises advertising signs shall be
permitted by special use permit only and shall be permitted in B-1, B-2, and
industrial districts only. Such special use permit shall be defined in and be
issued as provided by the zoning ordinance.
Sec. 3-26. through Sec. 3-45. (Reserved)
(a) The construction, erection, alteration, reconstruction, display,
ownership, maintenance, or operation of any sign within the city, except
as provided by this article, is hereby prohibited.
(b) Signposts are specifically prohibited from the public right-of-way with
the exception of those that are necessary or recommended by the state
manual of uniform traffic control devices.
(c) Signs overhanging the public right-of-way are specifically prohibited
except as provided by this article.
(d) No electric sign or electrically illuminated sign, or any signboard,
signpost, portion of any advertising nature, or otherwise shall be
permitted or allowed to remain on the sidewalk or on any portion of the
city streets.
Sec. 3-23 OLEAN CODE Sec. 3-26
C:202
DIVISION 2
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
Sec. 3-46. Nonconforming uses. [Code 1971, § 3-54]
Notwithstanding any other provisions of this article, any nonconforming
sign of any type in existence on August 14, 1984, shall, at the expiration
of 12 months from such date, become a prohibited and unlawful use and
shall be discontinued. If a party can show that he has been unduly burdened
by this provision, he may apply in the alternative to the zoning board of
appeals for a special permit to continue his nonconforming sign during the
remaining or undepreciated useful life of such sign, as determined by an
appropriate depreciation formula. For such purpose, the use of a formula
commonly used for income tax purposes or the depreciation formula used in
the depreciation schedules of the income tax returns of the owner of such
sign shall be acceptable.
Sec. 3-47. Variances. [Code 1971, § 3-55]
Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, upon application to the
zoning board of appeals, that board may vary or adopt the strict application
of any of the requirements of this article if the zoning board of appeals
finds that strict application of the provisions of this article would result
in practical difficulty or unnecessary hardship. The procedures, standards,
and criteria for the application for, public hearing upon, and the granting or
denial of a request for a variance pursuant to this section shall be as defined
in the zoning ordinance, as it may be amended.
Sec. 3-48. Administration and enforcement. [Res. No. 61-97, § 2,
6-10-1997]
Administration and enforcement of the provisions of this article shall be the
responsibility of the code enforcement office which shall have the authority
to establish regulations, policy and procedures as may be required or
convenient to realize the intent of this section.
Sec. 3-49. through Sec. 3-60. (Reserved)
Sec. 3-46 CHARTER Sec. 3-49
C:203

DIVISION 3
SIGNS IN RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
Sec. 3-61. Identification. [Code 1971, § 3-24]
Identification signs shall be permitted as an accessory use in any residential
district as follows:
Sec. 3-62. Bulletin boards. [Code 1971, § 3-25]
Sec. 3-63. Temporary. [Code 1971, § 3-26]
Temporary "For Sale" or "To Let" signs relating to the premises and
containing the name, address, and telephone number of the owner or
authorized agent, or both, and not exceeding six square feet in area in
the aggregate shall be permitted. One such sign shall be permitted for
each street frontage and may not be illuminated. Temporary signs must be
removed within 48 hours after the intent of business of the sign is complete.
See section 3-24(c). No fee will be charged for this sign.
(1) Customary professional or home occupation identification signs not
over two square feet, related solely to the profession or home
occupation conducted on the premises by a resident thereof.
(2) No more than one such identification sign shall be permitted for each
professional or other person so engaged and residing in the premises,
but if a dwelling has frontage on more than one street, an additional
identification sign shall be permitted for each additional frontage.
(3) Such identification sign may be affixed to the face of the building or
may be erected on a post not over four feet high, located in the yard but
at least five feet from the property line or 20 feet from street pavement,
whichever is greater.
(4) The sign may not be illuminated.
(5) A permit is required; however, no fee will be charged.
(a) Permanent bulletin boards or similar announcement signs are allowed
only for churches and other nonprofit institutions. They may not exceed
20 square feet in gross area and shall be located either on the face of
the building or on a post or posts at least five feet from the property
line. One such sign shall be permitted for each street frontage.
(b) Signs may be illuminated by night by back lighting or by direct lighting,
provided the latter is so screened as not to be visible from an adjacent
residence.
(c) A permit is required; however, no fee will be charged.
Sec. 3-61 CHARTER Sec. 3-64
C:205
Sec. 3-64. Flags, civic insignia. [Code 1971, § 3-27]
Flags, flagpoles, badges, insignia of any government, or government
agency, or any civic, charitable, religious, patriotic, fraternal, or similar
organization shall be considered as being signs subject to all provisions of
this article, except that no fee will be charged.
Sec. 3-65. Attaching to trees, poles, or structures. [Code 1971,
§ 3-28]
It shall be unlawful for any person to paint, post, place, or fix any business
or commercial advertisement, paper, handbills or circulars, or cause the
same to be done, on or to any curbstone, flagstone, or any other portion of
any sidewalk or street, or upon any tree, lamppost, hitching post, telegraph
post, telegraph pole, telephone pole, hydrant, bridge, or any other structure
within the limits of the city.
Sec. 3-66. through Sec. 3-80. (Reserved)
Sec. 3-64 OLEAN CODE Sec. 3-66
C:206
DIVISION 4
SIGNS IN BUSINESS DISTRICTS
Sec. 3-81. Generally. [Code 1971, § 3-34; Res. No. 84-93, 7-27-1993;
Res. No. 110-94, 11-8-1994; Res. No. 61-97, § 1, 6-10-1997]
Business signs in B-1 and B-2 business districts shall conform to the
following regulations:
(1) Permits required. A sign permit shall be required before any sign or
billboard may be erected, altered, reconstructed, or displayed within
the city.
(2) Application for permit. Written application shall be made to the building
inspector on a form provided by the building inspector and shall be
accompanied by complete plans and specifications showing the
construction, method of support, and materials to be used. Application
may be made by the owner or by the lessee of the property upon which
such sign is to be placed. The building inspector may require the plans
and specifications be signed by a professional engineer or architect
registered in the state.
(3) Permit fees. Each application shall be accompanied by a fee, as
established by the common council, which may be amended or modified
from time to time. The building inspector may require proof of the
monetary value of the sign. Licensed signs at the enactment of this
division, August 14, 1984, must obtain permits of this division upon
expiration of the license procured under former section 3-39 of the
Code of Ordinances enacted in 1971. All other signs within the city
must comply with the requirements of this article on August 14, 1984.
a. Upon the approval of the building inspector of such application and
of the place and manner of erecting the sign therein mentioned,
and upon his writing or stamping thereon the amount of the fee
required for the sign applied for, the applicant shall pay to the code
enforcement officer the fee prescribed by this division, and
thereupon the code enforcement officer shall issue to the applicant
a license for the sign applied for.
b. Licenses shall be issued for a period of three years. New
installations approved will be for three-year periods following the
issuance of a permit. However, construction of an approved sign
must be commenced within 30 days after the issuance of the permit
and completed within 60 days thereafter.
c. A fee of $25 will be charged for a variance of this division when it
appears in front of the zoning board of appeals.
d. License fees for the erection or maintenance of signs are as follows:
1. New installations. $5 per 1,000 based upon the proven cost of
the sign.
Sec. 3-81 CHARTER Sec. 3-81
C:207
2. Three-year permits approved as follows:
i. Illuminated wall, pole, or pylon signs. $30 for a three-year
license.
ii. Nonilluminated signs. $15 for a three-year license.
iii. Billboards. $150 for a three-year permit.
e. A permit fee of $200 per year for sign installers shall be required to
be paid except temporary permits may be purchased for three
months at a fee of $75. Temporary permits shall be accompanied by
the evidence that the applicant shall have liability insurance in a
minimum amount of $10,000 property damage and $100,000
personal injury.
f. Liability insurance must be obtained by the owner of a sign prior to
approval by the building inspector. Minimum liability coverage is
$10,000 property damage, and $100,000 personal injury. All
liability insurance policies shall be approved by the city attorney
prior to issuance of a sign permit.
(4) Temporary permits. Temporary signs shall require a permit from the
building inspector, but a fee will not be required.
a. A permit for a temporary sign may be issued for a period not
exceeding 90 days, and such sign shall be removed within 24 hours
after expiration, unless an extension of time, not exceeding 30
days, shall have been granted in writing by the building inspector.
b. Materials, except frames, used in the construction of temporary
signs may be of lightweight material.
c. Temporary signs shall conform to all other applicable provisions of
this article.
(5) Unsafe, unlawful, and deteriorating signs. Whenever it shall appear to
the building inspector that any sign has been constructed or erected or
is being maintained in violation of the terms of this article, or is unsafe
or insecure; is a menace to the public, or has been allowed to
deteriorate, he shall give written notifications to the property owner
and/or tenant. Such sign shall be removed or repaired and placed in a
safe condition within 10 days after receipt of the written notification. If
the foregoing is not complied with, the city will have the sign in
question removed and the cost added to the property owner's tax bill.
If a sign has been damaged and presents an immediate threat to the
public, the building inspector may order the immediate removal of
said sign and take appropriate action to protect the public and
recover costs. Any time a business goes out of business or moves, the
owner or company shall remove all signs of said business.
Sec. 3-81 OLEAN CODE Sec. 3-81
C:208
Sec. 3-82. Types allowed. [Code 1971, § 3-35]
Each business establishment shall be allowed the following types of signs
only and which shall be installed at the business location only. However,
ground signs and pole or pylon signs may not be used in combination.
(6) Sign mounting. All exterior signs shall be permanently mounted and
securely anchored.
(7) Restrictions. Signs and billboards shall not in any way obstruct the
required door or window area of any building or structure.
a. Signs shall not be attached to or placed upon any portion of a fire
escape.
b. Signs shall not be erected that will in any way interfere with the
activities of the fire department.
c. Signs constructed or erected after August 14, 1984, shall not be
rotating or contain any moving parts.
(8) Traffic control signs. Signs necessary for traffic control on private
property and containing no advertising may be erected, not to exceed
an area of 12 square feet per sign.
(9) Exemptions. The provisions of this division shall not apply to the
following signs:
a. Traffic signs erected by governmental bodies.
b. Railroad warning signs.
c. Municipal signs.
d. Memorial signs or tablets, names of buildings, and date of erection
when cut in any masonry surface or when constructed of bronze or
other combustible or noncombustible materials.
e. Occupational signs denoting only the name and profession of an
occupant in commercial buildings and the name and nature of the
occupancy in public and institutional buildings. Such signs shall not
exceed two square feet in area.
(10) Illumination. Signs may be illuminated at night by back lighting or
direct lighting only provided that the latter is so screened as not to cast
any direct light upon any residence.
a. No sign or lighting device shall be of the flashing, intermittent, or
reciprocating type.
b. Illuminated signs must bear the national underwriters seal of
approval or must be inspected and approved by the city electrical
inspector.
Sec. 3-81 CHARTER Sec. 3-82
C:209
Further, any area allowed in a ground sign or a pole or pylon type shall be
deducted from the total area allowed under section 3-83.
Sec. 3-83. Size limitations. [Code 1971, § 3-36]
The total display area of all signs, including wall, ground, pole, pylon, and
window, permitted upon a single lot shall be determined as follows:
Sec. 3-84. General requirements. [Code 1971, § 3-37]
Sec. 3-85. Ground. [Code 1971, § 3-38]
Two ground signs may be permitted not exceeding 65 square feet in total
area and subject to the following regulations:
(1) Wall sign. A sign attached to, erected against, or painted on the wall of a
building or structure, with the exposed face of the sign in a plane
parallel to the plane of the wall.
(2) Ground sign. A detached sign erected upon or supported by the ground.
(3) Pole or pylon sign. A sign supported by or suspended from a
freestanding column of concrete, structural steel, aluminum pipe, or
structural aluminum.
(1) On an interior lot, two square feet of display area for each lineal foot of
building frontage facing the main street or highway.
(2) On a corner lot where a building fronts on a second street, additional
signs must be approved by the zoning board.
(a) Any sign attached to a building shall not extend more than 50% above
the roofline immediately behind the sign, and in no case shall the sign
extend above same roofline by more than five feet.
(b) Wall signs shall not extend more than 12 inches from the face of the
building into any street, alley, sidewalk, thoroughfare, or other public
space.
(c) Wall signs projecting six inches or more into any public space from the
face of a building shall have a clearance of not less than eight feet
between the bottom of such sign and the sidewalk level of any public
thoroughfare.
(d) Glass in any wall sign must be safety glass or comparable material.
(1) Shall not be more than 10 feet in height, as measured from the ground.
(2) Any open space between the ground and the bottom of the sign shall not
exceed three feet.
(3) Ground signs may not be located in any area which shall affect the
visibility for motor vehicle traffic.
Sec. 3-82 OLEAN CODE Sec. 3-86
C:210
Sec. 3-86. Pole or pylon. [Code 1971, § 3-39]
One pole or pylon sign may be permitted not exceeding 65 square feet in
area and subject to the following regulations:
Sec. 3-87. through Sec. 3-100. (Reserved)
(1) Shall not be more than 25 feet in height above the ground or curb,
whichever is lower.
(2) An open space of not less than 10 feet shall be maintained between the
ground level and the bottom of such sign.
Sec. 3-86 CHARTER Sec. 3-87
C:211

DIVISION 5
SIGNS IN OTHER DISTRICTS
Sec. 3-101. Shopping centers. [Code 1971, § 3-45]
Businesses located within shopping centers shall be allowed wall signs only,
subject to regulations in sections 3-84 and 3-85. Ground and pole or pylon
signs shall not be permitted, except one pylon sign identifying the shopping
center only shall be permitted. Signs will follow all rules and regulations of
division 4.
Sec. 3-102. Industrial areas. [Code 1971, § 3-46]
All signs in industrial areas shall conform to B-1 and B-2 district regulations.
Sec. 3-103. Industrial parks. [Code 1971, § 3-47]
Signs shall be allowed in industrial parks, subject to the following
regulations:
(1) One sign of the pole or pylon type identifying the industrial park only
and not exceeding 100 square feet in area and conforming to section
3-86.
(2) One sign directing traffic to business locations. Such sign shall contain
equalsized areas not to exceed 12 inches by 72 inches for each business
located within the park.
(3) Entrance, exit, safety, and other directional signs, as required; size in
accordance with size used for state signs.
(4) Corporation identification signs, if intended to be seen from any road
outside the park or area, will conform to regulations for business signs.
Other corporate identification signs will be at the discretion of the
corporation but will not extend more than five feet above the roofline.
Sec. 3-101 CHARTER Sec. 3-103
C:213
Chapter 3.5
ALARM SYSTEMS
CROSS REFERENCES
Definitions and rules of construction
generally, § 1-2.
STATE LAW REFERENCES
Power of city to provide penalties, forfeitures
and imprisonment to punish violations of
ordinances, General City Law § 20(22).
Sec. 3.5-1. Definitions. [Res. No. 108-92, § 2, 7-14-1992]
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:
ALARM USER — Any person who has a security or fire alarm system at
premises located within or outside of the city limits owned, operated, or
maintained by such person or his agents, employees or servants.
AUTOMATIC DIALING DEVICE — A device which is connected to a
telephone line and is programmed to dial for access to an emergency
communication center and transmit by voice message or coded signal to
an emergency agency and emergency message indicating a need for
emergency response.
AVOIDABLE ALARM — Activation of security or fire alarm system as the
result of mechanical failure, malfunction, improper installation, false alarm
or negligence of the owner, user, custodian or agents or through any other
cause which results in notification of an emergency agency by a private
answering point, automatic dialing device or by a second party or means
which communicates that an emergency situation exists requiring response
by the city when, in fact, no emergency exists. An avoidable alarm does not
include alarms activated by violent conditions of nature such as hurricanes,
tornadoes, earthquake or similar cause beyond the control of the user of
the security or fire alarm system. Defective installation, failure to repair, or
use of defective equipment shall not constitute a circumstance beyond the
control of the alarm user.
EMERGENCY COMMUNICATION CENTER — The city offices responsible
for receiving and coordinating 911 emergency telephone calls.
ENHANCED 911 SYSTEM — The county-wide emergency communication
system.
Sec. 3-103 OLEAN CODE Sec. 3.5-1
C:214
FOREIGN EXCHANGE — Those security or fire alarm systems that are
permitted by the city to connect into an emergency communication center
from outside of the city limits.
HIGH-RISK PREMISES — Any premises having a security or fire alarm
system which is determined by the 911 coordinator to present a substantial
or extraordinary security or fire hazard. The following premises shall be
presumed to be high risk:
LEASED LINE SYSTEM — Those security or fire alarm systems which
have a dedicated telephone line or line override paid for by the user and
terminating at a city-operated emergency communication center.
LOCAL SECURITY OR FIRE ALARM SYSTEM — A signaling system which,
when activated, causes an audible signalling device to be activated outside
the premises within which it is installed.
911 COORDINATOR — The individual so designated by the mayor to carry
that title.
PRIVATE ANSWERING POINT — A business which offers the service of
receiving emergency signals, monitoring the signals and relaying them to
an emergency agency.
PROPRIETARY SECURITY OR FIRE ALARM SYSTEM — An alarm, sounding
and/or recording device within a premises which is not intended to alert
persons outside of the premises and not intended to alert an emergency
agency. If a proprietary system includes a signal line connected to an
emergency agency or to a private answering point or to a local security or
fire alarm system, it thereby becomes a "security or fire alarm system" as
defined in this section.
SECURITY OR FIRE ALARM SYSTEM — A device that will signal the
presence of a hazard requiring urgent attention and to which police, fire or
emergency medical service agencies are expected to respond. A security or
fire alarm system shall include automatic dialing devices as well as leased
line security or fire alarm systems. A devise connected to a motor vehicle,
water vessel or aircraft shall not be considered a security or fire alarm for
the purposes of this chapter.
SPECIAL TRUNK LINE — A designated telephone line leading to the
emergency communication center having the primary purpose of handling
emergency signals from automatic dialing devices.
(1) Governmental facilities of all types;
(2) Schools;
(3) Industrial premises;
(4) Retail premises having inventory for resale;
(5) Banks; and
(6) Residential premises having fire alarm systems only.
Sec. 3.5-1 CHARTER Sec. 3.5-2
C:215
Sec. 3.5-2. Purpose. [Res. No. 108-92, § 1, 7-14-1992]
The purpose of this chapter is to regulate:
Sec. 3.5-3. Jurisdiction. [Res. No. 108-92, § 12, 7-14-1992]
These regulations shall pertain to all security or fire alarm systems in the
city or which otherwise terminate at the fire or police department. The 911
coordinator may from time to time implement this chapter by regulation. All
regulations shall be issued with an effective date. It is the duty of all alarm
users to keep advised of amendments to this chapter and to procedures and
make appropriate changes and/or modifications as required.
Sec. 3.5-4. Penalty for noncompliance. [Res. No. 108-92, § 10,
7-14-1992]
Sec. 3.5-5. Permit required, application, effective date. [Res. No.
108-92, § 3, 7-14-1992; Res. No. 82-06, 6-27-2006]
(1) The connection of security or fire alarm systems to the city emergency
communications centers.
(2) Automatic dialing device message content to ensure that essential
information is received in order to provide appropriate emergency
response.
(3) Administrative matters relating to the operations of the city emergency
communication centers and to support the development and successful
implementation of an enhanced county-wide 911 system.
(a) It shall be unlawful to fail to comply with the provisions of this chapter.
Unless otherwise provided, any person, business or firm who shall fail
to comply shall be liable for a civil penalty payable to the city of $150. In
addition to the civil penalty payable to the city, noncompliance shall be
punishable by the court by a fine of not less than $150 and not more
than $1,000, or by a term of imprisonment not to exceed 15 days, or by
both such fine and imprisonment.
(b) The 911 coordinator may order the alarm user to immediately
disconnect any device not conforming with provisions of this chapter.
The failure by such user to obey such order shall be a separate offense
punishable by a fine of not less than $350 and not more than $1,500 or
by a term of imprisonment not to exceed 15 days, or by both such fine
and imprisonment. In addition, the owner of such security or fire alarm
system shall be liable for a civil penalty payable to the city in the
amount of $250 for the failure to obey such order.
(a) Permit. No person shall, as an alarm user, own, use, lease, operate or
maintain a security or fire alarm system connected to a city emergency
communication center or engage in the business for hire of installing
security or fire alarm systems, other than a proprietary system, unless
such person shall have first registered and obtained from the city
Sec. 3.5-2 OLEAN CODE Sec. 3.5-5
C:216
clerk's office a permit as herein provided. All permits shall expire
December 31 of each year and are required to be renewed in January
of each year.
(b) Registration/application; alarm user. Alarm user permits shall be issued
only to such premises determined to be high risk by the 911
coordinator. In order to obtain an alarm user's permit, a person who
owns or operates a security or fire alarm system shall submit an
application in the form designated by the city, which shall contain the
following:
(1) The name, home address and telephone number of the person
applying for the permit.
(2) The address of the premises upon which the security or fire alarm
system is or will be located.
(3) The address to which notices required under this chapter shall be
sent.
(4) The type of security or fire alarm system for which the permit is
sought.
(5) The name of the licensed alarm business selling, installing and/or
maintaining the security or fire alarm system.
(6) The name, address and telephone number of the licensed private
answering point business providing monitoring service.
(7) The name, address, and telephone number of two or more persons
who can be reached at any time and who are authorized by the
owner of the premises in which the system is installed to open the
premises and will be present at the premises any time an
emergency agency responds to a security or fire alarm system.
(8) A plan for safely silencing a local security or fire alarm system as
soon as possible.
(9) Any other information as the city may require.
The information required on the permit or renewal application
shall be treated as confidential and shall not be made available to
the general public. The common council finds that the release of
such information would constitute an unwarranted invasion of
personal privacy and could endanger the life or safety of persons
at the premises where a security or fire alarm system is located.
(c) (Reserved)
(d) Registration/application; alarm system installers. In order to obtain a
security or fire alarm system installer's permit, a person who operates a
security or fire alarm system installation/maintenance business for hire
providing services to any alarm user in the city shall submit an
Sec. 3.5-5 CHARTER Sec. 3.5-5
C:217
Sec. 3.5-6. Specific requirements — Automatic dialers
interconnected with emergency communication system. [Res. No.
108-92, § 4, 7-14-1992; Res. No. 125-94, 12-27-1994]
application in the form designated by the city, which shall contain the
following:
(1) The name, home address and telephone number of the person
applying for the permit.
(2) The address of the premises where the installer's business is or will
be located.
(3) The address to which notices required under this chapter shall be
sent.
(4) The name, address, and telephone number of the owner/
shareholder of the business.
(5) Evidence of compliance with state licensing requirements.
(6) Such other information as the city may require.
(e) Effective date.
(1) On or prior to October 1, 1992, all automatic dialing devices and
leased line security or fire alarm systems terminating at a city
emergency communication center shall be required to obtain the
permit required by this chapter.
(2) Effective October 1, 1992, all automatic dialing devices terminating
at the City Dispatch Center shall be required to be programmed to
call designated special trunk lines accessed by designated sevendigit
numbers. The designated emergency telephone numbers will
be such seven-digit numbers as set forth from time to time for such
purposes.
(3) (Reserved)
(4) On or prior to October 1, 1992, alarm system installers shall be
required to obtain the permit required by this chapter.
(a) Only digital dialers shall be permitted to be utilized as an automatic
dialing device interconnected with the city communications center. No
automatic dialing device shall be programmed to dial the number 911.
All automatic dialing devices terminating at an emergency
communication center must be programmed to dial the seven-digit
number designated by the city from time to time as its automatic device
emergency number. Only high risk premises shall be permitted to
interconnect with the city emergency communications system.
(b) Any person connecting to the city emergency communication center
shall make prior application to the city for authorization, obtain a
Sec. 3.5-5 OLEAN CODE Sec. 3.5-6
C:218
Sec. 3.5-7. Same—Private answering points. [Res. No. 108-92, § 5,
7-14-1992; Res. No. 115-96, § 1, 11-26-1996; Res. No. 82-06,
6-27-2006]
permit, and pay such fees as may from time to time be required for
connection and monitoring.
(c) Automatic dialing devices shall not hold the telephone line open after
the emergency communication center has broken the telephone
connection.
(d) Automatic dialing devices shall not dial the emergency communication
center more than three times as a result of a single activation.
(e) Automatic dialing devices shall not state a message more than twice
after the call has been answered.
(f) Automatic dialing device messages shall be in the following format:
"This is (name of household or business) in the _____ of _____ reporting
a (robbery, burglary, police trouble, fire, water flow or medical
emergency) alarm at (number, street name) (apartment or room
number) (floor) (building name)."
Information other than as provided by this subsection may be
authorized by the 911 coordinator.
(g) The city emergency communication center shall not provide medical
alert monitoring.
(a) Alarm notifications which terminate at a private answering point and
are then communicated to the fire or police department by an individual
for appropriate dispatch response shall be permitted to utilize the 911
emergency telephone number. The calling party shall provide the fire or
police department with the following information:
(1) Type of alarm activated: robbery, burglary, police trouble, fire,
water flow, or medical emergency.
(2) Name of business or household.
(3) Street number and name.
(4) Apartment, room number or floor, if applicable.
(5) Building name.
(6) Nearest intersecting street.
(7) Any additional information as requested by the fire or police
department.
The calling party shall promptly terminate the call upon
transmission of the above information.
Sec. 3.5-6 CHARTER Sec. 3.5-7
C:219
Sec. 3.5-8. Same—Local alarms. [Res. No. 108-92, § 6, 7-14-1992]
Sec. 3.5-9. Alarm testing. [Res. No. 108-92, § 8, 7-14-1992]
The testing of leased line security or fire alarm systems and automatic
dialing devices terminating at the city emergency communication center
shall be authorized in accordance with the following:
Sec. 3.5-10. User fees. [Res. No. 108-92, § 9, 7-14-1992; Res. No.
84-96, 9-10-1996; Res. No. 115-96, §§ 2, 3, 11-26-1996; Res. No.
82-06, 6-27-2006]
(b) (Reserved)
(a) All local security or fire alarm systems shall become deactivated and
silenced after a period no greater than 15 minutes.
(b) Police and/or fire officials may disable an audible local alarm signal that
has not been silenced prior to the expiration of the 15 minute period
and shall not be liable for any damage that may result.
(1) Unless otherwise authorized by the 911 coordinator, business alarms
may be tested a maximum of once per day. Residential alarms may be
tested a maximum of one time per week. Such testing shall be
conducted during the hours of 8:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. daily. Exceptions
for frequency of tests and hours will be granted when the alarm is being
tested as a result of alarm maintenance or repair.
(2) Prior to the alarm test, the user must contact the fire or police
department to notify of the test. The caller must provide name, address,
telephone number and type of alarm. The telephone number to be used
when requesting an alarm test is 375-5678 for robbery, burglary or
police trouble alarms and 375-5686 for fire, water flow or medical
emergency calls, or such other numbers as may be designated for such
purpose. If for any reason the alarm test cannot be conducted, the
operator will advise the user and the test shall be rescheduled at
another time.
(3) A police or fire official may be dispatched to the alarm address to verify
the test.
(4) Upon test completion, the user shall communicate with the emergency
communication center utilizing the appropriate number listed in
subsection (2) of this section to confirm the successful alarm test or
establish its failure.
(5) During the test, the fire and police department dispatcher will monitor
the test and evaluate clarity of message, tone and message
completeness.
Sec. 3.5-7 OLEAN CODE Sec. 3.5-10
C:220
(a) There shall be charged for municipal service provided pursuant to this
chapter the following user fees. These fees may from time to time be
reviewed by the common council of the city by resolution.
Alarm system installer's permit No charge
Alarm system installer renewal No charge
Annual application/connection fee and
renewal fee:
Automatic dialing system $10/building
Leased line system $10/building
Local security or fire alarm
system
No charge
Residential monitoring by city $100/building
Residential monitoring by city,
(for system located outside city)
$150/building
Commercial/industrial monitoring
by city
$175/building
Commercial/industrial monitoring
by city (for system located
outside city)
$225/building
Public school system monitoring No charge
Federal, state or county building No charge
Surcharge for tape dialer (City or
foreign exchange)
No charge
Test (city) No charge
Test (foreign) No charge
Avoidable alarm charge
1 to 7 $50/alarm
8 to 10 $75/alarm
11 to 13 $100/alarm
14 and above $125/alarm
Late payment administrative
charge
$10 + $2/month
(b) All permit renewal fees and monitoring fees shall be payable annually,
in January. No renewal permit shall be issued to any person who has
failed to pay any fee or charge provided by this chapter. False alarm
charges shall be levied after three avoidable alarms in any one-year
period. Avoidable alarm charges shall be payable 30 days after billing.
Alarm users shall be billed by the city and be obligated to pay all
avoidable alarm charges. Monitoring fees will be prorated during the
year of installation. No reimbursement of monitoring fees paid shall be
made upon termination.
Sec. 3.5-10 CHARTER Sec. 3.5-10
C:221
Sec. 3.5-11. Right to refuse to allow interconnection with city
emergency communication center. [Res. No. 108-92, § 11,
7-14-1992]
The 911 coordinator may refuse to permit any person, business or firm
the right to program its automatic dialing devices to access the designated
special trunk line when the coordinator has reason to that the use of the
device would adversely impact the operations of the fire and/or police
department.
Chapter 4
AMUSEMENTS
CROSS REFERENCES
Definitions and rules of construction
generally, § 1-2.
Licenses, permits and miscellaneous business
regulations, ch. 13.
STATE LAW REFERENCES
Police power and power to license and
regulate businesses, General City Law
§ 20(13).
Games of chance, General Municipal Law
§ 186 et seq.
Authority to legalize games of chance,
General Municipal Law §§ 187, 188
Licensing of games of chance, General
Municipal Law § 190 et seq.
Enforcing officer, General Municipal Law
§ 194.
State licensing and regulation of pool rooms,
General Business Law § 460 et seq.
Bingo, General Municipal Law § 475 et seq.
Authority to authorize bingo, General
Municipal Law §§ 477, 478.
Authority to so provide, General Municipal
Law § 485.
Authority of governing body to delegate its
functions under art. 14-H of General
Municipal Law, General Municipal Law § 498.
Authority of governing body to delegate its
functions under art. 14-H of General
Municipal Law, General Municipal Law § 498.
(c) In addition to any other remedy provided for failure to comply with this
chapter, there is established a late payment administrative charge. The
charge shall be a $10 administrative fee plus an additional amount of $2
assessed for each thirty-day delinquency.
(d) Failure to pay annual monitoring charges prior to April 1 shall be
deemed to authorize the coordinator to issue a notice of termination
terminating the privilege granted by the permit.
(e) All monitoring fee revenue from emergency communication services
shall be paid in to a capital project account maintained by the auditor
with such revenue earned for system upgrades.
Sec. 3.5-10 OLEAN CODE Sec. 3.5-11
C:222
ARTICLE I
IN GENERAL
Sec. 4-1. Public exhibitions and carnivals. [Code 1971, § 5-1]
Sec. 4-2. through Sec. 4-20. (Reserved)
(a) Prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to exhibit or conduct a
public carnival or public exhibition within the city limits. A violation of
this section is hereby declared to be an offense and punishable
accordingly.
(b) Exceptions. Public carnivals and public exhibitions which are sponsored
by local entities acceptable to the common council may be held under
the sponsorship of these entities on such terms and conditions as the
council may determine.
Sec. 4-1 CHARTER Sec. 4-2
C:223

ARTICLE II
BINGO
Sec. 4-21. Short title of article. [Code 1971, § 5-17]
This article shall be known and may be cited as "The City of Olean Bingo
Licensing Ordinance."
Sec. 4-22. Authority to conduct.
It is lawful for any authorized organization as defined in General Municipal
Law § 476, upon obtaining the required license, to conduct the game of
bingo within the territorial limits of the city, subject to the provisions of this
article, General Municipal Law art. 14-H [§ 475 et seq.] and Executive Law
article 19-B [§ 430 et seq.].
Sec. 4-23. Authority of city clerk to regulate.
Except as otherwise stated in this article, the common council delegates
to the city clerk all of the authority granted to the common council under
General Municipal Law art. 14-H [§ 475 et seq.] relative to the issuance,
amendment, and cancellation of licenses, the conduct of investigations and
hearings, and the collection and transmission of fees, all with respect to the
conduct of bingo games within the territorial limits of the city.
Sec. 4-24. Bingo inspector. [Code 1971, §§ 5-32—5-34]
Sec. 4-25. Approval of premises. [Code 1971, § 5-47]
Each applicant for a bingo license shall state on the application the
premises on which the games are to be conducted. No application shall
be approved nor shall a license be issued until the fire chief of the city
and the bingo inspector of the city have certified to the city clerk that the
premises are acceptable for public assemblage, and more particularly that
the premises comply with all fire and police regulations of the city. The
clerk of the city shall keep on file the name and addresses of all premises
previously approved for the conducting of games pursuant to this article,
and such list shall be presumptive evidence that such places are approved.
(a) Position created. There is hereby created the position of bingo
inspector. The office of bingo inspector shall be an appointive office by
appointment of the mayor and not subject to civil service rules and
regulations.
(b) Powers and duties. The bingo inspector shall have and exercise control
and supervision over all bingo games held, operated, or conducted
under any license issued to the end that such bingo games are fairly
held, operated, and conducted in accordance with the provisions of
such license, the rules and regulations promulgated by the state, and
the provisions of this article governing the holding, operation, and
conduct of bingo games.
Sec. 4-21 CHARTER Sec. 4-26
C:225
Sec. 4-26. Sunday games permitted after 1:00 p.m. [Code 1971,
§ 5-23]
It shall be lawful to conduct a licensed bingo game under General Municipal
Law art. 14-H [§ 475 et seq.] and under this article on the first day of the
week, commonly known and designated as Sunday, such game not to begin
before 1:00 p.m.
Sec. 4-27. through Sec. 4-45. (Reserved)
Sec. 4-26 OLEAN CODE Sec. 4-27
C:226
ARTICLE III
GAMES OF CHANCE
Sec. 4-46. Definitions adopted by reference. [L.L. No. 2-1980, §§ 2,
3]
The definitions in General Municipal Law § 186, as amended, are adopted
by reference and shall apply to this article.
Sec. 4-47. Authority to conduct. [L.L. No. 2-1980, § 1]
It shall be lawful, pursuant to this article, for any authorized organization,
upon obtaining a license therefor, to conduct games of chance within the
city, subject to the provisions of General Municipal Law art. 9-A [§ 185
et seq.] and subject to the provisions and rules governing such games of
chance as set forth by the state racing and wagering board.
Sec. 4-48. Administration and enforcement by chief of police. [Code
1971, § 2-68]
The administration and enforcement of this article shall be the
responsibility of the chief of police of the city police department.
Sec. 4-49. through Sec. 4-60. (Reserved)
Sec. 4-46 CHARTER Sec. 4-49
C:227

ARTICLE IV
CARNIVALS AND CIRCUSES
Sec. 4-61. License. [Res. No. 63-92, §§ 1—3, 4-28-1992; Res. No.
122-92, 8-25-1992; Res. No. 45-97, 5-27-1997]
(a) Traveling professional carnivals and circuses, whether or not locally
sponsored or hosted, shall be required to make application for a license
prior to opening for business in the city. The application shall be issued
by the city clerk. The application shall contain the following
information:
(1) The name of the amusement.
(2) The business name, if different.
(3) Permanent address of the business.
(4) Permanent business telephone number.
(5) If a corporation:
a. The state of incorporation.
b. The principal shareholder.
c. Address of principal shareholder.
(6) If a partnership:
a. The name of partners.
b. The address of all partners.
(7) If a limited partnership:
a. The name of general partner.
b. The address of general partner.
(8) If a proprietorship:
a. The name of owner.
b. The address of owner.
(9) State sales tax number.
(10) Federal identification number.
(11) Sponsoring or hosting organization(s):
a. Name.
b. Address.
c. Telephone number.
Sec. 4-61 CHARTER Sec. 4-61
C:229
d. Contact person.
(12) Date of play or show.
(13) Times of play or show.
(14) Number of employees:
a. Fulltime.
b. Parttime.
(15) Such other pertinent information as the clerk shall require.
(b) The application shall be accompanied by:
(1) The license fee as established by the common council from time to
time.
(2) A certificate of insurance reflecting in force liability insurance in
the minimum amount of $500,000 per occurrence.
(c) Prior to the issuance of the license, the applicant shall obtain the
certification of the city fire chief and the police chief or their designees,
confirming that the requirements of this Code relevant to the operation
of carnivals and circuses have been communicated to the applicant.
(d) The fee for a licensee issued pursuant to this section shall be $125 per
day of play or show.
(e) Circuses and carnivals licensed pursuant to this section shall not be
obligated to comply with or assure compliance with articles VI and VII
of chapter 13.
Sec. 4-61 OLEAN CODE Sec. 4-61
C:230
Chapter 5
ANIMALS
CROSS REFERENCES
Definitions and rules of construction
generally, § 1-2.
Health and human services, ch. 10.
Keeping of dogs and cats; limit, § 12-162.
Nuisances, ch. 16.
Injuring animals or birds in parks, § 17-27 et
seq.
STATE LAW REFERENCES
Dogs generally, Agriculture and Markets Law
§ 106 et seq.
Dangerous dogs, Agriculture and Markets
Law § 121.
Local regulation of dogs, Agriculture and
Markets Law § 124.
Sec. 4-61 CHARTER Sec. 4-61
C:231

ARTICLE I
IN GENERAL
Sec. 5-1. Prohibited in City; exceptions, conditions. [Code 1971,
§§ 6-2, 15-119]
All animals with the exception of dogs, cats, rabbits, fowl, and horses, shall
be barred from the confines of the City limits. Keeping of allowable animals
shall be subject to the following conditions:
Sec. 5-2. Maintaining breeding establishments. [Code 1971, § 6-1]
It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain any establishment within
the City limits for the breeding of animals which in any manner may be
detrimental to public health or decency.
Sec. 5-3. Animals running at large prohibited. [Code 1971, § 6-3;
amended 9-12-2017 by Res. No. 72-17]
(1) Horses may be maintained within the limits of the City only if the stable,
corral, or grazing area is more than 100 feet from any neighboring
property line, public street, or roadway. The walls of all horse stables
shall be of masonry construction, the roof may be of frame, and the
windows screened and large enough to provide adequate light and air.
All liquid wastes from the horse stable shall be intercepted before
entering the public sewer by a suitable catch basin, properly trapped
and vented. There shall also be provided a cold water hose connection
so as to flush the catch basin and to maintain the stable in a clean and
sanitary manner. All food and grains shall be kept in metal containers
with tight metal covers to prevent the presence of rodents.
(2) Cats may be maintained within the limits of the City if confined to the
owner's property. They shall not be allowed to run at large and become
a nuisance to adjoining property owners.
(3) Rabbits may be maintained within the limits of the City only if kept in a
clean and sanitary enclosure and maintained within the owner's
property. They shall not be allowed to become a nuisance to the
adjoining property owners.
(4) Fowl may be maintained within the limits of the City only if securely
confined in an enclosure maintained in a clean, dry, sanitary manner.
Such enclosure must be at least 50 feet from any dwelling or any
adjoining property line. Food and water shall be provided in suitable
containers and cleaned daily to prevent decay and attraction of flies or
other insects.
(a) No person, owner or custodian shall permit any animal to be at large
within the City. Any animal shall be deemed to be at large when it is off
the premises owned or leased by its owner or custodian unless crated,
penned, or under the control of a person able to control the animal by
Sec. 5-1 CHARTER Sec. 5-3
C:233
Sec. 5-4. Noisy animals, fowl and birds. [Res. No. 100-02,
9-10-2002]
It shall be unlawful for any person to own, keep, have in their possession,
or harbor any animal, fowl or bird in the City, which by frequent or habitual
noise or otherwise cause serious annoyance or disturbance to persons or to
the neighborhood.
Sec. 5-5. through Sec. 5-25. (Reserved)
means of a leash of sufficient strength to control the action of the
animal or such other personal attention as will reasonably control the
conduct and actions of the animal.
(b) No animal shall cause injury, minor or severe, or threat of injury, to any
person, or domestic animal, or cause any property damage to a person
other than the owner. It is a violation of this article for the owner of an
animal to permit or allow the animal to violate this section.
Sec. 5-3 OLEAN CODE Sec. 5-5
C:234
ARTICLE II
DOGS
[Adopted 9-23-2015 by Res. No. 86-158]
Sec. 5-26. Purpose.
The Common Council of the City of Olean (the "City") finds that the running
at large and other uncontrolled behavior of licensed and unlicensed dogs
has caused physical harm to persons, damage to property and created
nuisances within the City of Olean. The purpose of this article is to protect
the health, safety and well-being of persons and property by imposing
restrictions on the keeping and running at large of dogs within the City of
Olean.
Sec. 5-27. Legislative authority.
This article is enacted pursuant to the provisions of Section 124 of Article 7
of the Agriculture and Markets Law of the State of New York.
Sec. 5-28. Title.
The title of this article shall be "Dog Control Ordinance of the City of Olean."
Sec. 5-29. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following words shall have the following
respective meanings:
AGRICULTURE AND MARKETS LAW — The Agriculture and Markets Law
of the State of New York in effect as of the effective date of this article, as
amended by this article, and as amended thereafter.
CITY OF OLEAN — Shall designate the area within the corporate limits of
the City of Olean.
CONFINED — That such animal is securely confined or restrained and kept
on the owner's premises, whether within a building, kennel or other suitable
enclosure or securely fastened on a chain, wire or other effective tether of
such length and so arranged that the animal cannot reach or endanger any
person or any adjacent premises or on any public street, way or place, or
if the animal is being transported by the owner, that it is securely confined
in a crate, or other container, or so restrained in a vehicle that it cannot be
expected to escape therefrom.
DOG — Male and female, licensed and unlicensed, members of the species
Canis familiaris.
DOG CONTROL OFFICER — Any person authorized by the Common Council
of the City of Olean from time to time to enforce the provisions of this article
or the provisions of the Agriculture and Markets Law.
8. Editor's Note: This resolution also superseded former Art. II, Dogs, as amended.
Sec. 5-26 CHARTER Sec. 5-29
C:235
HARBOR — To provide food or shelter to any dog.
OWNER — The party purchasing the license, unless the dog is or has been
lost, and such loss reported to the dog warden and reasonable search has
been made. If an animal is not licensed, the term of "owner" shall designate
and cover any person or persons, firm, association or corporation who or
which at any time owns or has custody or control of, harbors, or is otherwise
responsible for any animal which is kept, brought or comes within the City
of Olean. Any person owning or harboring a dog for a period of one week
prior to the filing of any complaint charging a violation of this article shall
be held and deemed to be the owner of such dog for the purpose of this
article. In the event any dog found to be in violation of this article shall be
owned by a minor, the head of the household in which said minor resides
shall be deemed to have custody and control of said dog and shall be
responsible for any acts of the said dog and violation of this article.
RECREATIONAL AREAS — Any real property owned by the City of Olean
which is used for recreational purposes by the public, including, but not
limited to, parks or playgrounds.
RUN AT LARGE — To be in a public place or on private lands without the
knowledge, consent and approval of the owner of such lands.
SCHOOL PREMISES — Any real property situate within the City of Olean
which is used for educational purposes or purposes incidental thereto.
Sec. 5-29.1. Licensing.
(a) Pursuant to the provisions of §§ 109 and 110 of Article 7 of the
Agriculture and Markets Law of the State of New York, all dogs over the
age of four months shall be licensed by the City Clerk of the City of
Olean.
(1) The annual fee for such dog license issued in the City pursuant to
§ 109 of the Agriculture and Markets Law of the State of New York
shall be:
a. For each spayed or neutered dog and a copy of rabies vaccine
certificate for each and a copy of spay or neuter certificate:
$10.
b. For each unspayed or unneutered dog and a copy of rabies
vaccination certificate for each: $20.
(2) Each application for a dog license shall be accompanied by a fee as
specified in Sec. 5-29.1(a)(1), as well as the appropriated
certificates.
(b) All licenses issued pursuant to this article, and any renewal thereof,
shall expire on the last day of the last month of the period for which
they are issued, except that no license shall be issued for a period
expiring after the last day of the 11th month following the expiration
date of the current rabies certificate for the dog being licensed. In the
Sec. 5-29 OLEAN CODE Sec. 5-29.1
C:236
Sec. 5-30. Prohibited acts.
event an applicant for a license or renewal presents a statement
certified by a licensed veterinarian, in lieu of a rabies certificate, then
the license or renewal shall be issued for one year from the date of the
statement.
(c) A license shall not be issued or renewed unless the applicant provides a
current rabies certificate or a statement certified by a licensed
veterinarian stating that because of old age or other reason, the life of
the dog or dogs would be endangered by the administration of the
vaccine. The City of Olean will not provide a purebred license.
(d) Guide dogs, hearing dogs, service dogs, war dogs, working search dogs,
detection dogs, police work dogs, and therapy dogs, as defined in § 108
of Article 7 of the Agriculture and Markets Law of the State of New
York, shall be exempt from all license fees.
(e) In the event of a change in the ownership of any dog which has been
licensed pursuant to this article or in the address of the owner of record
of any such dog, the owner of record shall, within 10 days of such
change, file with the City Clerk a written report of such change. Such
owner of record shall be liable for any violation of this chapter until
such filing is made or until the dog is licensed in the name of the new
owner.
(f) If any dog which has been licensed pursuant to this article is lost or
stolen, the owner of record shall, within 10 days of the discovery of such
loss or theft, file with the City Clerk a written report of such loss or
theft. In the case of a loss or theft, the owner of record of any such dog
shall not be liable for any violation of this chapter committed after such
report is filed.
(g) In the case of a dog's death, the owner of record shall so notify the City
Clerk either prior to the renewal of licensure or upon the time of such
renewal.
(a) It shall be unlawful for any owner of any dog in the City of Olean to
permit or allow such dog to:
(1) Run at large unless the dog is restrained by an adequate leash.
(2) Engage in habitual loud howling, barking, crying or whining or
conduct itself in such a manner so as to unreasonably and
habitually disturb the comfort or repose of any person other than
the owner of such dog.
(3) Uproot, dig, or otherwise damage any vegetables, lawns, flowers,
garden beds, or other property not belonging to the owner of such
dog.
Sec. 5-29.1 CHARTER Sec. 5-30
C:237
Sec. 5-31. Enforcement.
This article shall be enforced by any dog control officer or peace officer
when acting pursuant to his/her special duties, or by any member of the
Olean Police Department.
Sec. 5-32. Seizure, impoundment, redemption and adoption.
(4) Chase, jump upon or at or otherwise harass any person in such a
manner as to reasonably cause intimidation or fear or to put such
person in reasonable apprehension of bodily harm or injury.
(5) Habitually chase, run alongside of or bark at motor vehicles while
on a public street or highway or upon public or private property
other than property of the owner or harborer of said dog.
(6) Create a nuisance by defecating, urinating, or digging on public
property or private property of said owner.
(7) If a female dog, be off the owner's premises when in heat.
(8) Be at large on any school premises or recreational areas, or the
sidewalks adjacent thereto, unless said dog is on a leash.
(b) Establishment of the fact or facts that a dog has committed any of the
acts prohibited by Section 5-30 of this article shall be presumptive
evidence against the owner or harborer of such dog that he/she has
failed to properly confine, leash or control his/her dog.
(a) Any dog found in violation of the provisions of Section 5-30 of this
article may be seized pursuant to the provisions of Section 118 of the
Agriculture and Markets Law.
(b) Every dog seized shall be properly cared for, sheltered, fed and watered
for the redemption periods set forth in Section 118 of the Agriculture
and Markets Law.
(c) Seized dogs may be redeemed by producing proof of licensing and
identification pursuant to the provisions of Article 7 of the Agriculture
and Markets Law and by paying the impoundment fees set forth in
Section 118 of said article.
(d) If the owner of any unredeemed dog is known, such owner shall be
required to pay the impoundment fees set forth in Subdivision (c) of this
section, whether or not such owner chooses to redeem his/her dog.
(e) Any dog unredeemed at the expiration of the appropriate redemption
period shall be made available for adoption or euthanized pursuant to
the provisions of Section 118 of the Agriculture and Markets Law.
(f) No action shall be maintained against the City of Olean, any dog control
officer or peace officer when acting pursuant to his/her special duties,
or any other agent or officer of the City of Olean or person under
Sec. 5-30 OLEAN CODE Sec. 5-32
C:238
Sec. 5-33. (Reserved)
Sec. 5-34. Appearance tickets.
Any dog control officer, peace officer when acting pursuant to his/her
special duties, or police officer in the employ of or under contract of the City
of Olean observing a violation of this article in his/her presence shall issue
and serve an appearance ticket for such violation.
Sec. 5-35. Complaints.
Any person who observes a dog in violation of this article may file a
complaint under oath with the City of Olean Police Department specifying
the nature of this violation, the date thereof, a description of the dog and
the name and residence, if known, of the owner of the dog. Upon receipt
by the City of Olean Police Department of any such complaint, he/she shall
issue and serve an appearance ticket for such violation.
Sec. 5-36. Hearing.
contract to said City of Olean to recover the possession or value of any
dog, or for damages or injury or compensation for the destruction of
any dog seized or destroyed pursuant to the provisions of this article or
the Agriculture and Markets Law.
(a) At arraignment on the violation, the owner shall be given the
opportunity to retain counsel, and to request a hearing on the matter. In
cases where the matter was initiated pursuant to Section 5-35, the
failure of the complaitant to appear at the hearing shall result in the
dismissal of the charge.
(b) If, after such hearing, in addition to the penalties set forth in Section
5-37, the Court decides that further action is warranted, he/she may
order:
(1) The dog to be declared a vicious or dangerous dog to be restrained
by collar and leash at all times whether on or off the owner's
property.
(2) The dog to be confined to the premises of the owner.
(3) Such other remedy as may be warranted by the circumstances in
such case.
(c) A violation of any order issued by the Olean City Court under the
provisions of this section shall be an offense punishable, upon
conviction thereof, as provided in Section 5-37 of this article.
Sec. 5-32 CHARTER Sec. 5-37
C:239
Sec. 5-37. Penalties for offenses.
A conviction of a violation of this article shall be deemed an offense and
punishable by a fine not exceeding $25 for the first offense, and $100 for
the second offense and $250 for each offense thereafter.
Sec. 5-38. Separability.
Each separate provision of this article shall be deemed independent of all
other provisions herein, and if any provisions shall be deemed or declared
invalid, all other provisions hereof shall remain valid and enforceable.
Sec. 5-39. Repealer.
This article shall supersede all prior local laws, ordinances, rules and
regulations relative to the control of dogs within the City of Olean and they
shall be, upon the effectiveness of this article, null and void.
Sec. 5-37 OLEAN CODE Sec. 5-39
C:240
Chapter 6
BUILDINGS, BUILDING REGULATIONS AND FIRE
PREVENTION
Sec. 5-39 CHARTER Sec. 5-39
C:241

ARTICLE I
IN GENERAL
Sec. 6-1. Purpose and intent. [Res. No. 136-06, 12-26-2006]
This chapter shall provide for administration and enforcement of the New
York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code (Uniform Code) in
the City of Olean. This chapter is adopted pursuant to Section 10 of Article
2 of the Municipal Home Rule Law. Except as otherwise provided within this
chapter, state law, or within the Uniform Code, all premises, regardless of
use, are subject to the provisions which follow.
Sec. 6-2. Partial invalidity. [Res. No. 136-06, 12-26-2006]
If any section of this chapter shall be held unconstitutional, invalid, or
ineffective, in whole or in part, such determination shall not be deemed to
affect, impair, or invalidate the remainder thereof.
Sec. 6-3. through Sec. 6-25. (Reserved)
Sec. 6-1 CHARTER Sec. 6-3
C:243

ARTICLE II
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
DIVISION 1
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT OF THE NEW YORK
STATE UNIFORM CODE.
Sec. 6-26. Code Enforcement Officers, duties and powers. [Res. No.
136-06, 12-26-2006]
(a) The office of Code Enforcement Officer is hereby created and shall be
administered by the Fire Chief or his designee. The Code Enforcement
Officer shall possess background experience related to building
construction or fire prevention and shall, within the time constraints
prescribed by law, obtain such training as the State of New York shall
require for code enforcement officials.
(b) In the absence of the Code Enforcement Officer, or in the case of his
inability to act for any reason, the Mayor shall have the power, with the
consent of the Common Council, to designate a person to act in behalf
of the Code Enforcement Officer and to exercise all the powers
conferred upon him by this chapter.
(c) The Mayor, with the approval of the Common Council, may appoint one
inspector or more, as the need may appear, to act under the supervision
and direction of the Code Enforcement Officer and to exercise any
portion of the powers and duties of the Code Enforcement Officer as
directed by him.
(d) The Code Enforcement Officer shall administer and enforce all the
provisions of the Uniform Code, ordinances and all regulations
pertaining to building construction, including receiving building permit
applications, reviewing plans and specifications, conducting
inspections, and issuing permits for the erection, alteration, relocation,
addition, repair and/or demolition of buildings and structures. He shall
issue certificates of occupancy, collect fees as set forth by the Common
Council and oversee the maintaining and filing of all records necessary
for the administration of the office to the satisfaction of the Common
Council.
(e) The Code Enforcement Officer is authorized to pursue administrative
actions and, in consultation with the City Attorney, legal action as
necessary to abate conditions not in compliance with the New York
State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code, ordinances, or other
laws, rules or regulations of the City of Olean or of the State of New
York.
(f) The Code Enforcement Officer shall have the authority to issue
appearance tickets in accordance with Section 150 of the Criminal
Procedure Law of New York State.
Sec. 6-26 CHARTER Sec. 6-26
C:245
Sec. 6-27. through Sec. 6-40. (Reserved)
Sec. 6-41. Officers or employees of Code Enforcement Office. [Res.
No. 136-06, 12-26-2006]
No officer or employee of the Code Enforcement Office shall engage in any
activity inconsistent with his duties or with the interests of the Office of
Code Enforcement; nor shall be be engaged directly or indirectly in any
building business, in the furnishing of labor, materials, or appliances for the
construction, alteration, or maintenance of a building, or the preparation
of plans or specifications thereof within the city; excepting only that this
provision shall not prohibit any employee from such activity in connection
with the construction of a building or structure owned by him, and not
constructed for sale.
Sec. 6-42. Department records and reports. [Res. No. 136-06,
12-26-2006]
(g) The Code Enforcement Officer shall issue all appropriate notices or
orders to remove illegal or unsafe conditions, to require the necessary
safeguards during construction, and to ensure compliance during the
entire course of construction with the requirements of such laws,
ordinances, or regulations. He shall make all inspections which are
necessary or proper for the carrying out of his duties. He may accept
written reports of inspection from code enforcement officials or other
employees of the Code Enforcement Office or from generally
recognized and authoritative service and inspection bureaus, provided
such reports are certified by a responsible official thereof.
(a) The Code Enforcement Officer shall receive applications and issue
permits for the erection, alteration, removal, and demolition of
buildings, or structures or parts thereof, and shall examine the
premises for which such applications have been received or such
permits have been issued for the purpose of ensuring compliance with
laws, ordinances, and regulations governing building construction.
(b) Whenever such reports may be necessary or appropriate to assure
compliance with the provisions of applicable laws, ordinances, or
regulations covering building construction, he may require the
performance of tests in the field by experienced, professional persons
or by accredited and authoritative testing laboratories or service
bureaus or agencies.
(c) The Code Enforcement Officer shall annually submit to the Secretary of
State on behalf of the Common Council, on a form prescribed by the
Secretary, a report of its activities relative to administration and
enforcement of the Uniform Code.
Sec. 6-26 OLEAN CODE Sec. 6-43
C:246
Sec. 6-43. Additional duties—Record-keeping. [Res. No. 136-06,
12-26-2006]
The Code Enforcement Officer shall keep permanent official records of
all transactions and activities conducted by him, including all applications
received, permits and certificates issued, fees charged and collected,
inspection reports, and notices and orders issued. All such records shall be
public records open to public inspection during business hours.
Sec. 6-44. Same—Annual report and summary of business to
Council. [Res. No. 136-06, 12-26-2006]
The Code Enforcement Officer shall annually submit to the Common Council
a written report and summary of all business conducted by the Code
Enforcement Office, including permits and certificates issued, fees
collected, orders and notices promulgated, inspections and tests made, and
appeals or litigation pending.
Sec. 6-45. Assistance and cooperation of other city officials. [Res.
No. 136-06, 12-26-2006]
The Code Enforcement Officer may request and shall receive, so far as may
be necessary in the discharge of his duties, the assistance and cooperation
of the Police, Fire, and Health Departments and of all other municipal
officials exercising any jurisdiction over the construction, use, or occupancy
of buildings, or the installation of equipment therein.
Sec. 6-46. Tests. [Res. No. 136-06, 12-26-2006]
Whenever there are reasonable grounds to believe that any material,
construction, equipment, or assembly does not conform with the
requirements of the applicable building laws, ordinances, or regulations,
the Code Enforcement Officer may require such material, equipment, etc.,
to be subjected to tests in order to furnish proof of such compliance.
Sec. 6-47. Violations. [Res. No. 136-06, 12-26-2006]
(a) Upon determination that a violation of this chapter or the Uniform Code
exists in, on, or about any building or premises, the Code Enforcement
Officer shall order in writing the remedying of the condition. Such order
shall state the specific provision of the Uniform Code or ordinance
which the particular condition violates and shall grant such time as may
be reasonably necessary for achieving compliance before proceedings
to compel compliance shall be instituted. Such order shall be served
personally or by notification by registered mail.
(b) Any person who shall fail to comply with a written order of the Code
Enforcement Officer within the time fixed for compliance therewith;
any owner, builder, architect, tenant, contractor, subcontractor,
construction superintendent or their agents; or any other person who
shall knowingly violate any of the applicable provisions of this chapter,
Sec. 6-43 CHARTER Sec. 6-47
C:247
Sec. 6-48. through Sec. 6-65. (Reserved)
or any lawful order, notice, directive, permit, or certificate of the Code
Enforcement Officer made thereunder, shall be punished as prescribed
in section 1-8.
(c) The civil penalties provided by this subdivision shall be recoverable in
an action instituted in the name of the City of Olean on its own initiative
or at the request of the Code Enforcement Officer.
(d) The application of the penalty in this section shall not be held to prevent
the enforced removal of prohibited conditions.
Sec. 6-47 OLEAN CODE Sec. 6-48
C:248
DIVISION 2
BUILDING PERMIT
Sec. 6-66. Permits required. [Res. No. 136-06, 12-26-2006]
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, corporation, association or
partnership to commence the erection, construction, enlargement,
alteration, removal, improvement, demolition, conversion, relocation or
change in the nature of the occupancy of any building or structure; or
cause such construction, or install a solid-fuel-burning heating
appliance, chimney or flue in any dwelling unit, etc., to be done without
first obtaining a separate building permit from the Fire Chief or his
designee for each such building, structure, or parking lot.
(b) An exemption from the requirement to obtain a permit shall not be
deemed an authorization for work to be performed in violation of the
Uniform Code. No permit shall be required for the following:
(1) Construction or installation of one-story detached structures
associated with one- or two-family dwellings or multiple singlefamily
dwellings (townhouses) which are used for tool and storage
sheds, playhouses or similar uses, provided the gross floor area
does not exceed 144 square feet (13.88m2);
(2) Installation of swings and other playground equipment associated
with a one- or two-family dwelling or multiple single-family
dwellings (townhouses);
(3) Installation of swimming pools associated with a one- or two-family
dwelling or multiple single-family dwellings (townhouses) where
such pools are designed for a water depth of less than 24 inches
and are installed entirely above ground;
(4) Installation of fences which are not part of an enclosure
surrounding a swimming pool;
(5) Construction of retaining walls unless they support a surcharge or
impound Class I, II or IIIA liquids;
(6) Construction of temporary motion picture, television and theater
stage sets and scenery;
(7) Installation of window awnings supported by an exterior wall of a
one- or two-family dwelling or multiple single-family dwellings
(townhouses);
(8) Installation of partitions or movable cases less than five feet nine
inches in height;
(9) Painting, wallpapering, tiling, carpeting, or other similar finish
work;
Sec. 6-66 CHARTER Sec. 6-66
C:249
Sec. 6-67. Application. [Res. No. 136-06, 12-26-2006]
(10) Installation of listed portable electrical, plumbing, heating,
ventilation or cooling equipment or appliances;
(11) Replacement of any equipment, provided the replacement does not
alter the equipment's listing or render it inconsistent with the
equipment's original specifications;
(12) Repairs, provided that such repairs do not involve:
a. The removal or cutting away of a load-bearing wall, partition,
or portion thereof, or of any structural beam or load-bearing
component;
b. The removal or change of any required means of egress, or the
rearrangement of parts of a structure in a manner which
affects egress;
c. The enlargement, alteration, replacement or relocation of any
building system;
d. The removal from service of all or part of a fire protection
system for any period of time.
(a) Application for a building permit shall be made to the Code
Enforcement Office, requesting sufficient information on forms
provided by it to permit a determination that the intended work
substantially conforms to the requirements of the Uniform Code and the
State Energy Conservation Construction Code, and shall require
submission of the following information and documents:
(1) A description of the land on which the proposed work is to be done;
(2) The use or occupancy of all parts of the land and of any affected
building or structure;
(3) The valuation of the proposed work;
(4) The full name, Tax Map number and address of the owner and of
the applicant;
(5) A description of the nature of the proposed work;
(6) At least two sets of construction documents (drawings and/or
specifications) that define the scope of the proposed work; and
(7) Such other information as may reasonably be required by Code
Enforcement to establish the compliance of the proposed work with
the requirements of all applicable building laws, ordinances, and
regulations.
(b) The owner or lessee shall make applications, or the agent of either or
the architect, engineer, or builder employed in connection with the
Sec. 6-66 OLEAN CODE Sec. 6-67
C:250
proposed work. Where a person other than the owner makes such
application, the owner must also sign such application.
(c) Amendments to the application or to the plans and specifications
accompanying the application may be filed at any time prior to the
completion of the work, subject to the approval of the Code
Enforcement Officer.
(d) Construction documents shall not be accepted as part of an application
for a building permit unless such documents:
(1) Are prepared by a New York State registered architect or licensed
professional engineer where so required by the Education Law;
(2) Indicate with sufficient clarity and detail the nature and extent of
the work proposed;
(3) Substantiate that the proposed work will comply with the Uniform
Code and the State Energy Conservation Construction Code;
(4) Include a site plan that shows any existing and proposed structures
on the site, the location of the intended work, and the distances
between the structures and the lot lines. Plans shall show widths
and grades of adjoining streets; walks and alleys; and, where
required by the Code Enforcement Officer, details of structural,
mechanical, and electrical work and other technical data. The Code
Enforcement Officer may waive the requirement for filing plans.
(e) Applications for a building permit or for an amendment thereto shall be
examined to ascertain whether the proposed construction is in
substantial conformance with the requirements of the Uniform Code.
(1) The Code Enforcement Officer shall stamp, sign and date all
accepted construction documents. One set of accepted
construction documents shall be retained by the Code Enforcement
Office. One set shall be returned to the applicant to be kept at the
work site so as to be available for use by the Code Enforcement
Officer.
(f) The building permit shall contain a statement directing that all work
shall be performed in accordance with the construction documents
submitted and accepted as part of the application and shall include the
directive that the Code Enforcement Officer shall be notified
immediately in the event of changes occurring during construction.
(g) Building permits shall expire 12 months from the date of issuance. A
building permit shall be invalid unless authorized work has commenced
within six months from the date of issuance. A building permit may be
renewed for good cause, with a payment of 50% of the original fee, with
such time not exceeding two years from the original issuance date.
(h) Building permits which are issued in error because of incorrect,
inaccurate or incomplete information, or when the work for which the
Sec. 6-67 CHARTER Sec. 6-67
C:251
Sec. 6-68. Building permit fees. [Res. No. 136-06, 12-26-2006]
Fees for building permits shall be established from time to time by the
Common Council by resolution. Such fees may be charged for the issuance
of permits, permit renewals, certificates of occupancy, certificates of
compliance, temporary certificates of occupancy, operating permits and for
firesafety inspections.
Sec. 6-69. Construction inspections. [Res. No. 136-06, 12-26-2006]
permit was issued violates the Uniform Code, shall be revoked or
suspended until such time as the permit holder demonstrates that all
work completed and all work proposed shall be in compliance with
applicable provisions of the code.
(i) Building permits shall be visibly displayed at the work site, to remain
visible until the project has been completed.
(j) Violations of this article shall be unlawful and subject to paying double
the permit application fee as listed in the fee schedule as adopted from
time to time by resolution of the Common Council, as well as a fine of
$100 per violation. [Res. No. 89-13, 11-26-2013]
(a) Permitted work shall be required to remain accessible and exposed
until inspected and accepted by the Code Enforcement Officer. Permit
holders shall be required to notify the Code Enforcement Officer when
construction work is ready for inspection.
(b) Provisions shall be made for inspection of the following elements or
other elements required by Code Enforcement of the construction
process, where applicable:
(1) Work site prior to the issuance of a permit;
(2) Footing and foundation;
(3) Preparation for concrete slab;
(4) Framing;
(5) Building systems, including underground and rough-in;
(6) Fire-resistant construction;
(7) Fire-resistant penetrations;
(8) Solid-fuel-burning heating appliances, chimneys, flues or gas vents;
(9) Energy code compliance; and
(10) A final inspection after all work authorized by the building permit
has been completed.
Sec. 6-67 OLEAN CODE Sec. 6-69
C:252
Sec. 6-70. Stop-work orders. [Res. No. 136-06, 12-26-2006]
Whenever a Code Enforcement Officer has reasonable grounds to believe
that work on any building or structure is being prosecuted in violation of
the provisions of the applicable Uniform Code, building laws, ordinances, or
regulations; not in conformity with the provisions of an application, plans,
or specifications on the basis of which a building permit was issued; or in an
unsafe and dangerous manner, he shall notify the owner of the property, the
owner's agent, or the person performing the work, to suspend all work, and
any such persons shall forthwith stop such work and suspend all building
activities until the stop order has been rescinded. Such order and notice
shall be in writing, shall state the conditions under which the work may be
resumed, and may be served upon a person to whom it is directed, either by
delivering it personally to him, or by posting such order and notice upon a
conspicuous portion of the building under construction and sending a copy
of such order and notice by registered mail.
Sec. 6-71. through Sec. 6-78. (Reserved)
(c) After inspection, the work or a portion thereof shall be noted as
satisfactory as completed, or the permit holder shall be notified as to
where the work fails to comply with the Uniform Code. Construction
work not compliant with code provisions shall be required to remain
exposed until it has been brought into compliance with code, been
reinspected, and been found satisfactory as completed.
Sec. 6-69 CHARTER Sec. 6-71
C:253

DIVISION 3
CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY, CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE
AND TEMPORARY CERTIFICATE
Sec. 6-79. Required. [Res. No. 136-06, 12-26-2006]
(a) No building hereafter erected subject to the New York State Uniform
Fire Prevention and Building Code shall be used or occupied in whole or
in part until a certificate of occupancy shall have been issued by the
Code Enforcement Officer.
(b) No building erected, enlarged, extended or altered, or upon which work
has been performed which required the issuance of a building permit,
shall continue to be occupied or used unless a certificate of occupancy
or certificate of compliance has been issued by the Code Enforcement
Officer.
(c) No change shall be made in the use or type of occupancy of an existing
building unless a certificate of occupancy authorizing such change has
been issued by the Code Enforcement Officer.
(d) A certificate of occupancy or a certificate of compliance shall be
preceded by an inspection of the building, structure or work. Where
applicable, the Code Enforcement Officer may require a written
statement of structural observations and/or a final report of special
inspections, prepared in accordance with the provisions of the Uniform
Code, to be received prior to the issuance of the certificate. Also, where
applicable, flood hazard certifications, prepared in accordance with the
provisions of the Uniform Code, shall be received prior to the issuance
of the certificate.
(e) A certificate of occupancy or certificate of compliance shall contain the
following information:
(1) The building permit number, if any;
(2) The date of issuance of the permit, if any;
(3) The name, address and Tax Map number of the property;
(4) If the certificate is not applicable to an entire structure, a
description of that portion of the structure for which the certificate
is issued;
(5) The use and occupancy classification of the structure;
(6) The type of construction of the structure;
(7) The assembly occupant load of the structure, if any;
(8) If an automatic sprinkler system is provided, a notation as to
whether the sprinkler system is required;
Sec. 6-79 CHARTER Sec. 6-79
C:255
Sec. 6-80. Landlord registration. [Res. No. 38-09, 5-26-2009; Res.
No. 92-10, 12-14-2010]
(9) Any special conditions imposed in connection with the issuance of
the building permit; and
(10) The signature of the official issuing the certificate and the date of
issuance.
(f) A temporary certificate of occupancy may be issued if the building or
structure or a designated portion of a building or structure is
sufficiently complete that it may be put to the use for which it is
intended.
(1) A temporary certificate shall not be issued unless:
a. The structure or portions thereof may be occupied safely;
b. Any fire- and smoke-detecting or fire protection equipment
which has been installed is operational; and
c. All required means of egress from the structure have been
provided.
(2) A temporary certificate shall list the items which remain
incomplete. The Code Enforcement Officer may place special
conditions on temporary certificates as necessary to ensure safety
and to protect the interests of the City of Olean.
(3) The effectiveness of a temporary certificate shall be limited to a
specified period of time as determined by the Code Enforcement
Officer, but in no event longer than three months, during which the
permit holder shall undertake to bring the structure into full
compliance with applicable provisions of the Uniform Code.
(4) A temporary certificate of occupancy may, at the discretion of the
Code Enforcement Officer and upon payment of an additional fee as
specified for a temporary certificate of occupancy, be renewed.
(g) A certificate of occupancy or certificate of compliance issued in error or
on the basis of incorrect information shall be suspended or revoked if
the relevant deficiencies are not corrected within the period of time
specified by the Code Enforcement Officer.
(a) The owner of a property constituting a rental property shall register the
same with the Code Enforcement Office within 90 days of the effective
date of this section. The registration form shall be known as a "landlord
registration" and shall be signed and affirmed by the property owner of
record and, if applicable, the managing agent.
(1) Any acquisition of property constituting a rental property shall
require the new owner to register the same with the Code
Enforcement Office within 15 days of the date of grant or transfer
Sec. 6-79 OLEAN CODE Sec. 6-80
C:256
by filing a landlord registration and shall be signed and affirmed
by the property owner of record and, if applicable, the managing
agent.
(2) The Code Enforcement Office shall supply a form for use as the
landlord registration which shall be completed and filed by the
property owner and shall include property description: a
description of the premises, including:
a. Property description: address, number of units, number of
floors, total number of bedrooms, the term for which the units
are rented or leased, whether the units are currently occupied,
the name listed on the property deed, and any other identifying
information requested by Code Enforcement;
b. Owner information: the owner's name, physical address,
mailing address, and primary and secondary voice telephone
numbers;
c. Designation of managing agent: if a managing agent is
required pursuant to this division, then the owner shall provide
the name, business address, business telephone number, and
fax number of the managing agent;
d. Insurance information: the name, address, and business
telephone number of the insurance provider, along with proof
of current insurance coverage for both liability and fire;
e. Certificate of occupancy: the certificate of occupancy number
and issue date.
(3) It shall be unlawful for any owner to offer any unit for rent, or to
rent any unit, or to allow any rental unit to be occupied without
having first registered pursuant to this section as required herein
within the time prescribed for such registration. Failure to receive
actual notice of the registration deadline shall not be a defense for
failure to register rental property.
a. Failure to maintain the landlord registration in compliance
with this section shall cause any certificate of occupancy
issued relative to the subject property to be deemed void.
(b) The landlord registration shall be signed and sworn to under penalty of
perjury by the property owner; if such owner is a corporation, an officer
thereof shall sign for the corporation; if such owner is a partnership, a
partner thereof shall sign for the partnership. If a managing agent is
designated, the owner's signature shall be acknowledgement of the
authority of the managing agent to receive notices related to the
property in the owners' place and stead, and receipt of such by the
managing agent shall be deemed actual notice to the property owner.
Sec. 6-80 CHARTER Sec. 6-80
C:257
(c) Any landlord registration statement or designation of a managing agent
shall be deemed prima facia proof of the statement contained therein,
in any criminal or civil prosecution instituted by the city or by any
proper prosecutorial agency against the owner or managing agent of
the subject rental property.
(d) Managing agent.
(1) Any property owner may designate a managing agent for any
property subject to the landlord registration, in which case the
managing agent must also sign and affirm the landlord registration
form as filed with the Code Enforcement Office.
(2) A property owner must designate a managing agent for any
property subject to the landlord registration, if:
a. The property owner is not a natural person; or
b. The property owner does not reside within 20 miles of the City
of Olean; or
c. The property owner does not reside in New York State.
(3) A managing agent must be:
a. A natural person;
b. Over the age of 18; and
c. Actually reside within 20 miles of the City of Olean, or have a
regular place of business within the City of Olean.
(e) The owner shall, at all times, keep this information updated and shall
amend the landlord registration to reflect any change in the required
information within 15 days of such change. Failure to comply with the
updating requirements shall be a violation by the owner and such
failure shall cause the certificate of occupancy to be deemed void.
(f) Failure to provide full and complete information, or provision of
inaccurate or false information, in the landlord registration shall be
deemed noncompliance and shall be a violation of the landlord
registration requirements, unless the same shall be corrected and
completed within the filing period, such failure shall cause the
certificate of occupancy to be deemed void.
(g) Any designation of a managing agent shall cease to be effective upon
the death or judicially declared incompetency of the managing agent
and shall require an updated landlord registration to be filed as in
§ 6-80.
(h) Designation of a managing agent in no way relieves the property owner
of liability under the Code for any violations related to the property. The
property owner, at all times, remains solely responsible for compliance
with all Code requirements related to the property.
Sec. 6-80 OLEAN CODE Sec. 6-80
C:258
Sec. 6-81. Certificate of occupancy requirement. [Added 12-16-2017
by L.L. No. 1-2017]
No existing structure shall be occupied after a change of ownership, or
change of occupancy classification until a certificate of occupancy has been
issued by the City of Olean Department of Buildings and Code Enforcement.
The City of Olean Department of Buildings and Code Enforcement shall
issue a certificate of occupancy provided there are not violations of law
or orders of the City of Olean Code of Ordinances pending, and it is
established after inspection and investigation that the building or structure
complies with all of the applicable requirements of the City of Olean Code
of Ordinances and other applicable New York State codes, laws, regulations
and ordinances.
Sec. 6-82. through Sec. 6-84. (Reserved)
Sec. 6-85. Penalties for offenses. [Res. No. 38-09, 5-26-2009; Res.
No. 92-10, 12-14-2010]
(i) If a managing agent is designated, the landlord registration shall also
be signed by the managing agent and such signature shall be
acknowledgement of accepting responsibility to receive notices related
to the property on behalf of the owner.
(a) Enforcement.
(1) Any violation of this division is an offense punishable by a fine not
to exceed the sum of $250. Each week that a violation continues
shall constitute a separate offense.
(2) The Code Enforcement Office is authorized to make inspections of
property, to respond to complaints, to issue notice(s) of violation(s)
and to issue appearance tickets, where necessary to enforce the
provisions of this division.
(b) Complaints of violations.
(1) Any person may file a complaint with the Code Enforcement Office
that a violation of this division may have taken place or is allegedly
taking place. All complaints shall be in writing and shall specify the
property on which the alleged violation has occurred.
(2) The Code Enforcement Office shall record and investigate any such
written complaint.
(3) The Code Enforcement Office shall also investigate any alleged
violation that it has reason to believe has occurred or is occurring.
(c) Inspection. Whenever a complaint has been filed, or whenever it shall
appear that the provisions of this division are being violated, the Code
Enforcement Office shall investigate the complaint. Except in cases
where the alleged violation is in plain view and/or where no entry is
Sec. 6-80 CHARTER Sec. 6-85
C:259
necessary, or except in cases where an imminent peril exists, the Code
Enforcement Office shall obtain approval from an owner, lessee, agent,
tenant or other person with authority to make an inspection of the
property.
Sec. 6-85 OLEAN CODE Sec. 6-85
C:260
DIVISION 4
OPERATING PERMITS
Sec. 6-86. Required. [Res. No. 136-06, 12-26-2006]
(a) The Code Enforcement Officer shall issue operating permits for
conducting the activities or using the categories of buildings listed
below:
(1) Manufacturing, storing or handling hazardous materials in
quantities exceeding those listed in Tables 2703.1.1(1),
2703.1.1(2), 2703.1.1(3) or 2703.1.1(4) of the Fire Code of New
York State (see 19 NYCRR Part 1225);
(2) Hazardous processes and activities, including, but not limited to,
commercial and industrial operations which produce combustible
dust as a byproduct, fruit and crop ripening, and waste handling;
(3) Use of pyrotechnic devices in assembly occupancies;
(4) Buildings containing one or more areas of public assembly with an
occupant load of 100 persons or more;
(5) Buildings whose use or occupancy classification may pose a
substantial potential hazard to public safety, as determined by the
City of Olean Code Enforcement Officer;
(6) Any open burning or bonfire, provided:
a. Open burning or bonfires shall not be permitted within 50 feet
of any structure or combustible material.
b. Conditions on the grounds that could cause the fire to spread
shall be eliminated prior to ignition.
c. Open burning and bonfires shall be constantly attended until
the fire is extinguished. A minimum of one portable fire
extinguisher with a minimum 4-A rating shall be located within
close proximity of the fire and available for immediate
utilization.
(7) Storage of flammable liquids per Article IV, Division 2, Subdivision
II.
(b) Parties who propose to undertake the types of activities or operate the
types of buildings listed in subdivision (a) of this section shall be
required to obtain an operating permit prior to commencing such
operation. An application for an operating permit shall be provided by
the Code Enforcement Officer and shall contain sufficient information
to permit a determination that quantities, materials, and activities
conform to the requirements of the Uniform Code. Tests or reports
necessary to verify conformance shall be required as determined by the
Code Enforcement Officer.
Sec. 6-86 CHARTER Sec. 6-86
C:261
Sec. 6-87. through Sec. 6-110. (Reserved)
(c) An inspection of the premises shall be conducted prior to the issuance
of an operating permit.
(d) A single operating permit may apply to more than one hazardous
activity as determined by the Code Enforcement Officer.
(e) Operating permits for areas of public assembly shall be limited to one
year. Operating permits for all other occupancies as noted in
subdivision (a) shall be for not more than three years or shall coincide
with the schedule of inspections as required by Section 6-146 of the
Code of Ordinances.
(f) Where activities do not comply with applicable provisions of the
Uniform Code, an operating permit shall be revoked or suspended.
Sec. 6-86 OLEAN CODE Sec. 6-87
C:262
ARTICLE III
ELECTRICITY
DIVISION 1
GENERALLY
Sec. 6-111. Electrical inspections fee. [Res. No. 136-06,
12-26-2006]
The Common Council hereby establishes an electrical inspection fee, to be
in addition to such other fees made and established in connection with the
issuance of building permits within the City of Olean. The additional fee
shall be utilized by the city for payment of electrical inspection(s) as may be
required in connection with projects in which electrical inspection(s) shall
be required. In the event an electrical inspection is not required, no such
fee will be collected. An applicant for a building permit shall be entitled to
a refund of such fee upon request and completion of a voucher approved
by the Code Enforcement Office in the event the applicant shall provide
a bona fide electrical inspection by a city-approved inspector within such
time as may be established by the Code Enforcement Office. In the event
the applicant shall fail to provide such inspection within the time frame
established, the city shall be entitled to employ an inspector in order to
complete the required inspection(s). The amount of the fee provided for
herein shall be established by resolution of the Common Council.
Sec. 6-112. through Sec. 6-125. (Reserved)
Sec. 6-111 CHARTER Sec. 6-112
C:263

DIVISION 2
RESERVED
Sec. 6-113. through Sec. 6-145. (Reserved)
Sec. 6-113 CHARTER Sec. 6-113
C:265

ARTICLE IV
FIRE PREVENTION AND COMPLAINTS
DIVISION 1
GENERALLY
Sec. 6-146. Fire prevention, property maintenance inspections.
[Res. No. 136-06, 12-26-2006]
Sec. 6-147. through Sec. 6-168. (Reserved)
(a) Fire prevention and property maintenance inspections.
(1) Firesafety inspections of buildings or structures having areas of
public assembly shall be performed at least once in every 12
months.
(2) Firesafety inspections of buildings or structures being occupied as
dormitories shall be performed at least once in every 12 months.
(3) Firesafety inspections of all other buildings, uses and occupancies
(except one- or two-family dwellings) shall be performed at least
once in every 36 months.
(4) An inspection of a building or dwelling unit may also be performed
at any other time upon:
a. The request of the owner, authorized agent, or tenant;
b. Receipt of a written statement alleging that conditions or
activities failing to comply with the Uniform Code exist; or
c. Other reasonable and reliable information that such a violation
exists.
(b) All such inspections shall be performed by the Code Enforcement
Officer or his duly authorized deputies.
Sec. 6-146 CHARTER Sec. 6-147
C:267

DIVISION 2
EXPLOSIVES AND INFLAMMABLES
Subdivision I. General Provisions
Sec. 6-169. Permit required to erect or open gasoline service
stations. [Res. No. 136-06, 12-26-2006]
Sec. 6-170. Transportation of nitroglycerine. [Res. No. 136-06,
12-26-2006]
All vehicles used in the transportation of nitroglycerine, while loaded with
such explosive, are prohibited from being operated or parked on any of the
thoroughfares within the limits of the city.
Sec. 6-171. Motor vehicle routes—For transport of explosives and
blasting agents. [Res. No. 136-06, 12-26-2006]
Routes 16, 417, and 17 are the exclusive routes for vehicles transporting
explosives and blasting agents within the city.
(a) Council approval required. Any person intending to operate a gasoline
service station within the city must obtain the permission of the Mayor
and the Common Council before any such station may be erected or
opened.
(b) Definition. The term "gasoline service station" means any premises or
portion of premises, public or private, where gasoline or other
flammable liquid fuel for self-propelled vehicles, boats, or portable
internal combustion engines is dispensed into fuel tanks of such
equipment, including outdoor facilities on such premises used for
lubrication and minor service of such vehicles, boats, machines, or
engines.
(c) Self-service station standards. The Mayor and the Common Council will
not permit self-service gasoline stations to be erected or operated
within the city until the Fire Chief of the city has certified to the Mayor
and the Common Council that the premises to be constructed, or as
constructed, is equipped with dispensing devices in conformance with
the Uniform Code.
(d) Identification of permits. All operating permits issued to the owner or
operator of self-service gasoline stations shall be plainly marked "selfservice
station."
(e) Fee. The Common Council, by resolution from time to time may
establish a fee for issuance of a permit pursuant to this section. The fee
upon adoption of this chapter is $250.
Sec. 6-169 CHARTER Sec. 6-172
C:269
Sec. 6-172. Storage of explosives, blasting agents, and ammunition.
[Res. No. 136-06, 12-26-2006]
Explosives, ammunition, and blasting agents as defined and regulated by
the New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code shall only
be stored in industrial districts when and as approved by the Fire Chief and
Code Enforcement Officer.
Sec. 6-173. through Sec. 6-205. (Reserved)
Subdivision II. Storage of Flammable Liquids Other Than Fuel Oil
Sec. 6-206. Keeping or storing generally. [Res. No. 136-06,
12-26-2006]
It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or store within the city limits
any flammable or combustible liquids or liquids of like character, fuel oil
excepted, in quantities greater than 50 gallons, except as provided in Secs.
6-207 through 6-210.
Sec. 6-207. Storage of flammable liquids in outside aboveground
tanks prohibited; exception. [Res. No. 136-06, 12-26-2006]
Sec. 6-208. Operating permit. [Res. No. 136-06, 12-26-2006]
Any person proposing in the future to store any flammable liquids in excess
of the quantity of 50 gallons shall make written application for an operating
permit to the Code Enforcement Office.
Sec. 6-209. Motor vehicle routes—For transport of hazardous
chemicals; other dangerous articles. [Res. No. 136-06, 12-26-2006]
Routes 16, 417, and 17 are established as the exclusive routes for vehicles
transporting hazardous chemicals and other dangerous articles within the
city.
(a) Bulk plants for the manufacture of flammable or combustible liquids are
not permitted within the corporate limits of the city except as provided
in Sec. 6-210.
(b) Aboveground bulk storage of up to 3,000 gallons of combustible liquids
in approved tanks for use in association with medical emergency
aircraft is authorized upon an operating permit issued by the Code
Enforcement Office utilizing the New York State Uniform Fire
Prevention and Building Code as it is from time to time amended.
(c) Building heating systems. Any provision of this Code to the contrary
notwithstanding, aboveground storage of combustible or flammable
liquids, Class I, II or III, is authorized without permit pursuant to this
section in all zoning districts of the city if connected to and used solely
for a building heating system.
Sec. 6-172 OLEAN CODE Sec. 6-210
C:270
Sec. 6-210. Bulk storage facilities. [Res. No. 136-06, 12-26-2006]
Sec. 6-211. through Sec. 6-235. (Reserved)
(a) Bulk storage facilities for the keeping or storage of flammable liquids,
combustible liquids and liquid compressed gases may be erected and
maintained within the city in those areas zoned industrial, as defined in
the Zoning Law of the city,9 provided that the erection and maintenance
of the installation are conducted in compliance with New York State
Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code and all applicable reference
standards. An operating permit is required and shall be issued by the
Fire Chief or his or her designee prior to any installation.
(b) Bulk storage facilities for the keeping or storage of flammable liquids,
combustible liquids and liquid compressed gases may be erected and
maintained within the city in those areas zoned commercial and
residential, as defined in the Zoning Law of the city, provided that the
installation is approved by the Common Council and a SEQR has been
conducted showing a negative impact would be created. If approved,
the erection, installation and maintenance shall comply with the New
York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code and all
applicable reference standards. An operating permit is required and
shall be issued by the Fire Chief or his or her designee prior to any
installation.
9. Editor's Note: See Ch. 28, Zoning.
Sec. 6-210 CHARTER Sec. 6-211
C:271

ARTICLE V
DANGEROUS BUILDINGS
Sec. 6-236. Designation. [Res. No. 136-06, 12-26-2006]
All buildings or structures or any part thereof which have any or all of
the following defects shall be deemed to endanger the health, safety, and
welfare of the public and shall be deemed dangerous buildings within the
meaning of this article:
(1) Those whose interior walls or other vertical structural members list,
lean, or buckle to such an extent that a plumbline passing through the
center of gravity falls outside of the middle third of its base.
(2) Those which, exclusive of the foundations, show 25% or more of
damage or deterioration of the supporting members or 50% of damage
or deterioration of the nonsupporting outside walls or covering.
(3) Those which have improperly distributed loads upon the floors or roofs
or in which such floors or roofs are overloaded, or which have
insufficient design strength to be reasonably safe for the purpose used.
(4) Those which have been damaged by fire, wind, or other causes so as to
have become dangerous to life, safety, morals, or the general health and
welfare of the occupants, neighboring property, or the people of the
city.
(5) Those which have become or are so dilapidated, decayed, unsafe,
unsanitary, or which so utterly fail to provide the amenities essential to
decent living that they are unfit for human habitation, or are likely to
cause sickness, disease or injury to the health, morals, safety, or
general welfare of those living therein.
(6) Those which are unoccupied; which have been vacant for a period in
excess of one month; which have either doors, windows, or other
openings broken, removed, or improperly sealed or boarded up; and
which building or structure is not enclosed in a safe and approved
manner.
(7) Those having light, air, and sanitation facilities which are inadequate to
protect the health, morals, safety, or general welfare of human beings
who live or may live therein.
(8) Those having inadequate facilities for egress in case of fire or panic or
those having insufficient stairways, elevators, fire escapes, or other
means of communication.
(9) Those which have parts thereof which are so attached that they may fall
and injure members of the public or property.
Sec. 6-236 CHARTER Sec. 6-236
C:273
Sec. 6-237. Standards for repair, vacation, or demolition. [Res. No.
136-06, 12-26-2006]
The following standards shall be followed in substance by the Code
Enforcement Officer and the Fire Chief in ordering repair, vacation, or
demolition:
Sec. 6-238. Declared to be public nuisances. [Res. No. 136-06,
12-26-2006]
All dangerous buildings within the terms of Sec. 6-236 are hereby declared
to be public nuisances and shall be repaired, vacated, or demolished as
provided in this article.
Sec. 6-239. Duties of the Code Enforcement Office. [Res. No.
136-06, 12-26-2006]
If, following inspection, conditions described in Sec 6-236 are found to exist,
the Code Enforcement Officer shall:
(10) Those which because of their condition are unsafe, unsanitary, or
dangerous to the health, morals, safety, or general welfare of the people
of this city.
(11) Those buildings existing in violation of any provision of any ordinance
or resolution of the city or in violation of any law of the state.
(1) If the dangerous building is in such condition as to make it dangerous to
the health, morals, safety, or general welfare of its occupants, it shall be
ordered to be vacated.
(2) If the dangerous building can reasonably be repaired so that it will no
longer exist in violation of the terms of this article, it shall be ordered
repaired.
(3) In any case where a dangerous building or any part thereof is 50% or
more damaged or decayed, or deteriorated from its original value or
structure, the building or part thereof shall be demolished. In all cases
where a building cannot be repaired so that it will no longer exist in
violation of the terms of this article, it shall be demolished. In all cases
where a dangerous building is a fire hazard existing or erected in
violation of the terms of this article, any ordinance of this city, or statute
of the state, it shall be demolished.
(1) Notify in writing the owner, occupant, lessee, mortgagee, agent, and all
other persons having an interest in such building as shown by the
records of the County Clerk, or of any building found by him to be a
dangerous building within the standards set forth in Sec. 6-236, that:
a. The owner must vacate, repair, or demolish such building in
accordance with the terms of the notice and this article;
Sec. 6-236 OLEAN CODE Sec. 6-239
C:274
Sec. 6-240. Powers of Common Council; assessment of costs. [Res.
No. 136-06, 12-26-2006]
If the owner, occupant, mortgagee, or lessee fails to comply with the order
provided for in Sec. 6-239(1) within 10 days, the Fire Chief shall report such
fact to the Common Council in writing and transmit to the Common Council
at such time a copy of any records created by the Code Enforcement Office
and of the order provided for in Sec. 6-239(1). The Common Council by
resolution or ordinance shall authorize and direct the Fire Chief to cause
such building or structure to be repaired, vacated, or demolished, as the
facts may warrant, under the standards provided for in Sec. 6-237. The
costs of such repair, vacation, or demolition shall be charged as an expense
against the land on which such building or structure is located, provided
that in cases where such procedure is desirable and any delay thereby
caused will not be dangerous to the health, morals, safety, or general
welfare of the people of this city, the Common Council may direct the City
Attorney to take legal action to force the owner to make all necessary
repairs or demolish the building.
b. The occupant or lessee must vacate such building or may have it
repaired in accordance with the notice and remain in possession;
c. The mortgagee, agent, or other persons having an interest in such
building, as shown by the records of the County Clerk, may, at his
own risk, repair, vacate, or demolish such building or have such
work or act done; provided that any person notified under this
subsection to repair, vacate, or demolish any building shall be given
such reasonable time, not exceeding 30 days, as may be necessary
to do, or have done, the work or act required by the notice provided
for in this section.
(2) Set forth in the notice provided for in subdivision (1) of this section a
description of the building, structure or part thereof deemed unsafe, a
statement of the particulars which make the building, structure or part
thereof a dangerous building and an order requiring such dangerous
building to be put in such condition as to comply with the terms of this
article within such length of time, not exceeding 30 days, as is
reasonable.
(3) Report to the Fire Chief any noncompliance and the notice provided for
in subdivisions (1) and (2) of this section.
(4) Place a notice on all dangerous buildings reading as follows: "This
building has been found to be a dangerous building by the Code
Enforcement Officer. This notice is to remain on this building until it is
repaired, vacated, or demolished in accordance with the notice which
has been given the owner, occupant, lessee, mortgagee, or agent of this
building, and all other persons having an interest in the building as
shown by the records of the county clerk. It is unlawful to remove this
notice until such notice is complied with."
Sec. 6-239 CHARTER Sec. 6-240
C:275
(Res. No. 136-06, 12-26-2006)
Sec. 6-241. Emergency cases. [Res. No. 136-06, 12-26-2006]
If it reasonably appears that there is an immediate danger to life or safety
of any person unless a dangerous building is immediately repaired, vacated,
or demolished, the Code Enforcement Office shall report such facts to the
Fire Chief. The fire chief shall report his recommendations to the Mayor
and, upon concurrence of the Mayor, shall cause the immediate repair or
demolition of such dangerous building. In the absence of the Mayor, the Fire
Chief shall be empowered to make such decision in his or her own right.
The cost of such emergency repair or demolition of such dangerous building
shall be collected in the same manner as provided in Sec. 6-240, charged as
an expense against the land on which such building or structure is located.
Sec. 6-242. Liability of city officers, agents, or employees. [Res. No.
136-06, 12-26-2006]
No officer, agent, or employee of the city shall render himself personally
liable for any damage that may accrue to persons or property as a result
of any act required or permitted in the discharge of his duties under this
article. Any suit brought against any officer, agent, or employee of the city
as a result of any act required or permitted in the discharge of his duties
under this article shall be defended by the City Attorney until the final
determination of the proceeding therein. Any judgment against any such
person shall be paid by the city.
Sec. 6-243. Manner of serving notices. [Res. No. 136-06,
12-26-2006]
In all cases where notice or orders provided for in this article are required
to be served, such service shall be made upon the necessary persons either
by registered mail directed to such persons at their last known address, as
shown by the records of the County Clerk, or by personal service of such
notice or order upon such persons. If service is made by registered mail, a
copy of such notice or order shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the
dangerous building to which it relates.
Sec. 6-244. through Sec. 6-265. (Reserved)
Sec. 6-240 OLEAN CODE Sec. 6-244
C:276
ARTICLE VI
MOVING BUILDINGS
DIVISION 1
GENERALLY
Sec. 6-266. Definition. [Res. No. 136-06, 12-26-2006]
"Building," as used in this article, means and includes any dwelling, barn,
or other building which has been constructed or erected, or any part of
such building. Part of a building shall not be deemed to apply to materials
to be used in the construction of a building, but only to some portion of
a building which has already been erected, and which is proposed to be
moved without reducing such portion of a building to the materials of which
it was originally constructed.
Sec. 6-267. through Sec. 6-285. (Reserved)
Sec. 6-266 CHARTER Sec. 6-267
C:277

DIVISION 2
PERMIT
Sec. 6-286. Required. [Res. No. 136-06, 12-26-2006]
The moving of any building or part of a building into, along, or across any
of the public streets or highways in the city without having first procured a
permit in the manner provided therefor in this division is hereby prohibited.
Sec. 6-287. Application; contents, signing, and acknowledgment;
fee. [Res. No. 136-06, 12-26-2006]
Sec. 6-288. Acknowledgments from utility companies to accompany
application. [Res. No. 136-06, 12-26-2006]
The application for a permit under this division shall be accompanied by
acknowledgments from the electric light, telephone, or other public utility
companies maintaining wires, cables, or other structures necessary for
the maintenance of light, power, travel, and communication in any street
or highway, along or across which it is proposed to move such building,
that satisfactory and proper arrangements have been made for the care of
their wires, cables, or structures, in order to expedite the passage of such
building.
Sec. 6-289. Bond. [Res. No. 136-06, 12-26-2006]
The application for a permit under this division shall be accompanied by a
bond with at least two sureties in the penal sum of at least $250,000, or
such other amount determined by the City Attorney dependent upon the
specific application. Such bond shall be conditioned to indemnify and save
harmless the city of and from any and all damages, loss, costs, and expenses
to which it may be put by reason of the moving of such building and of,
from, and against any injury or alleged injury to persons or property on
account of the moving of such building. Such bond shall be approved as
to form, manner of execution, and sufficiency of the sureties by the City
(a) Any person desiring to move any building or part of a building along any
street or highway in the city shall make written application for a permit
to the Code Enforcement Office, describing the building proposed to be
moved, whether the building is to be moved as a whole or in separate
parts, the location of the premises from which and of the premises to
which, and along and across what streets and highways it is proposed to
move the building. Such application shall be signed and acknowledged
and, if made by a partnership, shall specify the name of the members
thereof, and if a corporation, the name of the state under the laws of
which the corporation is organized.
(b) The application shall be submitted together with a license application
fee to the city in the amount of $500, which shall be refundable if
authority to move the building shall be denied; otherwise, such fee shall
be nonrefundable.
Sec. 6-286 CHARTER Sec. 6-289
C:279
Attorney, and he may reject the bond and require new or additional sureties
or changes in the form or manner of execution if, in his judgment, the
sureties are not sufficient, or such bond does not comply with the provisions
of this division.
Sec. 6-290. Meeting required. [Res. No. 136-06, 12-26-2006]
Prior to the issuance of a permit there shall be a meeting held to include
representatives from the city, utilities, applicant or other interested persons
or agency to developing a plan for the moving of said building to ensure the
requirements of this article and the Uniform Code are met.
Sec. 6-291. Issuance. [Res. No. 136-06, 12-26-2006]
Upon the approval of the bond and other required items by this division, the
Code Enforcement Officer shall grant to the applicant a permit to move such
building or part of a building along the route described in the application,
or the Code Enforcement Officer may change such route.
Sec. 6-292. Deviation from route specified prohibited. [Res. No.
136-06, 12-26-2006]
It shall be unlawful for any person, after procuring a permit under this
division, to move such building or part of a building along or across any
street or highway except those specified in such permit.
Sec. 6-289 OLEAN CODE Sec. 6-292
C:280
Chapter 7
ELECTIONS
CROSS REFERENCES
Common council, § 2-21 et seq.
LOCAL LAWS REFERENCES
Elections, ch. LL3.
STATE LAW REFERENCES
Elections generally, Election Law § 1-100 et
seq.
Chapter 8
ENVIRONMENTAL CONTROL
CROSS REFERENCES
Noise, ch. 15
Nuisances, ch. 16
Solid waste, ch. 20
Water sewer and sewage disposal, ch. 27.
STATE LAW REFERENCES
Environment control generally,
Environmental Conservation Law § 1-0101 et
seq.
Sec. 8-1. Preservation of wetlands. [Code 1971, § 24-5]
Pursuant to Environmental Conservation Law § 24-050, the city shall fully
undertake and exercise its regulatory authority with regard to activities
subject to regulation under the act in freshwater wetlands, as shown on the
freshwater wetlands map, as such map may from time to time be amended,
filed by the department of environmental conservation pursuant to the
Freshwater Wetlands Act [Environmental Conservation Law § 24-0101 et
seq.], and in all area adjacent to any such freshwater wetland up to 100
feet from the boundary of such wetland. Such regulatory authority shall
be undertaken and exercised in accordance with all of the procedures,
concepts, and definitions set forth in the Freshwater Wetlands Act and
Environmental Conservation Law art. 71, tit. 23 [§ 71-2301 et seq.] relating
to the enforcement of the Freshwater Wetlands Act, as such act may from
time to time be amended.
Sec. 6-292 CHARTER Sec. 8-2
C:281
Sec. 8-2. Hazardous materials emergency response plan. [Res. No.
78-91, 8-13-1991]
The city adopts the hazardous materials emergency response plan prepared
by the city department of fire, building, and emergency services dated
January 15, 1991, as amended from time to time, as the city hazardous
materials emergency response plan.
Chapter 9
FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
CROSS REFERENCES
Definitions and rules of construction
generally, § 1-2.
Buildings, building regulations and fire
prevention, ch. 6.
Planning and development, ch. 18.
Subdivision regulations, ch. 22.
Zoning, ch. 28.
STATE LAW REFERENCES
Participation in flood insurance program,
Environmental Conservation Law § 36-0101 et
seq.
Sec. 8-2 OLEAN CODE Sec. 8-2
C:282
ARTICLE I
IN GENERAL
Sec. 9-1. Definitions. [Code 1971, § 11 1/2-10]
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:
APPEAL — A request for a review of the local administrator's interpretation
of any provision of this chapter or a request for a variance.
AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING — A designated AO or VO zone on a
community's flood insurance rate map (FIRM), with base flood depths from
one to three feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the
path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate, and where velocity flow
may be evident.
AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD — The land in the floodplain within
a community subject to a 1% or greater chance of flooding in any given
year. This area may be designated as zone A, AE, AH, AO, A1-99, V, VO,
VE, or V1-30. It is also commonly referred to as the base floodplain or onehundred-
year floodplain.
BASE FLOOD — The flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year.
BASEMENT — That portion of a building having its floor subgrade below
ground level on all sides.
BREAKAWAY WALL — A wall that is not part of the structural support of
the building and is intended through its design and construction to collapse
under specific lateral loading forces without causing damage to the elevated
portion of the building or the supporting foundation system.
BUILDING — Any structure built for support, shelter, or enclosure for
occupancy or storage.
CELLAR — Basement.
COASTAL HIGH-HAZARD AREA — The area subject to high-velocity waters
including but not limited to hurricane wave wash. The area is designated on
a FIRM as zone V1-30, VE, VO, or V.
DEVELOPMENT — Any manmade change to improved or unimproved real
estate including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining,
dredging, filling, paving, excavation, or drilling operations located within
the area of a special flood hazard.
ELEVATED BUILDING — A nonbasement building built to have the lowest
floor elevated above the ground level by means of fill, solid foundation
perimeter walls, pilings, columns (posts and piers), or shear walls.
FLOOD OR FLOODING — A general and temporary condition of partial or
complete inundation of normally dry land areas from the overflow of inland
Sec. 9-1 CHARTER Sec. 9-1
C:283
or tidal waters or the unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface
waters from any source.
FLOOD BOUNDARY AND FLOODWAY MAP (FBFM) — An official map of the
community published by the Federal Emergency Management Agency as
part of a riverine community's flood insurance study. The FBFM delineates
a regulatory floodway along watercourses studied in detail in the flood
insurance study.
FLOOD HAZARD BOUNDARY MAP (FHBM) — An official map of a
community, issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, where
the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard have been defined but
no water surface elevation is provided.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM) — An official map of a community,
on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated both
the areas of special flood hazard and the risk premium zones applicable to
the community.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY — Is the official report provided by the Federal
Emergency Management Agency. The report contains flood profiles, as well
as the flood boundary floodway map and the water surface elevations of the
base flood.
FLOODPROOFING — Any combination of structural and nonstructural
additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate
flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary
facilities, structures, and their contents.
FLOODWAY — Has the same meaning as regulatory floodway.
FLOOR — The top surface of an enclosed area in a building, including the
basement, i.e., the top of the slab in concrete slab construction or the top of
wood flooring in wood frame construction.
FUNCTIONALLY DEPENDENT USE — A use which cannot perform its
intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to
water, such as a docking or port facility necessary for the loading and
unloading of cargo or passengers, ship-building, and ship repair. The term
does not include long-term storage, manufacture, sales, or service facilities.
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE — The highest natural elevation of the ground
surface, prior to construction, next to the proposed walls of a structure.
LOWEST FLOOR — The lowest level including the basement or cellar of
the lowest enclosed area. An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure usable
solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or storage in an area other
than a basement is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that
such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the
applicable nonelevation design requirements of this chapter.
MANUFACTURED HOME — A structure, transportable in one or more
sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used
with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required
utilities. The term also includes park trailers, travel trailers, and similar
Sec. 9-1 OLEAN CODE Sec. 9-1
C:284
transportable structures placed on a site for 180 consecutive days or longer
and intended to be improved property.
MEAN SEA LEVEL — For purposes of the National Flood Insurance
Program, the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929, or other
datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a community's flood
insurance rate map are referenced.
MOBILE HOME — Manufactured home.
NATIONAL GEODETIC VERTICAL DATUM (NGVD) — As corrected in 1929,
a vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations
within the floodplains.
NEW CONSTRUCTION — Structures for which the start of construction
commenced on or after March 24, 1987.
ONE-HUNDRED-YEAR FLOOD — Base flood.
PRINCIPALLY ABOVEGROUND — That at least 51% of the actual cash value
of the structure, excluding land value, is aboveground.
REGULATORY FLOODWAY — The channel of a river or other watercourse
and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge
the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation
more than a designated height, as determined by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency in a flood insurance study or by other agencies.
START OF CONSTRUCTION — The initiation, excluding planning and
design, of any phase of a project, physical alteration of the property, and
shall include land preparation, such as clearing, grading, and filling;
installation of streets and/or walkways; excavation for a basement, footings,
piers, or foundations; or the erection of temporary forms. It also includes
the placement and/or installation on the property of accessory buildings
(garages, sheds), storage trailers, and building materials. For manufactured
homes the actual start means affixing of the manufactured home to its
permanent site.
STRUCTURE — A walled and roofed building, a manufactured home, or a
gas or liquid storage tank that is principally aboveground.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Any repair, reconstruction, or
improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50% of
the market value of the structure, either before the improvement or repair
is started; or, if the structure has been damaged and is being restored,
before the damage occurred. For the purposes of this definition substantial
improvement is considered to commence when the first alteration of any
wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building commences,
whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the
structure. The term does not, however, include either any project for
improvement of a structure to comply with existing state or local building,
fire, health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which are solely
necessary to assure safe living conditions, or any alteration of a structure
listed on the National Register of Historic Places or a state inventory of
historic places.
Sec. 9-1 CHARTER Sec. 9-1
C:285
VARIANCE — A grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter which
permits construction or use in a manner that would otherwise be prohibited
by this chapter.
Sec. 9-2. Penalties for noncompliance with chapter. [Code 1971,
§ 11 1/2-20]
No structure shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended, converted,
or altered, and no land shall be excavated or filled without full compliance
with the terms of this chapter and any other applicable regulations. Any
infraction of the provisions of this chapter by failure to comply with any
of its requirements, including infractions of conditions and safeguards
established in connection with conditions of the permit, shall constitute a
violation. Any person who violates this chapter or fails to comply with any
of its requirements shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished as provided
in section 1-9. Any structure found not compliant with the requirements
of this chapter for which the developer and/or owner has not applied for
and received an approved variance under this chapter will be declared
noncompliant and notification sent to the Federal Emergency Management
Agency.
Sec. 9-3. Findings of fact. [Code 1971, § 11 1/2-1]
The common council of the city finds that the potential and/or actual
damages from flooding and erosion may be a problem to the residents of
the city and that such damages may include destruction or loss of private
and public housing, damage to public facilities, both publicly and privately
owned, and injury to and loss of human life. In order to minimize the threat
of such damages and to achieve the purposes and objectives set forth in this
chapter, the common council does ordain the provisions of this chapter.
Sec. 9-4. Statement of purpose of chapter. [Code 1971, § 11 1/2-2]
It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety, and
general welfare, and to minimize public and private losses due to flood
conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to:
(1) Regulate uses which are dangerous to health, safety, and property due
to water or erosion hazards, or which result in damaging increases in
erosion or in flood heights or velocities;
(2) Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve
such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial
construction;
(3) Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and
natural protective barriers which are involved in the accommodation of
floodwaters;
(4) Control filling, grading, dredging, and other development which may
increase erosion or flood damages;
Sec. 9-1 OLEAN CODE Sec. 9-4
C:286
Sec. 9-5. Objectives of chapter. [Code 1971, § 11 1/2-3]
The objectives of this chapter are:
Sec. 9-6. Lands to which this chapter applies. [Code 1971, § 11 1/
2-16]
This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazards within the
jurisdiction of the city.
Sec. 9-7. Basis for establishing the areas of special flood hazard.
[Code 1971, § 11 1/2-17]
The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency in a scientific and engineering report entitled the
Flood Insurance Study for the City of Olean, of Cattaraugus County, New
York, dated May 1987, with accompanying flood insurance rate maps and
flood boundary-floodway maps, is hereby adopted and declared to be a part
of this chapter. The flood insurance study and maps are on file at the Public
Works Department, Olean Municipal Building, Olean, New York.
Sec. 9-8. Interpretation, conflict with other laws. [Code 1971,
§ 11 1/2-18]
(5) Regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert
floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands; and
(6) Qualify and maintain for participation in the National Flood Insurance
Program.
(1) To protect human life and health;
(2) To minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control
projects;
(3) To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with
flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;
(4) To minimize prolonged business interruptions;
(5) To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and
gas mains; electric, telephone, and sewer lines; and streets and bridges
located in areas of special flood hazard;
(6) To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and
development of areas of special flood hazard so as to minimize future
flood blight areas;
(7) To provide that developers are notified that property is in an area of
special flood hazard; and
(8) To ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard
assume responsibility for their actions.
Sec. 9-4 CHARTER Sec. 9-8
C:287
Sec. 9-9. Warning and disclaimer of liability. [Code 1971, § 11 1/
2-21]
The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and
engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare
occasions. Flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes.
This chapter does not imply that land outside the area of special flood
hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or
flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the city,
any officer or employee thereof, or the Federal Emergency Management
Agency, for any flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter or
any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder.
Sec. 9-10. through Sec. 9-30. (Reserved)
(a) This chapter is adopted in response to revisions to the National Flood
Insurance Program effective October 1, 1986, and shall supercede all
previous laws adopted for the purpose of establishing and maintaining
eligibility for flood insurance.
(b) In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter
shall be held to be minimum requirements, adopted for the promotion
of the public health, safety, and welfare. Whenever the requirements of
this chapter are at variance with the requirements of any other lawfully
adopted rules, regulations, or ordinances, the most restrictive, or that
imposing the higher standards, shall govern.
Sec. 9-8 OLEAN CODE Sec. 9-10
C:288
ARTICLE II
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
Sec. 9-31. Designation of the local administrator. [Code 1971,
§ 11 1/2-27]
The fire chief is hereby appointed local administrator to administer and
implement this article by granting or denying development permit
applications in accordance with its provisions.
Sec. 9-32. Duties and responsibilities of the local administrator.
[Code 1971, § 11 1/2-29]
Duties of the local administrator shall include, but not be limited to:
(1) Permit application review.
a. Review all development permit applications to determine that the
requirements of this article have been satisfied.
b. Review all development permit applications to determine that all
necessary permits have been obtained from those federal, state, or
local governmental agencies from which prior approval is required.
1. If there is no adverse effect, then the permit shall be granted
consistent with the provisions of this article.
2. If there is an adverse effect, then flood damage mitigation
measures shall be made a condition of the permit.
c. Review all development permits for compliance with the provisions
of section 9-56(5).
d. Review all development permit applications to determine if the
proposed development adversely affects the area of special flood
hazard. For the purposes of this article, adversely affects means
physical damage to adjacent properties. An engineering study may
be required of the applicant for this purpose.
(2) Use of other base flood and floodway data. When base flood elevation
data has not been provided in accordance with section 9-7, the local
administrator shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any base flood
elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state, or other
source, including data developed pursuant to section 9-56(4)d., in order
to administer section 9-57 and section 9-58.
(3) Information to be obtained and maintained.
a. Obtain and record the actual elevation, in relation to mean sea
level, of the lowest floor, including the basement or cellar, of all new
or substantially improved structures, and whether or not the
structure contains a basement or cellar.
Sec. 9-31 CHARTER Sec. 9-32
C:289
b. For all new or substantially improved floodproofed structures:
1. Obtain and record the actual elevation, in relation to mean sea
level, to which the structure has been floodproofed; and
2. Maintain the floodproofing certifications required in sections
9-56 and 9-57.
c. Maintain for public inspection all records pertaining to the
provisions of this article, including variances when granted and
certificates of compliance.
(4) Alteration of watercourses.
a. Notify adjacent communities and the state department of
environmental conservation prior to any alteration or relocation of
a watercourse and submit evidence of such notification to the
Regional Director, Federal Emergency Management Agency,
Region II, 26 Federal Plaza, New York, N.Y. 10278.
b. Require that maintenance is provided within the altered or
relocated portion of the watercourse so that the flood-carrying
capacity is not diminished.
(5) Interpretation of FIRM boundaries.
a. The local administrator shall have the authority to make
interpretations when there appears to be a conflict between the
limits of the federally identified area of special flood hazard and
actual field conditions.
b. Base flood elevation data established pursuant to section 9-7 and/or
subsection (2) of this section, when available, shall be used to
accurately delineate the area of special flood hazards.
c. The local administrator shall use flood information from any other
authoritative source, including historical data, to establish the
limits of the area of special flood hazards when base flood
elevations are not available.
(6) Stop work orders.
a. All floodplain development found on-going without an approved
permit shall be subject to the issuance of a stop work order by the
local administrator. Disregard of a stop work order shall be subject
to the penalties described in section 9-2.
b. All floodplain development found noncompliant with the provisions
of this article and/or the conditions of the approved permit shall be
subject to the issuance of a stop work order by the local
administrator. Disregard of a stop work order shall be subject to
the penalties described in section 9-2.
Sec. 9-32 OLEAN CODE Sec. 9-32
C:290
Sec. 9-33. Establishment of development permit. [Code 1971,
§ 11 1/2-28]
A development permit shall be obtained before the start of construction
or any other development within the area of special flood hazard, as
established in section 9-7. Application for a development permit shall be
made on forms furnished by the local administrator and may include but not
be limited to plans, in duplicate, drawn to scale and showing the nature,
location, dimensions, and elevations of the area in question; existing or
proposed structures; fill, storage of materials, drainage facilities, and the
location of the foregoing.
(7) Inspections. The local administrator and/or the developer's engineer or
architect shall make periodic inspections at appropriate times
throughout the period of construction in order to monitor compliance
with permit conditions and enable the inspector to certify that the
development is in compliance with the requirements of either the
development permit or the approved variance.
(8) Certificate of compliance.
a. It shall be unlawful to use, occupy, or to permit the use or
occupancy of any building or premises, or both, or part thereof
hereafter created, erected, changed, converted, or wholly or partly
altered or enlarged in its use or structure until a certificate of
compliance has been issued by the local administrator stating that
the building or land conforms to the requirements of this chapter.
b. All other development occurring within the designated flood hazard
area will have upon completion a certificate of compliance issued
by the local administrator.
All certifications shall be based upon the inspections conducted
subject to subsection (7) of this section and/or any certified
elevations, hydraulic information, floodproofing, anchoring
requirements, or encroachment analysis which may have been
required as a condition of the approved permit.
(1) Application stage. The following information is required where
applicable:
a. Elevation in relation to mean sea level of the proposed lowest floor,
including the basement or cellar, of all structures;
b. Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any nonresidential
structure will be floodproofed;
c. When required, a certificate from a licensed professional engineer
or architect that the utility floodproofing will meet the criteria in
section 9-56(3)a.;
Sec. 9-32 CHARTER Sec. 9-33
C:291
Sec. 9-34. Appeals and requests for variances. [Code 1971, § 11 1/
2-54]
d. Certificate from a licensed professional engineer or architect that
the nonresidential floodproofed structure will meet the
floodproofing criteria in section 9-57; and
e. Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered
or relocated as a result of proposed development.
(2) Construction stage. Upon placement of the lowest floor, or
floodproofing by whatever means, it shall be the duty of the permit
holder to submit to the local administrator a certificate of the elevation
of the lowest floor, or floodproofed elevation, in relation to mean sea
level. The elevation certificate shall be prepared by or under the direct
supervision of a licensed land surveyor or professional engineer and
certified by such surveyor or engineer. When floodproofing is utilized
for a particular building, the floodproofing certificate shall be prepared
by or under the direct supervision of a licensed professional engineer or
architect and certified by such engineer or architect. Any further work
undertaken prior to submission and approval of the certification shall
be at the permit holder's risk. The local administrator shall review all
data submitted. Deficiencies detected shall be cause to issue a stop
work order for the project unless immediately corrected.
(a) The zoning board of appeals as established by the city shall hear and
decide appeals and requests for variances from the requirements of this
article.
(b) The zoning board of appeals shall hear and decide appeals when it is
alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision, or determination
made by the local administrator in the enforcement or administration of
this article.
(c) Those aggrieved by the decision of the zoning board of appeals may
appeal such decision to the supreme court, pursuant to Civil Practice
Law and Rules art. 78 [§ 7801 et seq.].
(d) In passing upon such applications, the zoning board of appeals shall
consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, standards
specified in other sections of this chapter, and:
(1) The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the
injury of others;
(2) The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;
(3) The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood
damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner;
(4) The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to
the community;
Sec. 9-33 OLEAN CODE Sec. 9-34
C:292
Sec. 9-35. Conditions for variances. [Code 1971, § 11 1/2-55]
(5) The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where
applicable;
(6) The availability of alternative locations for the proposed use which
are not subject to flooding or erosion damage;
(7) The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated
development;
(8) The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan
and floodplain management program of that area;
(9) The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary
and emergency vehicles;
(10) The costs to local governments and the dangers associated with
conducting search and rescue operations during periods of
flooding;
(11) The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and sediment
transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if
applicable, expected at the site; and
(12) The costs of providing governmental services during and after
flood conditions, including search and rescue operations;
maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as
sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems; and streets and bridges.
(e) Upon consideration of the factors of subsection (d) of this section and
the purposes of this local law, the zoning board of appeals may attach to
the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes
of this article.
(f) The local administrator shall maintain the records of all appeal actions,
including technical information, and report any variances to the Federal
Emergency Management Agency upon request.
(a) Generally, variances may be issued for new construction and
substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of 1/2 acre or less in
size, contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures
constructed below the base flood level, providing subsections (1)—(12)
in section 9-34(d) have been fully considered. As the lot size increases
beyond 1/2 acre, the technical justification required for issuing the
variance increases.
(b) Variances may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation, or
restoration of structures and contributing structures listed on the
National Register of Historic Places or the state inventory of historic
places, without regard to the contributing structures procedures set
forth in the remainder of this section.
Sec. 9-34 CHARTER Sec. 9-35
C:293
Sec. 9-36. through Sec. 9-55. (Reserved)
(c) Variances may be issued by a community for new construction and
substantial improvements and for other development necessary for the
conduct of a functionally dependent use provided that:
(1) The criteria of subsections (a), (d), (e), and (f) of this section are
met; and
(2) The structure or other development is protected by methods that
minimize flood damages during the base flood and create no
additional threat to public safety.
(d) Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any
increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result.
(e) Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is
the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief.
(f) Variances shall only be issued upon receiving written justification
providing:
(1) A showing of good and sufficient cause;
(2) A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in
exceptional hardship to the applicant; and
(3) A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in
increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, or
extraordinary public expense; create nuisances; cause fraud on or
victimization of the public; or conflict with existing local laws or
ordinances.
(g) Any applicant to whom a variance is granted for a building with the
lowest floor below the base flood elevation shall be given written notice
that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the
increased risk resulting from lowest floor elevation.
Sec. 9-35 OLEAN CODE Sec. 9-36
C:294
ARTICLE III
PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION
Sec. 9-56. General standards. [Code 1971, § 11 1/2-41]
In all areas of special flood hazards the following standards are required:
(1) Anchoring.
a. All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the
structure.
b. All manufactured homes shall be installed using methods and
practices which minimize flood damage. Manufactured homes must
be elevated and anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral
movement. Manufactured homes shall be elevated to or above the
base flood elevation or two feet above the highest adjacent grade
when no base flood elevation has been determined. Methods of
anchoring may include but are not to be limited to use of over-thetop
or frame ties to ground anchors. This requirement is in addition
to applicable state and local anchoring requirements for resisting
wind forces.
(2) Construction materials and methods.
a. All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood
damage.
b. All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed using methods and practices that minimize flood
damage.
(3) Utilities.
a. Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air conditioning
equipment, and other service facilities shall be designed and/or
located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating
within the components during conditions of flooding. When
designed for location below the base flood elevation, a professional
engineer's or architect's certification is required.
b. All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system.
c. New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed
to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters.
d. On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid
impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding.
(4) Subdivision proposals.
Sec. 9-56 CHARTER Sec. 9-56
C:295
Sec. 9-57. Specific standards. [Code 1971, § 11 1/2-42]
In all areas of special flood hazards where base flood elevation data has
been provided, as set forth in section 9-7 and section 9-32(2), the following
standards are required:
a. All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to
minimize flood damage.
b. All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities
such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems located and
constructed to minimize flood damage.
c. All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to
reduce exposure to flood damage.
d. Base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision
proposals and other proposed developments, including proposals
for manufactured home parks and subdivisions, greater than either
50 lots or five acres.
(5) Encroachments.
a. All proposed development in riverine situations where no flood
elevation data is available (unnumbered A zones) shall be analyzed
to determine the effects on the flood-carrying capacity of the area
of special flood hazards set forth in section 9-32(1)c. This may
require the submission of additional technical data to assist in the
determination.
b. In all areas of special flood hazard in which base flood elevation
data is available, pursuant to section 9-32(2) or subsection (4)d. of
this section, and no floodway has been determined, the cumulative
effects of any proposed development, when combined with all other
existing and anticipated development, shall not increase the water
surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point.
c. In all areas of the special flood hazard where floodway data is
provided or available pursuant to section 9-32(2), the requirements
of section 9-58 shall apply.
(1) Residential construction. New construction and substantial
improvements of any residential structure shall:
a. Have the lowest floor, including the basement or cellar, elevated to
or above the base flood elevation;
b. Have fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are subject to
flooding designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces
on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters.
Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a
licensed professional engineer or architect or meet or exceed the
following minimum criteria:
Sec. 9-56 OLEAN CODE Sec. 9-57
C:296
1. A minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less
than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area
subject to flooding;
2. The bottom of all such openings shall be no higher than one
foot above the lowest adjacent finished grade; and
3. Openings may be equipped with louvers, valves, screens, or
other coverings or devices, provided they permit the automatic
entry and exit of floodwaters.
(2) Nonresidential construction. New construction and substantial
improvements of any commercial, industrial, or other nonresidential
structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, shall
either have the lowest floor, including the basement or cellar, elevated
to or above the base flood elevation, or be floodproofed so that the
structure is watertight below the base flood level with walls
substantially impermeable to the passage of water. All structural
components located below the base flood level must be capable of
resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effects of
buoyancy.
a. If the structure is to be elevated, fully enclosed areas below the
base flood elevation shall be designed to automatically, without
human intervention, allow for the entry and exit of floodwaters for
the purpose of equalizing hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls.
Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a
licensed professional engineer or a licensed architect or meet the
following criteria:
1. A minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less
than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area
subject to flooding;
2. The bottom of all such openings shall be no higher than one
foot above the lowest adjacent finished grade; and
3. Openings may be equipped with louvers, valves, screens, or
other coverings or devices, provided they permit the automatic
entry and exit of floodwaters.
b. If the structure is to be floodproofed:
1. A licensed professional engineer or architect shall develop and/
or review structural designs, specifications, and plans for the
construction and shall certify that the design and methods of
construction are in accordance with accepted standards of
practice to make the structure watertight, with walls
substantially impermeable to the passage of water, with
structural components having the capability of resisting
hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy;
and
Sec. 9-57 CHARTER Sec. 9-57
C:297
Sec. 9-58. Floodways. [Code 1971, § 11 1/2-43]
Located within areas of special flood hazard are areas designated as
floodways. The floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to highvelocity
floodwaters carrying debris and posing additional threats from
potential erosion forces. When floodway data is available for a particular
site, as provided by sections 9-7 and 9-32(2), all encroachments, including
fill, new construction, substantial improvements, and other development,
are prohibited within the limits of the floodway unless a technical evaluation
demonstrates that such encroachments shall not result in any increase in
flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge.
2. A licensed professional engineer or licensed land surveyor
shall certify the specific elevation in relation to mean sea level
to which the structure is floodproofed.
The local administrator shall maintain on record a copy of all
such certificates noted in this section.
(3) Construction standards for areas of special flood hazards without base
flood elevations. New construction or substantial improvements of
structures, including manufactured homes, shall have the lowest floor,
including the basement, elevated to or above the base flood elevation,
as may be determined in section 9-32(2) or two feet above the highest
adjacent grade where no elevation data is available.
a. New construction or substantial improvements of structures,
including manufactured homes, shall have the lowest floor,
including the basement, elevated at least two feet above the
highest adjacent grade next to the proposed foundation of the
structure.
b. Fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are subject to
flooding shall be designed to automatically, without human
intervention, allow for the entry and exit of floodwaters for the
purpose of equalizing hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls.
Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a
licensed professional engineer or a licensed architect or meet the
following criteria:
1. A minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less
than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area
subject to flooding;
2. The bottom of all such openings shall be no higher than one
foot above the lowest adjacent finished grade; and
3. Openings may be equipped with louvers, valves, screens, or
other coverings or openings, provided they permit the
automatic entry and exit of floodwaters.
Sec. 9-57 OLEAN CODE Sec. 9-58
C:298
Chapter 10
HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES
CROSS REFERENCES
Definitions and rules of construction
generally, § 1-2.
Boards and commissions, § 2-81 et seq.
Animals, ch. 5
Licenses, permits and miscellaneous business
regulations, ch. 13
Nuisances, ch. 16
Solid waste, ch. 20
Vehicles for hire, ch. 26.
Water sewer and sewage disposal, ch. 27.
LOCAL LAWS REFERENCES
Health and human services, ch. LL4.
STATE LAW REFERENCES
Public health generally, Public Health Law § 1
et seq.
General ambulance services, General
Municipal Law § 122-b.
Local health organization, Public Health Law
§ 300 et seq.
Sec. 9-58 CHARTER Sec. 9-58
C:299

ARTICLE I
IN GENERAL
Sec. 10-1. Smoking in city-owned or city-maintained buildings.
[Code 1971, § 2-15]
(a) In accordance with Public Health Law art. 13-E [§ 1399-n et seq.],
smoking in public areas operated or maintained by the city is prohibited
unless in designated areas identified by SMOKING PERMITTED signs.
(b) The following buildings are subject to this policy:
(1) The City Municipal Building;
(2) Fanny E. Bartlett Center;
(3) City Garage;
(4) City Sewage Plant;
(5) Community Center;
(6) City Recreation Center;
(7) Filtration Plant;
(8) Fire Department Central Station;
(9) Fire Department Station No. 1;
(10) Fire Training Center;
(11)Water Maintenance Shop;
(12) Electrician's Workshop (War Vets Park);
(13) Parks Department Workshop (Bradner's Stadium).
(c) The mayor shall from time to time designate an agent responsible for
each building to notify those in violation of these policies. The agents'
names shall be posted as required by law.
(d) Smoking is specifically prohibited in all municipally maintained
restrooms, elevators, hallways, auditoriums, and all areas which
contain office equipment used in common. Smoking is also prohibited in
conference or meeting rooms and municipal vehicles used by more than
one person, unless all occupants agree to allow smoking.
(e) An enclosed smoking room may be designated upon request if space is
available. Conflicts should be brought to the attention of employees'
supervisory personnel.
(f) Employees found smoking outside of designated smoking areas will be
considered in violation of this policy and may be subject to penalties for
violation of personnel policies. Other persons shall be punished as
Sec. 10-1 CHARTER Sec. 10-1
C:301
Sec. 10-2. through Sec. 10-20. (Reserved)
provided in section 1-9. Copies of these rules will be distributed and
posted to all employees and to all perspective employees upon request.
(g) City employees will be notified of amendments to this section in
accordance with state law.
Sec. 10-1 OLEAN CODE Sec. 10-2
C:302
ARTICLE II
GENERAL MUNICIPAL AMBULANCE SERVICE
Sec. 10-21. Established. [Res. No. 90-92, § 4-16, 5-26-1992]
Pursuant to the provisions of General Municipal Law § 122-b, there is
hereby established in and for the city a general ambulance service for the
purpose of emergency transport of sick or injured persons or nonemergency
transport of patients found within the boundaries of the city or elsewhere
if pursuant to intermunicipal agreement or otherwise in accordance with
the laws, rules and regulations of the city to a hospital, clinic, sanitorium or
other place for treatment of such illness or injury.
Sec. 10-22. City authorized to acquire, supply, and equip motor
vehicles. [Code 1971, § 4-17]
To carry out the provisions and purposes of this article, the city may
acquire by purchase one or more motor vehicles; supply and equip such
vehicles with such facilities and materials as it may consider necessary for
emergency treatment; and may operate, maintain, repair, and replace such
vehicles, supplies, and equipment.
Sec. 10-23. Operated under direction of chief. [Code 1971, § 4-18]
The municipal ambulance service established by this article shall be
operated under the direction of the fire chief, or in his absence such person
as he shall designate.
Sec. 10-24. Fees. [Code 1971, § 4-19]
The schedule of fees or charges which shall be paid to the city by persons
using the municipal ambulance service established by this article shall be
as established by ordinance or resolution.
Sec. 10-25. City auditor to keep record of revenues and expenses of
ambulance services. [Res. No. 12-92, 8-25-1992]
The auditor of the city shall establish necessary procedures in order to
keep an accurate account of all revenues received and expenses incurred
in connection with the provision of ambulance services and submit an
account thereof to the common council once a month. Each department
of the city providing services in connection with ambulance administration
shall implement such procedures and accounting methodology as may from
time to time be required by the auditor in order to assure accuracy and
completeness of the data developed. The auditor shall as warranted
recommend to the common council such policies, procedures and practices
as will improve the fiscal administration of ambulance services.
Sec. 10-21 CHARTER Sec. 10-26
C:303
Sec. 10-26. Nonemergency transportation. [Res. No. 92-92, § 4-21,
5-26-1992]
The city ambulance service shall not provide routine out-of-city
nonemergency transportation of patients. The prohibition provided for in
this section shall not prohibit out-of-city emergency transport of patients
or nonemergency transport of patients out of the city in an unusual
circumstance of special need as determined by the fire chief.
Sec. 10-27. Ambulance board; established, duties. [Res. No. 123-92,
8-25-1992]
Sec. 10-28. through Sec. 10-45. (Reserved)
(a) There is established an ambulance board to oversee the operation of
the ambulance. This board will consist of the following to be appointed
by the mayor with a term of two years, except common council
members, whose term shall end upon leaving office, and city
employees, whose term shall end upon leaving position:
(1) Physician advisor.
(2) Fire chief.
(3) City EMS officer.
(4) President of fire department union.
(5) Olean General Hospital administrator.
(6) Common council president.
(7) Chairman, fire/buildings and emergency services committee.
(8) Chairman, clerk/assessor and computer committee.
(9) Three residents of the city.
(b) This board shall be empowered to consider and recommend to the
common council policies and procedures, training levels, equipment
purchases, level of care, and recommend fees and collection
procedures in connection with the ambulance services provided by the
city. The chief of the fire department shall provide required
administrative support for the activities of the committee.
Sec. 10-26 OLEAN CODE Sec. 10-28
C:304
ARTICLE III
PRIVATE AMBULANCES
DIVISION 1
GENERALLY
Sec. 10-46. Definitions. [Code 1971, § 4-31]
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:
AMBULANCE — A vehicle or conveyance used to move a sick or injured
person.
Sec. 10-47. Drivers and attendants to be fingerprinted, etc. [Code
1971, § 4-37]
Every driver of an ambulance licensed under this article and every
attendant of such ambulance shall have the impressions of the fingers of
his right and left hand taken by the police department. Such impressions
shall be placed upon forms furnished by the chief of police and shall be
taken by a member of the police department. No person shall be employed
as a driver or attendant on any ambulance until a report in writing from the
chief of police showing the results of such examination is received by the
city clerk. No person who has been convicted of a felony shall operate any
private ambulance or act in attendance on such ambulance.
Sec. 10-48. through Sec. 10-65. (Reserved)
Sec. 10-46 CHARTER Sec. 10-48
C:305

DIVISION 2
LICENSE
Sec. 10-66. Required. [Code 1971, § 4-32]
It shall be unlawful for any person, by himself or through his agents,
servants, or employees, to operate, manage, or maintain any private
ambulances within the city, without first obtaining a license as provided in
this division.
Sec. 10-67. Application; contents. [Code 1971, § 4-33]
Any person now operating, managing, or maintaining a private ambulance,
or desiring to secure a license to do so, shall make written application
therefor to the city clerk stating the place from which it shall be operated,
managed, or maintained; the name and residence of the applicant; the
number and character of the vehicles to be used as private ambulances; and
the state license numbers of such vehicles.
Sec. 10-68. Investigation of ambulances; issuance. [Code 1971,
§ 4-34]
The application for a license required by section 10-66 shall be referred
by the city clerk to the county health commissioner who shall cause an
investigation to be made to determine the fitness and suitability of the
ambulance from the standpoint of health, safety, and sanitation. The
ambulance shall be equipped with such oxygen equipment and first aid
supplies as shall be required by the county health commissioner. Upon
completion of such investigation, the county health commissioner shall
transmit a written report of his findings to the city clerk, together with
his recommendations for or against the issuance of such license. The city
clerk shall accordingly issue the license to permit the operation of such
ambulance in the city.
Sec. 10-69. Fee. [Code 1971, § 4-35]
The annual fee for any person for the license to operate a private ambulance
under this article shall be as established by ordinance.
Sec. 10-70. Attendance required of person who has obtained a
certificate of fitness relative to emergency first aid. [Code 1971,
§ 4-36]
Each ambulance licensed under the provisions of this article shall have in
attendance, at all times such vehicle is in use, a person who has obtained
a certificate of fitness from the county health commissioner with respect to
his ability to render emergency first aid.
Sec. 10-66 CHARTER Sec. 10-70
C:307
Chapter 11
HISTORIC PRESERVATION
CROSS REFERENCES
Boards, commissions, etc., § 2-81 et seq.
Buildings, building regulations and fire
prevention, ch. 6.
Planning and development, ch. 18.
Zoning, ch. 28.
STATE LAW REFERENCES
Municipal protection of historical places,
buildings, etc., General Municipal Law § 96-a.
Sec. 10-70 OLEAN CODE Sec. 10-70
C:308
ARTICLE I
IN GENERAL
Sec. 11-1. Purpose of chapter. [Res. No. 135-90, § 1, 11-27-1990]
It is hereby declared as a matter of public policy that the protection,
enhancement, and perpetuation of landmarks and monuments, and the
establishment of historic districts and/or historic interest districts is
necessary to promote the cultural, educational, economic, and general
welfare of the public. Inasmuch as the identity of a people is founded on
its past, and inasmuch as Olean has many significant historic, architectural,
and cultural resources which constitute its heritage, this chapter is
intended to:
Sec. 11-2. Criteria for consultation upon appropriate alteration,
demolition, or new construction affecting landmarks or historic
districts. [Res. No. 135-90, § 4, 11-27-1990]
(1) Protect and enhance landmarks and monuments and historic districts,
when created, which have a special character or special historical or
aesthetic interest or value which represent distinctive elements of
Olean’s historic, architectural, and cultural heritage;
(2) Foster civic pride in the architecture and historic accomplishments of
the past;
(3) Protect, promote, and enhance Olean’s aesthetic qualities for the
benefit of residents and visitors; and
(4) Ensure the harmonious, orderly, and efficient growth and development
of the city.
(a) When consulting with owners of property in landmark or historic
districts, the historic preservation commission shall determine whether
the proposed alteration, demolition, or construction is compatible with
its historic character, as well as with the surrounding properties. If the
commission determines that it is not, the commission’s efforts shall be
directed toward convincing the owner to eliminate from his plans any
work which would alter the special character, historic or aesthetic
interest, or value which constituted the basis for the landmark,
monument, or historic district designation.
(b) When deciding whether or not any alteration, demolition, or new
construction is compatible, the commission shall consider the following
criteria:
(1) General design, character, and appropriateness to the property of
the proposed alteration, demolition, or new construction;
(2) Scale of the proposed alteration or new construction in relation to
the property itself, surrounding properties, and the neighborhood;
Sec. 11-1 CHARTER Sec. 11-2
C:309
Sec. 11-3. through Sec. 11-20. (Reserved)
(3) Texture, materials and color and the relation to the similar features
of other properties in the neighborhood;
(4) Visual compatibility with surrounding properties, including
proportion of properties, front facade, proportion and arrangement
of windows and other openings within the facade, roof shape, and
rhythm of spacing of properties on street;
(5) Importance of historic, architectural, or other features to the
significance of the property; and
(6) Each and every other factor which the commission deems
appropriate to its decision.
Sec. 11-2 OLEAN CODE Sec. 11-3
C:310
ARTICLE II
HISTORIC PRESERVATION COMMISSION
Sec. 11-21. Creation. [Res. No. 135-90, § 2, 11-27-1990]
There is hereby created a commission to be known as the Olean Historic
Preservation Commission.
Sec. 11-22. Membership. [Res. No. 135-90, § 2(a), 11-27-1990]
The historic preservation commission shall consist of nine members to be
appointed, to the extent available in the community, by the mayor as follows:
Sec. 11-23. Terms of members. [Res. No. 135-90, § 2(b),
11-27-1990]
Historic preservation commission members shall serve for a term of three
years, except the common council members, the city attorney, and the
city historian shall have a term of two years of appointment, which shall
nevertheless end at the expiration of their term of elective or appointive
office.
Sec. 11-24. Election of chairman and vice-chairman. [Res. No.
135-90, § 2(c), 11-27-1990]
The chairman and vice-chairman of the historic preservation commission
shall be elected by and from among the members of the commission.
Sec. 11-25. Meetings. [Res. No. 135-90, § 2(e), 11-27-1990]
The historic preservation commission shall meet at least bi-monthly, but
meetings may be held anytime on the written request of any four of the
commission members or on the call of the chairman or the mayor.
Sec. 11-26. Quorum. [Res. No. 135-90, § 2(f), 11-27-1990]
A quorum for the transaction of business shall consist of five of the historic
preservation commission’s members.
(1) At least one shall be an architect;
(2) One shall be the city historian;
(3) One shall be the city attorney;
(4) Three shall be members of the Olean Historical and Preservation
Society;
(5) Three shall be members of the common council; and
(6) All members shall have a known interest in historic preservation and
architectural development within the city.
Sec. 11-21 CHARTER Sec. 11-27
C:311
Sec. 11-27. Duties and powers. [Res. No. 135-90, § 2(d),
11-27-1990]
The duties and powers of the historic preservation commission shall
include:
Sec. 11-28. Review of application; hearing. [Res. No. 135-90, § 6(c),
11-27-1990]
The historic preservation commission shall review the application and issue
its report within 14 days from the receipt of the completed application.
The commission may hold a public hearing on the application at which
an opportunity will be provided for proponents and opponents of the
application to present their views.
Sec. 11-29. Recording of landmarks and historic districts. [Res. No.
135-90, § 6(b), 11-27-1990]
The historic preservation commission shall forward notice of each property
designated as a landmark and of the boundaries of each historic district to
the office of the county clerk for recordation, to the city clerk’s office, and
the city building inspector where it will be available for public inspection.
Sec. 11-30. Decisions written and sent to applicant and building
inspector. [Res. No. 135-90, § 6(d), 11-27-1990]
All decisions of the historic preservation commission shall be in writing. A
copy shall be sent to the applicant and the building inspector.
(1) Promulgating rules and regulations as necessary for the conduct of
business of the commission;
(2) Establishing criteria for the identification of significant historic,
architectural, and cultural landmarks and monuments and areas of the
city for historic district status;
(3) Conducting surveys of significant historic, architectural, and cultural
landmarks and historic districts within the city;
(4) Recommending to the common council the designation of identified
structures as historic landmarks or monuments and areas within the
city for historic district status;
(5) Increasing public awareness of the value of historic, cultural, and
architectural preservation by developing and participating in public
education programs;
(6) Making recommendations to the common council concerning the
utilization of state, federal, and private funds to promote the
preservation of landmarks and historic districts within the city; and
(7) Reviewing and reporting on building permit applications dealing with
designated landmarks, monuments, and historic districts.
Sec. 11-27 OLEAN CODE Sec. 11-31
C:312
Sec. 11-31. Procedure for consultation with commission prior to
filing a building permit. [Res. No. 135-90, § 7, 11-27-1990]
Sec. 11-32. Owner’s right of appeal. [Res. No. 135-90, § 6(a),
11-27-1990]
Any owner or interested party shall have the right to appeal the decision
of the historic preservation commission to the common council within 30
days of the commission’s decision. If not satisfied with the decision of the
common council, the owner or interested party may seek review by the
court pursuant to Civil Practice Law and Rules art. 78 [§ 7801 et seq.] within
40 days of the final decision of the common council.
Sec. 11-33. through Sec. 11-50. (Reserved)
(a) Prior to the filing of a building permit regarding the commencement of
any work which might affect the historical nature of a structure in the
city, whether or not it is located in a historic district or granted
landmark or monument status, the owner may file a request for
consultation within the historic preservation commission.
(b) The request shall contain the following:
(1) Name, address, and telephone number of the applicant;
(2) Location and photographs of property;
(3) Elevation drawings or proposed changes, if available;
(4) Perspective drawings, including relationship to adjacent
properties, if available;
(5) Samples of color or materials to be used;
(6) Where the proposal includes signs or lettering, a scale drawing
showing the type of lettering to be used, all dimensions and colors,
a description of materials to be used, method of illumination, and a
plan showing the sign’s location on the property; and
(7) Any other information which the commission may deem necessary
in order to visualize the proposed work.
(c) No building permit shall be issued for such proposed work for 60 days
from the filing of the request, or until the property owner and the
commission have reached written agreement on the appropriateness of
the proposed project, whichever event shall occur first.
(d) All agreements resulting from consultation with the commission shall
be in writing and signed by the chairman of the commission or his
designated representative and the property owner. A copy shall be filed
with the city clerk’s office for public inspection. The agreement shall
state the reasons for deeming a project appropriate to the particular
property involved.
Sec. 11-31 CHARTER Sec. 11-33
C:313

ARTICLE III
DESIGNATION OF LANDMARKS, MONUMENTS, AND HISTORIC
DISTRICTS
Sec. 11-51. Commission’s criteria for recommending
designation—Individual property as landmark or monument. [Res.
No. 135-90, § 3(a), 11-27-1990]
The historic preservation commission may recommend that the common
council designate an individual property as a landmark or monument if it:
Sec. 11-52. Same—Group of adjoining properties as historic
district. [Res. No. 135-90, § 3(b), 11-27-1990]
The historic preservation commission may recommend that the common
council designate a group of adjoining properties as a historic district if
each of the adjoining properties:
Sec. 11-53. Notice to owner of proposed designation; time, date,
place of hearing. [Res. No. 135-90, § 3(c), (d), 11-27-1990]
(a) Possesses special character, historic or aesthetic interest, or value as
part of the cultural, political, economic, or social history of the city,
region, state, or nation;
(b) Is identified with historic personages;
(c) Embodies the distinguishing characteristics of an architectural style;
(d) Is the work of a designer whose work has significantly influenced an
age; or
(e) Because the grounds or the structures located thereon are of a unique
location or singular physical characteristic or represent an established
and familiar visual feature of a neighborhood.
(1) Contains one or more of the criteria for designation of a landmark or
monument; and
(2) By reason of possession of such qualities, the group of adjoining
properties constitutes a distinct section of the city which reasonably
requires historic treatment as a whole.
(a) The historic preservation commission, upon recommending to the
common council a landmark, monument, or district for a historical
designation, shall send notice of the proposed designation by registered
mail to the owner of the property proposed for designation, describing
the property proposed and announcing a time, date, and place for a
public hearing by the common council to consider the designation.
Notice shall also be published at least twice in the Olean Times Herald
at least 30 and 15 days prior to the date of the public hearing.
Sec. 11-51 CHARTER Sec. 11-53
C:315
Sec. 11-54. Hearing. [Res. No. 135-90, § 3(e), 11-27-1990]
The common council shall hold a public hearing prior to designation of
any landmark, monument, or historic district. More than one proposed
designation may be the subject of a single hearing. The historic
preservation commission, property owners, lessors, and any interested
persons may present testimony of documentary evidence at the hearing
which will become part of a record regarding the proposed designation.
The record may also contain staff reports, written public comments, or
other evidence offered outside of the hearing. However, all evidence not
submitted at the hearing shall be submitted at least five days prior to the
hearing and made available to the public at the hearing.
Sec. 11-55. Recommendation to common council. [Res. No. 135-90,
§ 3(f), 11-27-1990]
Within 30 days after the hearing, the historic preservation commission
shall prepare a written recommendation to the common council, which
shall consider the testimony and evidence compiled at the hearing, the
opinions of the commission, and any other evidence offered outside the
hearing which the commission feels is relevant to its recommendation. The
commission’s report shall specifically consider each of the factors set forth
in section 11-51, indicating which of the factors it deems most important.
The commission’s report shall be forwarded by the commission to each
property owner who shall be affected by the decision, and shall also be
printed in the Olean Times Herald at least 15 days prior to the common
council meeting where the recommended designation shall be considered.
The common council shall, within 60 days after the public hearing, decide
whether or not to grant the proposed landmark, monument, or historic
district historic status.
Sec. 11-56. Resolution by common council granting or denying
designation. [Res. No. 135-90, § 3(g), 11-27-1990]
Upon the decision of the common council, the historic preservation
commission shall forward a copy of the written resolution granting
landmark, monument, or historic district status or denying such designation
to the owner of the property involved.
Sec. 11-57. Issuance of building permits. [Res. No. 135-90, § 3(h),
11-27-1990]
Once a landmark, monument, or district has been granted historic status,
no building permits shall be issued by the building inspector relative to such
(b) Once the commission has issued notice of a proposed designation, no
building permits shall be issued by the building inspector within a
designated district or for work on a designated landmark or monument,
until the common council has reviewed the building permit application
and acted on the commission’s recommendation.
Sec. 11-53 OLEAN CODE Sec. 11-57
C:316
landmark, monument, or district until the historic preservation commission
has reviewed the building permit application, giving consideration as to
whether the work proposed in the building permit application will adversely
affect the special character, historic or aesthetic interest, or value of the
landmark, monument, or district. If the commission believes that a
possibility of adverse impact exists, the commission shall contact and
consult with the applicant for the building permit, review designs, drawings,
and architectural plans relative to the proposed work; and consider the
criteria set forth in section 11-2. After consulting with the owner, the
commission shall either:
Sec. 11-58. through Sec. 11-75. (Reserved)
(1) Recommend to the building inspector that the permit be granted;
(2) Propose a plan to the owner under which the commission feels the work
anticipated can be completed in a manner which shall not adversely
impact the monument, landmark, or district; or
(3) Recommend to the common council that the building permit be denied,
setting forth the reasons why the proposed work cannot be completed
in a manner which would not adversely impact the landmark,
monument, or district, and recommend to the common council what
action the commission believes is necessary to preserve the landmark,
monument, or district.
Sec. 11-57 CHARTER Sec. 11-58
C:317

ARTICLE IV
DESIGNATION OF HISTORIC INTEREST DISTRICTS
Sec. 11-76. Commission’s recommendation for establishment. [Res.
No. 135-90, § 5(a), 11-27-1990]
If the historic preservation commission believes that a group of adjoining
properties possesses historic interest to the community as a whole, but
they do not meet the criteria set forth in this chapter relative to the
establishment of historic districts, the commission may recommend to the
common council the establishment of a historic interest district.
Sec. 11-77. Establishment by common council. [Res. No. 135-90, §
5(b), 11-27-1990]
Upon the recommendation of the historic preservation commission, the
common council, if it finds that a group of adjoining properties possesses
a historical interest, may, by majority vote, establish a historic interest
district. No public hearings shall be required for the establishment of such
district.
Sec. 11-78. Commission review of building and demolition permits.
[Res. No. 135-90, § 5(c), (d), 11-27-1990]
(a) Once a historic interest district is created, the historic preservation
commission shall have the power to review all building permit or
demolition applications received by the building inspector related to
properties within the district. Within five days of receipt of a building
permit or demolition application for a structure within a historic
interest district, the building inspector shall deliver a copy of the
application to the chairman of the commission. The commission shall,
within seven days, review the application, and if the commission
believes that the work described on the application may have an impact
on the subject property or the historic interest district in part or in
whole, it may, upon written notice to the building inspector with a copy
mailed to the applicant for such a permit, make recommendations to the
applicant as to how the applicant can complete the planned work
without affecting or lessening the effect of the planned work on the
historic interest of the structure or district. In making its
recommendations, the commission shall be permitted to review all
documents, drawings, or other materials submitted with the building
permit application. However, it shall not be able to require the owner to
provide additional materials unless the owner voluntarily agrees to do
so. If the commission requests the opportunity to make
recommendations, the building inspector shall not issue the permit for
30 days from the date of the original application, unless the commission
shall consent in writing.
Sec. 11-76 CHARTER Sec. 11-78
C:319
Sec. 11-79. Stringent portions of law applied to historic district,
landmark, or monument in historic interest area. [Res. No. 135-90,
§ 5(e), 11-27-1990]
If a historical district, landmark, or monument is located within a historic
interest district, the more stringent portions of the law related to the
landmark, monument, or historic district shall apply to those properties. A
landowner in a historic interest district may use the informal procedure set
for in section 11-31; however, section 11-31(c) shall not apply.
(b) If the commission does not act within the seven-day period after the
building inspector has delivered the permit application to the chairman,
the building inspector shall act in his ordinary course.
Sec. 11-78 OLEAN CODE Sec. 11-79
C:320
Chapter 12
HOUSING CODE
CROSS REFERENCES
Definitions and rules of construction
generally, § 1-2.
Animals, ch. 5.
Buildings, building regulations and fire
prevention, ch. 6.
Dangerous buildings, § 6-236 et seq.
Nuisances, ch. 16.
Solid waste, ch. 20.
Sec. 11-79 CHARTER Sec. 11-79
C:321

ARTICLE I
Property Maintenance
Sec. 12-1. Findings and declaration.
It is hereby found and declared that there exists in the City of Olean
structures used for residential and nonresidential use which are or may
become in the future substandard with respect to structure, equipment or
maintenance or further that such conditions, including but not limited to
structural deterioration; lack of maintenance and appearance of exterior
of premises; infestation; lack of essential heating, plumbing, storage or
refrigeration equipment; lack of maintenance or upkeep of essential utilities
and facilities; existence of fire hazards; inadequate provisions for light and
air; and unsanitary conditions, constitute a menace to the health, safety,
morals, welfare and reasonable comfort of the citizens and inhabitants
of the City. It is further found and declared that, by reason of lack of
maintenance and because of progressive deterioration, certain properties
have the further effect of creating blighting conditions and initiating slums
and that, if the same are not curtailed and removed, the aforesaid
conditions will grow and spread and will necessitate in time and
expenditure of large amounts of public funds to correct and eliminate
the same and that, by reason of timely regulations and restrictions as
herein contained, the growth of slums and blight may be prevented and
the neighborhood and property values thereby maintained, the desirability
and amenities of residential and nonresidential uses and neighborhoods
enhanced and the public health, safety and welfare protected and fostered.
Sec. 12-2. Purpose.
The purpose of this code is to protect the public health, safety, morals and
welfare by establishing minimum standards governing the maintenance,
appearance, condition and occupancy of residential and nonresidential
premises; to establish minimum standards governing utilities, facilities and
other physical components and conditions essential to make the aforesaid
facilities fit for human habitation, occupancy and use; and to fix certain
responsibilities and duties upon owners and operators and distinct and
separate responsibilities and duties upon occupants.
Sec. 12-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ACCESSORY BUILDING — A structure, the use of which is incidental to that
of the main building, and which is attached thereto or is located on the same
premises [9 NYCRR 606.3(a)(1)].
BILLBOARDS (See "SIGNS.") —
A flat surface (as of a panel, wall or fence) on which bills are posted; a
large panel designed to carry outdoor advertising.
(1)
Sec. 12-1 CHARTER Sec. 12-3
C:323
BLIGHT — Something that impairs or destroys; an impaired condition; to
cause to deteriorate, ruin.
BUILDING — A structure, wholly or partially enclosed within exterior walls
or within exterior or party walls and a roof, affording shelter to persons,
animals or property.
CITY — The City of Olean.
CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — The officer charged with enforcement
of building or fire codes [9 NYCRR 606.3(a)(31)]. The officer employed by
the City of Olean to enforce the City Code of ordinances of the City of Olean
and this chapter, as well as the New York State Public Health Law.
CONSTRUCTION DEBRIS — Discarded building material, concrete, stones,
earth from excavations or grading and all other refuse resulting from the
erection, repair, demolition or other improvement of property.
DEBRIS — To break to pieces: the remains of something broken down or
destroyed; ruins.
DETERIORATION — The condition or appearance of a building, or any part
thereof, characterized by holes, rot, breaks, crumbling, cracking, peeling,
rusting or other evidence of physical decay, neglect, excessive use or lack of
maintenance.
DWELLING, MULTIPLE —
EXPOSED TO PUBLIC VIEW — Any premises or open space, or any part
thereof, or any building, or any part thereof, which may be lawfully viewed
by any member of the public from a sidewalk, street, alleyway, open-air
parking lot or from any adjoining or neighboring premises.
A sign or structure which directs attention to an idea, product, business
activity, service or entertainment which is conducted, sold or offered
elsewhere than upon the lot on which such sign is situated.
(2)
A building containing three or more dwelling units; building containing
living, sanitary and sleeping facilities occupied by one or two families
and more than four lodgers residing with either one of such families;
a building with one or more sleeping rooms, other than a one- or twofamily
dwelling, used or occupied by permanent or transient paying
guests or tenants; a building with sleeping accommodations for more
than five persons used or occupied as a club, dormitory, fraternity or
sorority or for similar uses; a building used or occupied as an old-age
home or community residence [9 NYCRR 606.3(a)(141)].
(1)
A building containing three or more dwelling units with shared or
individual entrances and/or other essential facilities and services. This
term shall not be deemed to include motel, hotel, rooming house or
other accommodations used for more or less transient occupancy.
(2)
A building or portion thereof containing three or more dwelling units
and designed or used for occupancy by three or more families living
independent of each other.
(3)
Sec. 12-3 OLEAN CODE Sec. 12-3
C:324
EXTERIOR OF PREMISES — Those portions of a building that are exposed
to public view and the open space of any premises outside of any building
erected thereon.
FENCE — A barrier intended to prevent escape or intrusion or to mark a
boundary, such as a barrier made of posts and wire or boards; an artificially
constructed barrier of wood, masonry, stone, wire, metal or any other
manufactured material or combination of materials erected for the
enclosure of yard areas.
GARBAGE —
GOOD WORKING CONDITION — Fully operable for the use intended.
GOOD WORKING REPAIR — A standard of maintenance that renders a
building safe, habitable and possessed of a neat and orderly appearance.
HEDGE — See "fence."
JUNK — Any old, discarded or unused waste iron or other metal or
substance, glass, paper, used lumber, rags, machine parts, accessories,
machinery, machines, unregistered motor vehicles which are unfit for
reconditioning, used parts of motor vehicles and any material commonly
known and generally referred to as "junk" in the ordinary and accepted
meaning of the word.
JUNKYARD — Any tract of land within the City of Olean on which junk is
placed, collected, stored, kept, maintained or located.
OCCUPANT — The person in occupancy, in possession or in control of
premises or using premises [9 NYCRR 606.3(a)(149)].
OPERATOR or MANAGER — Any person who has charge, care or control of
a building or part thereof.
OWNER — The owner of the freehold of the premises or lesser estate
therein, a mortgagee or vendee in possession, assignee of rents, receiver,
executor, trustee, lessee or other person, firm or corporation in control of a
building [(9 NYCRR 606.3(a)(154)].
PERSON — Includes an individual, a partnership, a joint venture, a
corporation, an association and any other organization recognized as an
entity by the laws of the State of New York.
POINT OF VIEW — For the purpose of § 12-5, Exterior standards, not
personal opinion but line of sight of adjoining property owners to include
front, rear and side views.
PREMISES — A lot, plot or parcel of land, including the building or
structure thereon [9 NYCRR 606.3(a)(162)].
Food wastes; refuse; the worthless or useless part of something;
leavings; trash.
(1)
Wastes from the preparation, cooking or serving of food; market
wastes; and wastes from the handling, storage and sale of produce.
(2)
Sec. 12-3 CHARTER Sec. 12-3
C:325
PROPERTY — Land and whatever is erected on, growing on, placed on or
affixed thereto.
REFUSE —
RUBBISH — Useless waste or rejected matter; noncombustible waste
material. The term shall include the residue from the burning of wood, coal
and coke; and also tin cans, metals, mineral matter, glass, crockery, dust
and other noncombustible matters.
SIGNS — A lettered board or other display used to identify or advertise a
place of business; a posted command, warning or direction; something that
serves to indicate the presence or existence of something; any structure or
part thereof or any device attached to a structure or painted or represented
on a structure which shall display or include any lettering, wording, model,
drawing, picture, banner, flag, insignia, device, marking or representation
used as or which is in the nature of an announcement, direction or
advertisement. A sign includes a billboard but does not include the flag or
insignia of any nation or of any governmental agency or of any political,
educational, charitable, philanthropic, civic, professional, religious or
similar organization, campaign, drive, movement or event which is
temporary in nature.
STRUCTURE — A combination of materials assembled, constructed or
erected at a fixed location, including, for example, a building, stationary and
portable carports and swimming pools, the use of which requires location
on the ground or attachment to something having location on the ground.
TRASH — Something worth little or nothing, as junk, rubbish; something in
a crumbled or broken condition or mass; debris from pruning or processing
plant material.
Sec. 12-4. Provisions to be minimum standards; conflict with other
provisions.
Putrescible and nonputrescible solid waste consisting of organic or
nonorganic materials but shall not include human or animal body
waste.
(1)
All cardboard, plastic material or glass containers, wastepaper, rags,
sweeping, pieces of wood, excelsior, rubber and like waste material.
(2)
COMBUSTIBLE — Paper, cartons, boxes, barrels, wood, excelsior, tree
branches, yard trimmings, wood furniture and bedding dunnage and all
other materials subject to burning.
(1)
NONCOMBUSTIBLE — Metal, tin cans, metal furniture, glass, crockery
and minerals.
(2)
(a) This chapter establishes certain minimum standards for the initial and
continued occupancy and use of all structures and does not replace or
modify standards otherwise established for the construction, repair,
alteration or use of the structure, the premises or the equipment or
Sec. 12-3 OLEAN CODE Sec. 12-4
C:326
Sec. 12-5. Exterior standards.
The exterior of the premises and the condition of structures shall be
maintained so that the premises and all buildings shall reflect a level of
maintenance in keeping with the standards of the community and shall not
constitute blight from the point of view of adjoining property owners or lead
to the progressive deterioration of the neighborhood. Such maintenance
shall include, without limitation, the following:
facilities contained therein, as are required by the New York State
Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code.
(b) In any case where a provision is found to be in conflict with any
applicable zoning, building, plumbing, electrical, heating, ventilation,
fire or safety code of the City of Olean, County of Cattaraugus, State of
New York or United States of America, the provision that establishes
the higher standard, as determined by the Code Enforcement Officer,
shall prevail.
(1) Foundations, porches, decks, steps and walls shall be in good condition.
(2) Vent attachments shall be safe, durable, smoketight and capable of
withstanding the action of flue gases.
(3) Exterior balconies, porches, landings, stairs and fire escapes shall be
provided with banisters or railings properly designed, installed and
maintained to minimize the hazard of falling and unsightly appearance.
(4) All permanent signs and billboards exposed to public view permitted by
reason of other regulations or as a lawful nonconforming use shall be
maintained in good repair. Any signs that have become excessively
weathered, those upon which the paint has excessively peeled or those
whose supports have deteriorated so that they no longer meet the
structural requirements of the New York State Uniform Fire Prevention
and Building Code shall, with their supports, be removed or put into a
good state of repair. All nonoperative or broken electrical signs shall be
repaired or shall, with their supports, be removed. Signs denoting a
business which is no longer on the premises shall be removed within 30
days of the date on which the business ceases to occupy the premises.
(5) All storefronts and walls exposed to public view shall be kept in a good
state of repair. Storefronts or any portion of the structure shall not
show evidence of excessive weathering or deterioration of any nature.
Unoccupied storefronts shall be maintained in a clean and neat
appearance.
(6) Any awnings or marquees and accompanying structural members shall
be maintained in a good state of repair. In the event that said awnings
or marquees are made of cloth, plastic or of a similar material and are
exposed to public view, such material shall not show evidence of
excessive weathering, discoloration, ripping, tearing, holes or other
Sec. 12-4 CHARTER Sec. 12-5
C:327
Sec. 12-6. Open areas and parking spaces.
deterioration. Nothing herein shall be construed to authorize any
encroachment on streets, sidewalks or other parts of the public domain.
(7) All vacant buildings shall be continuously guarded or sealed and kept
secure against unauthorized entry. Materials and methods with which
such buildings are sealed must meet the approval of the Code/Health
Enforcement Officer as to color, design and building material. Owners
of such buildings shall take such steps and perform such acts as may be
required to ensure that the building and its adjoining yards remain safe
and secure and do not present a hazard to adjoining property or to the
public and that such property does not become infested with vermin or
rodents.
(8) Exterior walls, including doors and windows and the areas around
doors, windows, chimneys and other parts of the building, shall be so
maintained as to keep water from entering the building. Materials
which have been damaged or show evidence of dry rot or other
deterioration shall be repaired or replaced and refinished in a
workmanlike manner.
(9) All exposed exterior surfaces shall be maintained free of broken or
cracked glass, loose shutters, railings, aerials, peeling paint or other
conditions reflective of deterioration or inadequate maintenance.
(Surfaces not inherently resistant to deterioration shall be treated with
a protective coating of paint or other suitable preservative.) Wood,
masonry or other exterior materials that will naturally resist
deterioration do not have to be treated but must be maintained in a
neat, orderly, serviceable manner.
(10) Roof drains, overflow pipes, air-conditioning drains and any other
device used to channel water off or out of a building shall be maintained
in a safe and operable condition and shall not drain onto a public
sidewalk, walkway, street, alleyway or adjoining property, and shall be
conveyed to an adequate and approved system of stormwater disposal
where available. Where a drainage system may be subject to backwater,
suitable provision shall be made to prevent its overflow into the
building.
(11) Lawns shall be cut and bushes, shrubs and hedges shall be trimmed
regularly during the growing season so as to avoid an unsightly
appearance in accordance with all relevant provisions of the City Code.
(a) Surface or subsurface water shall be appropriately drained to protect
buildings and structures and to prevent the development of stagnant
ponds. Gutters, culverts, catch basins, drain inlets, stormwater sewers
or other satisfactory drainage systems shall be utilized where
necessary. No roof, surface or sanitary drainage shall create a
structural, safety or health hazard by reason of construction,
maintenance or manner of discharge.
Sec. 12-5 OLEAN CODE Sec. 12-6
C:328
Sec. 12-7. Dwelling units: cooking and refrigeration; keeping of
dogs and cats.
Sec. 12-8. Business units.
(b) Fences and other minor construction shall be maintained in a safe and
substantial condition.
(c) Steps, walks, driveways, parking spaces and similar paved areas shall
be maintained so as to afford safe passage under normal use and
weather conditions. Any holes or other hazards that may exist shall be
filled and necessary repairs or replacement carried out.
(d) Yards and vacant lots shall be kept clean and free of physical hazards
and rodent harborage and infestation. They shall be maintained in a
manner that will prevent dust or other particles from being blown about
the neighborhood. Open wells, cesspools or cisterns shall be securely
closed or barricaded from access by the public. All temporary
excavations shall be kept covered or barricaded so as to protect the
general public from injury.
(e) All land must be kept free of dead or dying trees and accumulations of
brush, shrubs, weeds, grass, stumps, roots, excessive and/or noxious
growths, garbage, refuse or debris which would either tend to start a
fire or increase the intensity of a fire already started or cause poisoning
or irritation to people or animals or cause or tend to cause or enhance
an unhealthy or dangerous or obnoxious condition on said property or
on any adjacent or neighboring property.
(f) Unpaved parking areas which accommodate three or more vehicles
shall be treated and maintained so as to eliminate dust.
(a) Each dwelling unit shall be provided with appropriate cooking and
refrigeration equipment. Cooking and refrigeration equipment shall be
maintained in good operating condition. All gas-burning cooking
equipment shall be permanently fastened and connected in place with
any gas supply connection to such equipment in compliance with the
relevant Code provisions. Solid fuel-burning cooking equipment shall
be appropriately vented.
(b) No dwelling unit shall harbor more than four cats or dogs or the
aggregate total of such animals, except the harboring of a litter of more
than four dogs shall be permitted for a period not to exceed six months
and harboring a litter of more than four cats shall be permitted for a
period not to exceed three months.
(a) Business units shall at all times be maintained in compliance with the
provisions of this chapter regulating open spaces, buildings or
structures and littering.
(b) No outside storage or accumulation of garbage, crates, rubbish, refuse
or debris shall be permitted at any time, and all such garbage, crates,
Sec. 12-6 CHARTER Sec. 12-8
C:329
Sec. 12-9. Infestation, storage and screening.
Sec. 12-10. Litter; garbage and refuse.
rubbish, refuse or debris shall be kept inside the building or buildings
on the premises or in an acceptable enclosure and shall be regularly
collected and removed from the premises.
(c) No shopping baskets, carts or wagons shall be left unattended or
standing in open areas, and the same shall be collected at the close of
business each day by the occupant of such unit and moved off to the
interior of the building or buildings. No one shall take a shopping
basket, cart or wagon off the premises without permission of the owner
and/or a manager.
(d) No mobile refrigeration unit shall be operated on the premises after the
closing of the business conducted thereon unless such mobile
refrigeration unit is electrically operated, except in an industrial zone.
(e) All fences and planting areas installed on the premises shall be
maintained by the owner of the property. Such maintenance shall
include but not be limited to the replacement of trees and shrubs which
may die and/or otherwise be destroyed, the maintenance and cutting of
lawns and the replacement and/or repair of fences which may become
in disrepair.
(f) Persons owning or occupying property shall keep all walkways, public
or private, abutting said premises free from litter and trash of whatever
nature.
(a) Grounds, buildings and structures shall be maintained free of insect,
vermin and rodent harborage and infestation. Methods used for
exterminating insects, vermin and rodents shall conform to generally
accepted practice.
(b) Where the potential for rodent or vermin infestation exists, windows
and other openings in basements and cellars shall be closed or
appropriately screened with wire mesh or other suitable materials.
(c) No materials, goods or supplies may be stored in any front yard or in an
exterior or interior side yard. Materials may be stored in a rear yard,
provided that the area used for storage is screened from neighboring
properties by a fence or hedge and that the method and manner of
storage complies with the other provisions hereof.
(a) Residential, commercial and industrial premises, whether improved or
vacant, shall be maintained free of litter; provided, however, that this
section shall not prohibit the storage of litter in appropriate private
receptacles for collection.
(b) Adequate sanitary facilities and methods shall be used for the
collection, storage, handling and disposal of garbage and refuse in
Sec. 12-8 OLEAN CODE Sec. 12-10
C:330
Sec. 12-11. Incinerators; liquefied petroleum gas.
Sec. 12-12. Responsibilities of occupants.
An occupant of premises shall be responsible for compliance with this
chapter in regard to the following:
accordance with the provisions of applicable codes. Each owner of
any building from which garbage, rubbish, mixed refuse, ashes or
other wastes are collected shall provide refuse containers sufficient
in number to hold all collectible wastes which may accumulate.
Containers must be rodent-proof and insect-proof and watertight and
must be kept covered at all times. Such containers must not be kept
in a front yard or exterior side yard, except for the day of collection as
determined by the collections schedule set forth by the Department of
Public Works.
(c) No refrigerator may be discarded, abandoned or stored in a place
accessible to children without first completely removing any locking or
latching devices and all doors.
(d) Dumpsters and similar large receptacles shall be shielded from the
public view by means of appropriate landscaping, hedges, fences or
screening. This subsection shall not apply to receptacles for clothing
and the like donated to charity and temporary construction, demolition
dumpsters and similar receptacles.
(e) Shopping centers, supermarkets and similar business units shall
provide permanent, attractive, decorated litter receptacles within the
premises for public use in sufficient quantity so that a person will not
have to walk in excess of 50 feet to use any such receptacle.
(a) The use of incinerators shall be prohibited in the City of Olean.
(b) Undiluted liquefied petroleum gas in liquid form shall not be conveyed
through piping equipment and systems in buildings. Liquefied
petroleum gas shall not be vaporized by devices utilizing open flame or
open electrical coil. Where two or more containers are installed,
connection shall be arranged so that containers can be replaced
without shutting off the flow of gas to equipment. Containers shall be
designed, stored, and located outside the building, so as not to be a
hazard to the premises served or to the surrounding property. Systems
shall be provided with safety devices to relieve excessive pressures, and
such systems shall be arranged so that the discharge terminates at a
safe location. Systems shall have at least one accessible means for
shutting off the gas. Such means shall be located outside the building
and shall be maintained in good operating condition.
(1) Maintenance of that part of the premises which he occupies or controls
in a clean, sanitary and safe condition.
Sec. 12-10 CHARTER Sec. 12-12
C:331
Sec. 12-13. Responsibilities of owners; persons considered to be
owners.
(2) Maintenance of all plumbing, cooking and refrigeration fixtures and
appliances, as well as other building equipment and storage facilities,
in that part of the premises which he occupies or controls in a clean and
sanitary condition and providing reasonable care in the operation and
use thereof.
(3) Keeping exits from the building or occupant's portion thereof clear and
unobstructed.
(4) Disposal of garbage and refuse into appropriate facilities in a clean and
sanitary manner, in accordance with any applicable provisions of the
City code.
(5) Maintenance of yards, lawns and courts in a clean, sanitary and safe
condition and free from infestation by rodents or vermin, insofar as said
occupant occupies or controls said yards, lawns or any parts thereof.
(6) The installation and removal of required screens.
(7) Keeping domestic animals and pets in an appropriate manner and
under control, in accordance with any other regulation of the City.
(8) Elimination of all prohibited uses for that part of the premises which he
occupies, controls or has accessibility thereto.
(a) Owners of premises shall be responsible for compliance with the
provisions of this chapter and shall remain responsible therefor
regardless of the fact that this chapter may also place certain
responsibilities on operators and occupants and regardless of any
agreements between owners and operators or occupants as to which
party shall assume such responsibility.
(b) Owners and operators of building shall be responsible for the proper
installation, maintenance, condition and operation of service facilities
and for furnishing adequate heat and hot-water supply where they have
contracted to do so.
(c) Whenever any person or persons shall be in actual possession of or have
charge, care or control of any property within the City as executor,
administrator, trustee, guardian, operator or agent, such persons shall
be deemed and taken to be the owner or owners of said property within
the intent and meaning of this chapter and shall comply with the
provisions of this chapter to the same extent as the record owner; and
notice to any such person of any order or decision of the Code
Enforcement Officer shall be deemed and taken to be good and
sufficient notice, as if such person or persons were actually the record
owner or owners of such property. In instances where an occupant is
responsible or shares responsibility with the owner for the existence of
Sec. 12-12 OLEAN CODE Sec. 12-13
C:332
Sec. 12-14. Property under construction.
Sec. 12-15. Administration.
one or more violations of this chapter, said occupant shall be deemed
and taken to be an owner within the intent and meaning of this chapter.
(a) For purpose of enforcement of this chapter, if work is being done on the
property, either the prime or general contractor or the owner shall be
held responsible.
(b) Materials may be stored in any area of the property upon which
construction is being carried on, provided that the method of storage
and the materials stored are in compliance with the requirements of
this chapter. In no event shall such storage be permitted for a period
exceeding one year.
(c) Drainage crossing the property being developed must be maintained
during the period of development, and no materials may be stored, land
disturbed or other work done to interfere with drainage or to divert or
cause runoff of groundwater or stormwater in an unnatural fashion.
(d) The person responsible as herein shall take all necessary and
reasonable steps to ensure that there will not be an unusual or
unwarranted amount of dust and debris blown onto or across
neighboring or nearby properties.
(e) Construction roads must be oiled or kept wet or properly treated to
decrease the spread of dust and mud.
(f) A temporary cover, such as rye grass or a mulch, must be applied on
land that has been stripped of its protective vegetation during the
course of its construction to prevent the spread of dust and mud.
(g) All excavations in or near a public or private walkway or street must be
properly guarded and protected at all times by lights, flags, barricades
or other warnings sufficient in kind and amount to warn the public of
the danger of falling into the excavation.
(h) Temporary electrical service must be through electric lines that are
weather and waterproof, such lines must not cross public walkways or
highways on the ground, nor shall they be placed on the ground in areas
subject to construction equipment traffic.
(i) Grounds and buildings must be kept free of debris such as broken glass,
boards with fastenings protruding and other articles making travel
around the job site dangerous and unsafe.
(a) The Fire Chief is authorized to make and adopt such written rules and
regulations as may be necessary for the proper enforcement and
interpretation of this chapter, and to secure the intent thereof. Such
rules and regulations shall not be in conflict with the provisions of this
Sec. 12-13 CHARTER Sec. 12-15
C:333
Sec. 12-16. Inspection and enforcement.
chapter, or any other ordinance of the city, nor shall they have the
effect of waiving any provisions of this chapter or any other ordinance.
Such rules and regulations shall have the same force and effect as the
regulations of this chapter. The penalty for violation thereof shall be the
same as the penalty for violation of the provisions of this chapter, as
provided in this article. Such rules and regulations shall be submitted to
the Common Council by the Fire Chief. Failure of the Common Council
to approve, reject, or modify such rules and regulations within 30 days
after submission shall be deemed to constitute approval thereof. Such
rules shall be on file and available as a matter of public record in the
City Clerk's office.
(b) No officer, agent, or employee of the City shall render himself
personally liable for any damage that may accrue to persons or
property as a result of any act required or permitted in the discharge of
his duties pursuant to this chapter. Any suit brought against any officer,
agent, or employee of the City, as a result of any act required or
permitted in the discharge of his duties pursuant to this chapter, shall
be defended by the City Attorney until the final determination of the
proceedings therein.
(a) The Code Enforcement Officer and/or his designee is hereby authorized
and directed to make inspections to determine compliance with this
chapter. Inspections shall be made between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and
5:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, or at such other times as may be
necessary in an emergency and every operator or owner shall
cooperate with the Code Enforcement Officer in providing access to the
premises. It shall be unlawful for any person to refuse entrance to or to
impede an inspector or officer authorized pursuant to this article in the
performance of his duties. Every such inspector or officer shall have the
right to enter, examine, and survey all premises, grounds, structures,
dwellings, multifamily dwellings or rooming houses and every part
thereof at all reasonable times, or at such other times as may be
necessary in an emergency, upon display of proper identification. If any
owner, occupant, or other person in charge of a dwelling, dwelling unit,
rooming unit, multifamily dwelling or rooming house subject to the
provisions of this chapter refuses, impedes, inhibits, interferes with,
restricts, or obstructs entry and free access to every part of the
structure or premises where inspection authorized by this article is
sought, the administrative authority may seek, in a court of competent
jurisdiction, an order that such owner, occupant, or other person in
charge cease and desist with such interference. Upon failure of the
owner or operator to allow the Code Enforcement Officer access to the
premises for inspections, the Code Enforcement Officer shall have the
authority to apply to the Olean City Court for an administrative search
warrant to compel compliance with this section.
Sec. 12-15 OLEAN CODE Sec. 12-16
C:334
Sec. 12-17. Penalties for offenses.
A violation of any provision of this chapter shall be an offense punishable by
a fine not less than $50 and no more than $1,000 or no more than 15 days
in jail. For the purposes of this chapter, each day continued existence of a
violation shall constitute a separate violation.
Sec. 12-18. Demolition as compliance of chapter.
Any owner of a building receiving a notice of violation stating that such
building does not comply with the provisions of this chapter may demolish
such building, and such action shall be deemed compliance. On
demolishment, all utilities shall be properly disconnected by the owner,
operator, agent, or occupant.
(b) Whenever the Code Enforcement Officer determines that there is a
violation of the provisions of this chapter, he shall cause a written notice
to be served upon the owner or operator, which shall include:
(1) An enumeration of conditions which violate the provisions of this
chapter.
(2) An enumeration of the remedial action required to meet the
standards of this chapter.
(3) A statement of a definite number of days from the date of the notice
in which the owner or operator must commence and complete such
remedial action.
(4) A statement of the penalties for noncompliance, as set forth herein.
(c) A copy of such notice shall be filed in the City Clerk's office, and such
notice shall be deemed sufficient if served upon the owner or operator
as follows:
(1) In person;
(2) By first class mail to the address to which the City Tax Bills are
mailed and by posting a copy of said notice on the building.
(d) Upon failure to comply with said notice, the Code Enforcement Officer
shall issue an appearance ticket returnable in the City Court.
(e) The City Attorney shall, upon complaint of the Fire Chief, Code
Enforcement Officer, or upon his own motion, institute appropriate
action to restrain, prevent, enjoin, abate, correct, or remove such
violation, and to take such other legal action as is necessary to carry out
the terms and provisions of this chapter. The remedies provided for in
this article shall be cumulative and not exclusive and shall be in
addition to any other remedies provided by law. All remedies may be
pursued concurrently or consecutively, and the pursuit of any remedy
shall not be construed as an election or the waiver of the right to pursue
any and all of the others.
Sec. 12-16 CHARTER Sec. 12-19
C:335
Sec. 12-19. through Sec. 12-49. (Reserved)
Sec. 12-19 OLEAN CODE Sec. 12-19
C:336
ARTICLE II
Certificate of Occupancy
Sec. 12-50. Purpose.
There is hereby adopted by the City of Olean, for the purpose of prescribing
regulations governing the use and occupancy of commercial and residential
structures in the City of Olean, a certain code as hereinafter set forth.
Sec. 12-51. Application and severability.
Sec. 12-52. Definitions.
Whenever used in this article, unless otherwise expressly stated or unless
the context or subject material requires a different meaning, the definitions
as contained in Chapter 12, Article I, Section 12-3 shall apply to the terms
and provisions herein.
Sec. 12-53. Inspection and certification required.
(a) The Fire Chief is authorized to make and adopt such written rules and
regulations as may be necessary for the proper enforcement and
interpretation of this chapter, and to secure the intent thereof. Such
rules and regulations shall not be in conflict with the provisions of this
chapter, or any other ordinance of the City, nor shall they have the
effect of waiving any provisions of this chapter or any other ordinance.
Such rules and regulations shall have the same force and effect as the
regulations of this chapter. The penalty for violation thereof shall be the
same as the penalty for violation of the provisions of this chapter, as
provided in this article. Such rules and regulations shall be submitted to
the Common Council by the Fire Chief. Failure of the Common Council
to approve, reject, or modify such rules and regulations within 30 days
after submission shall be deemed to constitute approval thereof. Such
rules shall be on file and available as a matter of public record in the
City Clerk's office.
(b) If a provision of this chapter is found to be inconsistent with any
provision of other chapters of the City Code or Charter, the provision or
requirement which is the more restrictive or which establishes the
higher standard shall prevail. A greater penalty shall not be considered
as more restrictive or a higher standard.
(c) If any part, provision, section, subdivision, paragraph, or term of this
chapter shall be held unconstitutional, invalid, or ineffective, in whole
or in part, such determination shall not be deemed to invalidate the
remaining chapter, parts, provisions, sections, subdivisions,
paragraphs, or terms.
(a) All premises located in the City of Olean shall be inspected and certified
by the Code Enforcement Department which shall determine
compliance with, administer and enforce all applicable provisions of
Sec. 12-50 CHARTER Sec. 12-53
C:337
Sec. 12-54. Fees.
Sec. 12-55. Penalties for offenses.
Any violation of any provision of this chapter, or any provision of any rule
or regulation adopted by the enforcement officer pursuant to authority
granted by this chapter, shall be deemed an offense and any person found
guilty thereof shall be liable to a fine which shall not be less than $250 and
this chapter, the City Code, and the New York State Uniform Fire
Prevention and Code Enforcement Code (hereinafter "Uniform Code")
upon the occurrence of the following:
(1) The transfer of title if a certificate of occupancy has not previously
been issued within the preceding 12 months.
(2) A change of occupancy or use other than that which is governed
under Article III of this chapter.
(3) A change in the occupied status of a one- or two-family exempted
property where the structure is no longer occupied by the owner or
the spouse, child, parent or sibling of the owner.
(b) Except as otherwise provided herein, it shall be unlawful and a violation
of this chapter to transfer, rent, lease, or otherwise allow the occupancy
of any premises without the inspection and certification required
herein.
(c) If, upon inspection, said premises do not comply with all applicable
provisions of this Code or the Uniform Code, the specific reasons for
noncompliance shall be specified in writing and a time limit, not to
exceed 30 days, shall be directed for the correction of, or the
substantial effort to correct, the deficiencies noted. The notice of
noncompliance shall be delivered personally or by mail within seven
business days to the owner, agent or person in charge at the address set
forth on the City Tax Bill and to any occupant who so requests.
(d) The officials charged with conducting the inspection shall make such
inspection, access and circumstances permitting, within five business
days of receipt of a request from the owner or agent of the owner.
(e) No occupancy certificate shall be issued under this article unless the
applicable fee(s) required under this chapter is paid in full to the
Department.
(a) The fee for an occupancy certificate issued under this Article II shall be
$60.
(b) Should a premises fail inspection, the initial reinspection shall be free
of charge; however, each subsequent reinspection thereafter necessary
to issue said certificate shall result in a reinspection fee of $25 per
reinspection.
Sec. 12-53 OLEAN CODE Sec. 12-55
C:338
not to exceed $1,000, or imprisonment not to exceed 15 days, or to both
such fine and imprisonment, and each day's failure to comply with such
provision, rule or regulation shall constitute a separate violation.
Sec. 12-56. through Sec. 12-69. (Reserved)
Sec. 12-55 CHARTER Sec. 12-56
C:339

ARTICLE III
Rental Dwelling Registration and Rental Occupancy Permits
Sec. 12-70. Legislative findings.
The Common Council of the City of Olean hereby finds and declares that
there exist in the City rental housing properties which are, or may become
in the future, substandard with respect to structure and maintenance
thereof or, further, that conditions, including but not limited to structural
deterioration, lack of maintenance, the appearance of the exterior of the
premises, the existence of fire hazards and unsanitary conditions, constitute
a menace to the health, safety, welfare and reasonable comfort of the
residents and inhabitants of the City. It is further found and declared that,
by reason of lack of maintenance and progressive deterioration, certain
properties have the further effect of creating blighting conditions and
initiating slums, and, that if the same are not curtailed and removed, the
aforesaid conditions will grow and spread and will necessitate, in time,
the expenditure of large amounts of public funds to correct and eliminate
same. By reason of timely regulations and restrictions as herein contained,
the growth of slums and blight may be prevented and the immediate
neighborhood and property values thereby maintained the desirability and
amenities of rental housing properties and immediate neighborhoods
enhanced and the public health, safety and welfare protected and fostered.
The City of Olean further wishes to achieve the following beneficial
purposes:
Sec. 12-71. Definitions; word usage.
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement
of this chapter.
(1) The protection of the character and stability of residential areas;
(2) The correction and prevention of housing conditions that adversely
affect or are likely to adversely affect the life, safety, general welfare
and health, including the physical, mental and social well-being of
persons occupying dwellings;
(3) The enforcement of minimum standards for heating, plumbing and
other sanitary equipment necessary for health and safety;
(4) The enforcement of minimum standards for light and ventilation
necessary for health and safety;
(5) The enforcement of minimum standards for the maintenance of existing
residential buildings and the prevention of slum and blight conditions;
(6) The preservation of the value of land and buildings throughout the City.
(1) As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated unless a different meaning is indicated clearly by the context,
as used in this Code:
Sec. 12-70 CHARTER Sec. 12-71
C:341
ACCESSORY BUILDING — A structure, the use of which is incidental to
that of the main building, and which is attached thereto or located on
the same premises.
BASEMENT — That portion of a building partly or completely below
grade. (See "story above grade.")
BUILDING — A structure, wholly or partially enclosed within exterior
walls or within exterior or party walls and a roof, affording shelter to
persons, animals or property.
CELLAR — A portion of a building located partly or wholly underground
and having 1/2 or more than 1/2 of its clear floor-to-ceiling height below
the average grade of the adjoining ground.
DETERIORATION — The condition or appearance of a building, or any
part thereof, characterized by holes, rot, breaks, crumbling, cracking,
peeling, rusting or other evidence of physical decay, neglect, excessive
use or lack of maintenance.
DWELLING — Any structure designed for use by human occupants for
sleeping and living purposes.
DWELLING, MULTIPLE —
DWELLING UNIT — A single unit providing complete independent
living facilities for one or more persons, including permanent provisions
for living, sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation.
ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — A Code Enforcement or Building
Inspector of the City of Olean, or his designated qualified
representative, any officer of the Olean Police Department, any
professional firefighter of the Olean Fire Department, the City Attorney
A building containing three or more dwelling units; building
containing living, sanitary and sleeping facilities occupied by one
or two families and more than four lodgers residing with either one
of such families; a building with one or more sleeping rooms, other
than a one- or two-family dwelling, used or occupied by permanent
or transient paying guests or tenants; a building with sleeping
accommodations for more than five persons used or occupied as a
club, dormitory, fraternity or sorority or for similar uses; a building
used or occupied as an old-age home or community residence [9
NYCRR 606.3(a)(141)].
a.
A building containing three or more dwelling units with shared or
individual entrances and/or other essential facilities and services.
This term shall not be deemed to include motel, hotel, rooming
house or other accommodations used for more or less transient
occupancy.
b.
A building or portion thereof containing three or more dwelling
units and designed or used for occupancy by three or more families
living independent of each other.
c.
Sec. 12-71 OLEAN CODE Sec. 12-71
C:342
and the County Health Department when their assistance is requested
by the enforcement officer.
EXPOSED TO PUBLIC VIEW — Any premises or open space, or any
part thereof, or any building, or any part thereof, which may be lawfully
viewed by any member of the public from a sidewalk, street, alleyway,
open-air parking lot or any adjoining or neighboring premises.
EXTERIOR OF PREMISES — Those portions of a building that are
exposed to public view and the open space of any premises outside of
any building erected thereon.
EXTERMINATION — The control and elimination of insects, rodents,
or other pests by eliminating their harborage places; by removing
or making inaccessible materials that may serve as their food; by
poisoning, spraying, fumigating, trapping, or by any other recognized
and legal pest elimination methods approved by the enforcement
officer.
FIRE HAZARD — Any thing or act which increases, or may cause an
increase in, the hazard or menace of fire to a greater degree than that
customarily recognized as normal by persons in the public service of
preventing, suppressing or extinguishing fires, or which may obstruct,
delay or hinder, or may become the cause of an obstruction, delay or
hindrance to the prevention, suppression or extinguishment of fires,
or any fire hazard identified in these codified ordinances. See also
"nuisance."
GARBAGE —
HABITABLE ROOM — A room or enclosed floor space used or intended
to be used for living, sleeping, cooking, or eating purposes, excluding
bathrooms, water closet compartments, laundry, pantries, foyers, or
communicating corridors, closets and storage spaces.
INFESTATION — The presence, within or around a dwelling, of any
insects, rodents, or other pests.
MANAGING AGENT — As defined under Section 6-80(d) of the Olean
City Code of Ordinances.
MULTIPLE DWELLING, OWNER-OCCUPIED — One- or two-family
property where the structure is occupied by the owner or the spouse,
child, parent or sibling of the owner.
NUISANCE — Any public nuisance known as provided by the statutes
of the state or ordinance of the City; conditions dangerous to human
life or detrimental to the health of persons on or near the premises
where the conditions exist and where the condition is made perilous
Food wastes; refuse; the worthless or useless part of something;
leavings; trash.
a.
Wastes from the preparation, cooking or serving of food; market
wastes; and wastes from the handling, storage and sale of produce.
b.
Sec. 12-71 CHARTER Sec. 12-71
C:343
by active and negligent operation thereof; unsanitary conditions or
anything dangerous to health, in violation of this Code; and fire
hazards.
OCCUPANT — The person in occupancy, in possession or in control of
premises or using premises.
OWNER — The owner of the freehold of the premises or lesser estate
therein, a mortgagee or vendee in possession, assignee of rents,
receiver, executor, trustee, lessee or other person, firm or corporation
in control of a building [(9 NYCRR 606.3(a)(154)].
PERSON — Includes any individual, firm, corporation, association, or
partnership.
PLUMBING — Includes all of the following supplied facilities and
equipment: gas pipes, gas-burning equipment, water pipes, garbage
disposal units, waste pipes, water closets, sinks, installed dishwashers,
lavatories, bathtubs, shower baths, installed clothes-washing machines,
catch basins, drains, vents, and any other similar supplied fixtures,
together with all connections to water, sewer, or gas lines.
PREMISES — A lot, plot or parcel of land, including the buildings or
structures thereon.
REFUSE —
RESIDENTIAL HEATING FACILITIES — Dwellings shall be provided
with heating facilities capable of maintaining a room temperature of
68° F. (20° C.) in all habitable rooms, bathrooms and toilet rooms based
on the winter design dry-bulb temperature for the locality indicated in
Table 302.1 of the Energy Conservation Construction Code of New York
State. Cooking appliances shall not be used to provide space heating to
meet the requirements of this definition.
ROOMING HOUSE — A building arranged or occupied for lodging, with
or without meals, for compensation and not occupied as a one- or twofamily
dwelling.
ROOMING UNIT — Any room or group of rooms forming a single
habitable unit used or intended to be used for living and sleeping but
not for cooking or eating purposes.
RUBBISH — Useless waste or rejected matter; noncombustible waste
material. The term shall include the residue from the burning of wood,
coal and coke; and also tin cans, metals, mineral matter, glass, crockery,
dust and other noncombustible matters.
Putrescible and nonputrescible solid waste consisting of organic or
nonorganic materials but shall not include human or animal body
waste.
a.
All cardboard, plastic material or glass containers, wastepaper,
rags, sweeping, pieces of wood, excelsior, rubber and like waste
material.
b.
Sec. 12-71 OLEAN CODE Sec. 12-71
C:344
Sec. 12-72. Rental dwelling unit registration.
STORY ABOVE GRADE — Any story having its finished floor surface
entirely above grade, except that a basement shall be considered as
a story above grade where the finished surface of the floor above the
basement is: more than six feet (1,829 mm) above grade plane; more
than six feet (1,829 mm) above the finished ground level for more than
50% of the total building perimeter; more than 12 feet (3,658 mm)
above the finished ground level at any point.
STRUCTURE — A combination of materials assembled, constructed or
erected at a fixed location, including, for example, a building, stationary
and portable carports and swimming pools, the use of which requires
location on the ground or attachment to something having location on
the ground.
SUPPLIED — Paid for, furnished, or provided by or under the control of
the owner or operator.
TEMPORARY HOUSING — Any tent, trailer, or other structure used for
human shelter which is designated to be transportable and which is not
attached to the ground, to another structure, or to any utilities system
on the same premises for more than 30 consecutive days.
COMBUSTIBLE — Paper, cartons, boxes, barrels, wood, excelsior,
tree branches, yard trimmings, wood furniture and bedding
dunnage and all other materials subject to burning.
a.
NONCOMBUSTIBLE — Metal, tin cans, metal furniture, glass,
crockery and minerals.
b.
(2) Meaning of certain words. Whenever the words "dwelling," "dwelling
unit," "rooming house," "rooming unit" and "premises" are used in this
chapter, they shall be construed as though they were followed by the
words "or any part thereof."
(a) Registration required. No person shall occupy or allow the occupancy
of or rental to another for occupancy any dwelling unit unless the owner
has first obtained a rental dwelling unit registration certificate as
hereafter provided.
(b) Exemptions. The provisions of this article shall not apply to owneroccupied
with no more than one rental unit; hotels; motels; hospitals;
nursing homes; or other dwelling units which offer or provide medical
or nursing services if such units are subject to state or federal licensing
or regulations concerning the safety of users and patients.
(c) Application for registration. Within 90 days after the effective date of
this article, the owner of each dwelling unit existing on the effective
date of this article shall submit a properly completed rental registration
form to the City of Olean Codes Department. Furthermore, the owner of
any property, whether previously used as a rental or not, whether being
a single-family or multifamily dwelling, must submit a properly
Sec. 12-71 CHARTER Sec. 12-72
C:345
completed rental registration form within 30 days of renting any
dwelling unit.
(1) Such form shall be furnished by the Code Enforcement Office and
shall set forth the following information, in addition to the other
information reasonably required by the Code Enforcement Office
from time to time which may be necessary to administer, enforce,
and insure compliance with the provisions of this chapter and the
housing code:
a. Name, principal residence address and telephone number of
the owner.
b. Each and every owner, principal member, or general partner,
joint tenancy, tenancy in common or tenancy by entirety shall
be indicated on the application and residence address in
accordance with this section.
c. If the owner is a corporation, the principal place of business of
the corporation must be provided and the name, title and
residence address of all officers, directors, managing or
general agents must be included.
d. If the owner has designated a managing agent or managing
company, then the name, principal residence address and
telephone number of such agent or managing company must
be included in addition to that of the owner. The managing
company must also supply its principal business address and
telephone number.
e. It shall be the responsibility of the owner to properly register
any change of address, managing agent or any other
information which occurs after the filing of the application.
f. For purposes of this section, a post office box shall not be
accepted as the owner's physical address. A post office box
may be designated as an address to be provided as required in
this section. The building intended to be registered shall not be
accepted as the owner's address unless it is the principal place
of business or primary residence of the owner.
g. The owner shall specify the address to which all notices of
violation issued pursuant to this chapter and other violations of
the housing codes are to be forwarded.
(2) If the owner does not actually reside within 20 miles of the City of
Olean, or have a regular place of business within the City of Olean,
they must have a managing agent who actually resides within 20
miles of the City of Olean, or have a regular place of business
within the City of Olean.
Sec. 12-72 OLEAN CODE Sec. 12-72
C:346
Sec. 12-73. Required inspections and status reports.
(3) Failure to provide the aforementioned information shall be deemed
an offense and shall be penalized upon notice to the owner
pursuant to this chapter.
(d) Term of rental dwelling unit registration.
(1) A rental dwelling unit registration pursuant to this chapter shall
expire three years after the date it is issued. Renewal shall be due
within 30 days prior to the expiration of the rental registration.
(e) Revocation of rental dwelling unit registration certificate. A rental
dwelling unit registration certificate issued pursuant to this chapter
may be revoked by the Code Enforcement Official for any of the
following reasons:
(1) Fraud, misrepresentation or a false statement as to material fact in
the application;
(2) A finding that a rental dwelling unit registration was issued in error
and not in accordance with applicable law;
(3) A violation of any provision of this chapter, including
noncompliance with a notice of violation.
(a) All rental housing properties are subject to inspection by the City of
Olean at the change of occupant unless otherwise exempt under this
section. At the time of such inspection, all interior and exterior parts of
the rental housing property must be available and accessible for such
inspection, and the owner/managing agent/occupant are required to
provide the necessary arrangements to facilitate such inspections. Such
inspection shall be made between 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m., unless there
exists a violation of a character which is an immediate threat to health
and safety, requiring inspection and abatement without delay.
(b) Application for inspection. Whenever an owner/managing agent or bona
fide occupant shall apply to the City of Olean Codes Department for an
inspection in order to ascertain if any section of this Code has been
violated, the Codes Department shall, upon payment of the fee
hereunder stated, cause an inspection to be made of the premises and
issue either an occupancy certificate or a report of the inspection to the
applicant, indicating therein any violations at the premises. The
applicant for such inspection shall state, in writing, his or her full name,
residence address and the reasons and basis for which the inspection is
requested. The application may be denied for failure to comply with this
requirement. Upon a passed inspection the property owner shall be
issued a certificate for rental occupancy by the City of Olean Codes
Department. This certificate is nontransferable; it is only valid for the
tenant in which the application was made.
Sec. 12-72 CHARTER Sec. 12-73
C:347
Sec. 12-74. Refused access; search warrants or access warrants;
enforcement; service of notices and orders.
(c) Application for status report. Where an owner/managing agent/
occupant or bona fide prospective occupant requests a status report as
to whether or not there are any known violations presently pending on
the premises, upon payment of the fee prescribed herein and a written
request, a copy of any notice or order on any violation then pending
shall be sent to the applicant.
(d) The enforcement officer is hereby authorized and directed to make
inspections to determine whether the condition of dwellings, dwelling
units and rooming units and premises located within the City of Olean
are in compliance with the requirements of this chapter. For that
purpose and in order that he may perform his duty of safeguarding the
health and safety of the occupants of such dwellings and the general
public, the enforcement officer is hereby authorized to enter, examine
and survey at reasonable times all dwellings, dwelling units and
premises with permission of the occupant and subsequent notification
being given to the owner. However, such inspections shall be made
upon request to the occupant of the premises to be inspected and at the
convenience of such occupant. In the event that access to such dwelling
or premises cannot be obtained upon request to the occupant and after
reasonable effort to obtain access by permission, the enforcement
officer, if he has reason to believe said dwelling unit for the inspection
of which permission has been refused or has not been given after
reasonable request is in violation of one or more of the provisions of this
chapter, may apply to a court of competent jurisdiction upon affidavit
for an order directing that the said enforcement officer have access to
said dwelling or premises for the purpose of making his inspection. The
court, if satisfied from the papers presented to it that there is
reasonable ground to believe that the aforesaid dwelling or premises
may be in violation of one or more of the provisions of this chapter, shall
grant and issue an order directed to the occupant and owner of said
dwelling or premises requiring that the enforcement officer be
admitted thereto for the purpose of making the inspection provided for
in this chapter. The enforcement officer shall thereupon proceed to
make such inspection.
(a) Refused access. Where the City of Olean is refused access or is
otherwise impeded or prevented by the owner/managing agent/
occupant from conducting an inspection of a rental housing property,
such person shall be in violation of this Code and subject to the
penalties hereunder.
(b) Search warrants or access warrants. In addition to the provision of this
section, the City of Olean may, upon affidavit, apply to the Olean City
Court or any court of competent jurisdiction for a search warrant,
setting forth factually the actual conditions and circumstances that
provide a reasonable basis for believing that a nuisance or violation of
Sec. 12-73 OLEAN CODE Sec. 12-74
C:348
Sec. 12-75. Minimum standards for basic equipment and facilities.
No person shall occupy as owner-occupant or let to another for occupancy
any dwelling or dwelling unit, for the purpose of living, sleeping, cooking,
or eating therein, which does not comply with the following requirements:
this Code exists on the premises. If the Court is satisfied as to the
matter set forth in the affidavit, the Court may authorize the issuance
of a search warrant permitting access to the inspection of that part of
the premises on which the nuisance or violation exists. A warrant for
access may be issued by the Court upon an affidavit of any employee of
the City establishing grounds therefor.
(c) Whenever the enforcement officer determines that there are
reasonable grounds to believe that there has been a violation of any
provisions of this chapter or of any rule or regulation adopted pursuant
thereto in any building, dwelling unit or property, there shall be issued
a notice of violation pursuant to Criminal Procedure Law § 150.40 and
Civil Practice Law and Rules § 308 or other applicable laws.
(d) Such notice shall be put in writing, specifically state the location of the
subject property, and state the specific violation of the chapter.
(1) Every dwelling unit shall contain a kitchen sink in good working
condition and properly connected to a potable water supply and to a
sewer system in a manner to comply with the Plumbing Code and the
ordinances of the City of Olean.
(2) Every dwelling unit (except as otherwise permitted under Subsection D
of this section) shall contain, amongst its rooms which affords privacy, a
flush water closet and a lavatory basin in good working condition and
properly connected to a potable water supply and to a sewer system in a
manner to comply with the Plumbing Code and the ordinances of the
City of Olean.
(3) Every dwelling unit (except as otherwise permitted under Subsection D
of this section) shall contain, within a room which affords privacy to a
person within said room, a bathtub or shower in good working condition
and properly connected to a potable water supply and to a sewer
system in a manner to comply with the Plumbing Code and the
ordinances of the City of Olean.
(4) The occupants of two or more dwelling units may share a single flush
water closet, a single lavatory basin and a single bathtub or shower if
the total number of rooms of such dwelling units shall not exceed eight
and the total number of occupants shall not exceed six. Such water
closet, lavatory basin and bathtub or shower shall be in good working
condition and properly connected to a potable water supply and to a
sewer system in a manner to comply with the Plumbing Code and the
ordinances of the City of Olean.
Sec. 12-74 CHARTER Sec. 12-75
C:349
Sec. 12-76. Minimum standards for light, ventilation and heating.
No person shall occupy as owner-occupant or let to another for occupancy
any dwelling or dwelling unit, for the purpose of living therein, which does
not comply with the following requirements:
(5) Every kitchen sink, lavatory basin and bathtub or shower required
under the provisions of Subsections A, B, C and D of this section shall
be properly connected with both hot and cold water lines.
(6) Every dwelling unit shall have adequate rubbish and garbage storage
facilities as well as containers, type and location of which are a kind
sufficient to meet the requirements of the Code of the City of Olean.
(7) Every dwelling shall have supplied water-heating facilities which are
properly installed, are maintained in safe and good working condition,
are properly connected with the hot water lines required by this
section, and are capable of heating water to such a temperature as to
permit an adequate amount of water to be drawn at every required
kitchen sink, lavatory basin, bathtub or shower at a temperature
capable of maintaining a temperature of not less than 120° F. Such
supplied water-heating facilities shall be capable of meeting the
requirements of this subsection when the dwelling or dwelling unit
heating facilities, required under the provisions of § 310-7E of this
chapter, are not in operation.
(8) Every dwelling unit shall have safe, unobstructed means of egress
leading to safe and open space at ground level as required by New York
State Law.
(1) Every habitable room shall have at least one window or skylight facing
directly to the outdoors. Whenever walls or other portions of structures
face a window of any such room and such light obstruction structures
are located less than three feet from the window and extend to a level
above that of the ceiling of the room, such a window shall not be
deemed to face directly to the outdoors and shall not be included as
contributing to the required minimum total window area.
(2) Every habitable room shall have at least one window or skylight which
can easily be opened, or such other device as will adequately ventilate
the room.
(3) Every bathroom and water closet compartment shall comply with the
light and ventilation requirements for habitable rooms contained in
Subsections (1) and (2), except that no window or skylight shall be
required in bathrooms and water closets adequately equipped with a
ventilation system approved by the enforcement officer and kept in
continuous operation.
(4) Where there is electric service available from power lines which are not
more than 300 feet away from a dwelling, where practicable every
habitable room of such dwelling shall contain at least one electric
Sec. 12-75 OLEAN CODE Sec. 12-76
C:350
Sec. 12-77. General maintenance requirements.
No person shall occupy or let to another for occupancy any dwelling or
dwelling unit, for the purpose of living therein, which does not comply with
the following requirements:
convenience for every 20 linear feet (or major fraction) of the total
distance around the room as measured horizontally along the wall
at the floor line. Such receptacles shall not be a part of a fixture
for computation. Every water closet compartment, bathroom, laundry
room, furnace room, and public hall shall contain at least one supplied
ceiling or wall-type electric light fixture. Every such outlet and fixture
shall be properly installed, shall be maintained in good and safe
working condition and shall be connected to the source of electric
power in a safe manner.
a. Over current protection. Fuse holders for plug fuses of 30 amperes
or less shall not be installed unless they are of the Type S with the
adaptor inserted or of the Type S construction. Fuses or circuit
breakers shall not exceed wire (conductor) capacity of the circuit.
b. There shall be at least one lighting circuit for each 500 square feet
of floor space and at least one circuit for appliances which is
separate from the lighting circuits; if only one lighting circuit is in
existence, all new additional outlets shall be installed on a new
circuit (or circuits).
c. In a multiple-occupancy building, each occupant shall have access
to his disconnecting means and overcurrent protection at all times,
without locks or through other occupancies.
(5) Every owner and operator of any building who rents, leases or lets one
or more dwelling units, rooming units, dormitories or guestrooms on
terms, either expressed or implied, to furnish heat to the occupants
thereof shall supply heat during the period from September 15 to May
31 to maintain a temperature of not less than 68° F. (20° C.) in all
habitable rooms, bathrooms, and toilet rooms.
(6) Every public hall and stairway in every multiple dwelling containing five
or more dwelling units shall be adequately lighted at all times. Every
public hall and stairway in structures devoted solely to dwelling
occupancy and containing not more than four dwelling units may be
supplied with conveniently located light switches, controlling an
adequate lighting system which may be turned on when needed,
instead of full-time lighting.
(7) Every basement or cellar window used or intended to be used for
ventilation, and every other opening to a basement which might provide
an entry for rodents, shall be supplied with a screen or such other
device as will effectively prevent their entrance.
Sec. 12-76 CHARTER Sec. 12-77
C:351
Sec. 12-78. Minimum space, use and location requirements.
No person shall occupy or let to another for occupancy any dwelling or
dwelling unit, for the purpose of living therein, which does not comply with
the following requirements:
(1) Every foundation, floor, wall, ceiling and roof shall be reasonably
weathertight and rodent-proof, shall be capable of affording privacy
and shall be kept in good repair.
(2) Every window, exterior door and basement hatchway shall be
reasonably weather tight, watertight and rodent-proof and shall be kept
in sound working condition and good repair.
(3) Every inside and outside stair, every porch and every appurtenance
thereto shall be so constructed as to be safe to use and capable of
supporting the load that normal use may cause to be placed thereon
and shall be kept in sound condition and good repair.
(4) Every plumbing fixture and water and waste pipe shall be properly
installed and maintained in good sanitary working condition, free from
defects, leaks and obstructions.
(5) Every water closet compartment floor surface and bathroom floor
surface shall be constructed and maintained so as to be reasonably
impervious to water and so as to permit such floor to be easily kept in a
clean and sanitary condition. Nothing contained herein shall be deemed
to prohibit the maintenance of wooden floors in such rooms, provided
such floors are as impervious to water as may reasonably be required to
well-maintained wood floors.
(6) Every supplied facility, piece of equipment or utility which is required
under this chapter shall be so constructed or installed that it will
function safely and effectively, and shall be maintained in satisfactory
working condition.
(7) No owner, operator or occupant shall cause any service, facility
equipment or utility which is required under this chapter to be removed
from or shut off from or discontinued for any occupied dwelling let or
occupied by him, except for such temporary interruption as may be
necessary while actual repairs or alteration are in process or during
temporary emergencies.
(8) No owner shall occupy or let to any other occupant any vacant dwelling
unit unless it complies with the provisions of this chapter.
(1) Every dwelling unit shall contain at least 150 square feet of floor space
for the first occupant thereof and at least 100 additional square feet of
floor space for every additional occupant thereof, the floor space to be
calculated on the basis of total habitable room area.
Sec. 12-77 OLEAN CODE Sec. 12-78
C:352
Sec. 12-79. Responsibilities of owners and occupants.
(2) In every dwelling unit of two or more rooms, every room occupied for
sleeping purposes by one occupant shall contain at least 70 square feet
of floor space, and every room occupied for sleeping purposes by more
than one occupant shall contain at least 50 square feet of floor space for
each occupant thereof, except that where the occupants of such room
are all less than 15 years of age, a room having at least 120 square feet
of floor space may be occupied by additional persons, provided that the
floor space per occupant does not become less than 35 square feet.
(3) No dwelling or dwelling unit containing two or more sleeping rooms
shall have such room arrangements that access to a bathroom or water
closet compartment intended for use by occupants of more than one
sleeping room can be had only by going through another sleeping room;
nor shall room arrangements be such that access to a sleeping room
can be had only by going through another sleeping room or a bathroom
or water closet compartment, except that where such a dwelling unit is
occupied only by a husband and wife, or a husband and wife and child
or children under the age of 13, this section shall not apply.
(4) At least 1/2 of the floor area of every habitable room shall have a ceiling
height of at least seven feet, and the floor area of that part of any room
where the ceiling height is less than five feet shall not be considered as
part of the floor area in computing the total floor area of the room for
the purpose of determining the maximum permissible occupancy
thereof.
(5) No cellar space shall be used as a habitable room or dwelling unit.
(6) No basement space shall be used as a habitable room or dwelling unit
unless the floor and walls are impervious to leakage of underground
and surface water and are insulated against dampness; the total of
window area in each room is equal to at least the minimum window area
sizes as required in this chapter; Such required minimum window area
is located entirely above the grade of the ground and adjoining such
window area.
(7) The provisions of this section shall only apply to new construction and
to existing homes which are to be remodeled.
(a) Every owner of a dwelling containing two or more dwelling units shall
be responsible for maintaining in a clean and sanitary condition the
shared or public areas of the dwelling and premises thereof.
(b) Every occupant of a dwelling or dwelling unit shall keep in a clean and
sanitary condition that part of the dwelling, dwelling unit and premises
thereof which he occupies and controls.
(c) Every occupant of a dwelling or dwelling unit shall dispose of all his
rubbish in a clean and sanitary manner by placing it in the rubbish
containers required by the Olean City Code.
Sec. 12-78 CHARTER Sec. 12-79
C:353
Sec. 12-80. Rooming houses.
No person shall operate a rooming house or shall occupy or let to another
for occupancy any rooming unit in any rooming house, except in compliance
with the provisions of every section of this chapter.
(d) Every occupant of a dwelling or dwelling unit shall dispose of all his
garbage and any other organic waste which might provide food for
rodents in a clean and sanitary manner, by placing it in the garbage
disposal facilities or garbage storage containers required by this
chapter. It shall be the responsibility of the owner to supply such
facilities or containers for all dwelling units.
(e) Every occupant of a dwelling containing a single dwelling unit shall be
responsible for the extermination of any insects, rodents, or other pests
therein or on the premises, and every occupant of a dwelling unit in a
dwelling containing more than one dwelling unit shall be responsible
for such extermination whenever his dwelling unit is the only one
infested. Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this subsection,
whenever infestation is caused by failure of the owner to maintain a
dwelling in a rat-proof or reasonably insect-proof condition,
extermination shall be the responsibility of the homeowner. Whenever
infestation exists in two or more of the dwelling units in any dwelling, or
in the shared or public parts of any dwelling containing two or more
dwelling units, extermination thereof shall be the responsibility of the
owner.
(f) Every occupant of a dwelling unit shall keep all plumbing fixtures
therein in a clean and sanitary condition and shall be responsible for
the exercise of reasonable care in the proper use and operation thereof.
(1) No person shall operate a rooming house unless he holds a valid
rooming house permit issued by the Code Enforcement Officer in the
name of the operator and for the specific dwelling or dwelling unit. The
owner shall apply to the enforcement officer for such permit, which
shall be issued by the enforcement officer upon compliance by the
owner with the applicable provisions of the Olean City Code of
Ordinances. This permit shall be displayed in a conspicuous place
within the rooming house at all times.
No such permit shall be transferable. Every person holding such a
permit shall give notice, in writing, to the enforcement officer within 24
hours after having sold, transferred, given away or otherwise disposed
of ownership or interest in or control of any rooming house. Such notice
shall include the name and address of the person succeeding to the
ownership or control of such rooming house. Every such permit shall be
renewable annually upon written application to the enforcement officer
at least three days before the expiration of one year from its issuance
or last renewal, unless such permit is subject to revocation for violation
of this chapter or other ordinances or law applicable to said premises.
Sec. 12-79 OLEAN CODE Sec. 12-80
C:354
(2) Any person whose application for a permit to operate a rooming house
has been denied may require and shall be granted a hearing on the
matter before the Zoning Board of Appeals.
(3) Whenever, upon inspection of any rooming house, the enforcement
officer finds that conditions or practices exist which are in violation of
any provision of this chapter or any other law or any other ordinance of
this City, the enforcement officer shall give notice, in writing, to the
owner of such rooming house that unless such conditions or practices
are corrected within a reasonable period, to be determined by the
enforcement officer, the owner's rooming house permit will be
suspended. At the end of such period, the enforcement officer shall reinspect
such rooming house, and if he finds such conditions or practices
have not been corrected, he shall issue a violation pursuant to this
chapter.
(4) At least one flush water closet, lavatory basin and bathtub or shower,
properly connected to a water and sewer system approved by the
enforcement officer and in good working condition, shall be supplied for
each eight persons or fraction thereof residing within a rooming house,
including members of the operator's family wherever they share the use
of the said facilities; provided that in a rooming house where rooms are
let only to males, flush urinals may be substituted for not more than 1/2
the required number of water closets. All such facilities shall be so
located within the dwelling as to be reasonably accessible from a
common hall or passageway to all persons sharing such facilities. Every
lavatory basin and bathtub or shower shall be supplied with hot water
at all times. No such facilities shall be located in a basement, except by
written approval of the enforcement officer.
(5) The owner of every rooming house shall change supplied bed linen and
towels therein at least once each week and prior to the letting of any
room to any occupant. The owner shall be responsible for the
maintenance of all supplied bedding in a clean and sanitary manner.
(6) Every room occupied for sleeping purposes by one person shall contain
at least 70 square feet of floor space, and every room occupied for
sleeping purposes by more than one person shall contain at least 50
square feet of floor space for each occupant thereof.
(7) Every rooming unit shall have safe, unobstructed means of egress
leading to safe and open spaces at ground level as required by the laws
of this state and the City of Olean.
(8) The owner of every rooming house shall be responsible for the sanitary
maintenance of all walls, floors and ceilings and for maintenance of a
sanitary condition in every other part of the rooming house, and he
shall be further responsible for the sanitary maintenance of the entire
premises where the entire structure or building is leased or occupied by
the owner.
Sec. 12-80 CHARTER Sec. 12-80
C:355
Sec. 12-81. Designation of unfit dwellings; condemnation.
The designation of dwellings or dwelling units as unfit for human habitation
and the procedure of the condemnation and placarding of such unfit
dwellings or dwelling units shall be carried out in compliance with the City
of Olean and New York State codes.
Sec. 12-82. Inspections and rental occupancy permits.
(9) Every provision of this chapter which applies to rooming houses shall
also apply to hotels, except to the extent that any such provision may be
found in conflict with the laws of this state or with the lawful
regulations of any state board or agency.
(a) No person shall occupy and no owner or managing agent shall permit a
person to occupy a rental dwelling unit unless a City of Olean has issued
to the owner or managing agent a certificate of rental occupancy permit
for such rental unit.
(b) Application for a rental occupancy permit shall be made separately for
each rental unit by supplying necessary information to determine
compliance with applicable laws, ordinances, rules and regulations for
the existing use or occupancy or the intended use or occupancy on
forms supplied by the City of Olean Codes Department. Such
information shall include but need not be limited to the following:
(1) The name, address and telephone number of the owner of the
rental housing property;
(2) The name, address and telephone number of the managing agent of
the rental unit if one is required;
(3) The address of the rental housing property and the number of the
rental unit;
(4) The current name, address, business and/or home telephone
number of the person(s) who, since the last application, shall be
residing/occupying the rental housing unit;
(5) Number of people to be residing in the rental unit;
(6) Such other information as may be requested on the application as
determined by the Fire Chief.
(c) The City of Olean may revoke a rental occupancy permit if any false
statement appears in the application or if the information contained in
the application is inaccurate.
(d) Upon a passed inspection of the rental housing unit, the City of Olean
shall issue a rental occupancy permit. In the case of a failed inspection,
the property owner shall have a time period not to exceed 10 days from
the date of inspection to make the necessary corrections unless, for
Sec. 12-80 OLEAN CODE Sec. 12-82
C:356
Sec. 12-83. Conflict with other provisions; severability.
Sec. 12-84. Fees.
good cause shown, the City of Olean has extended the time for
completion.
(e) Frequency and schedule of inspections for rental occupancy. The City of
Olean Code Enforcement Department is hereby directed to conduct an
inspection of all rental housing units in single-family, two-family and
multifamily dwelling structures, except the interior of an owneroccupied
dwelling unit, at each change of occupant occurring after June
1, 2018, and every vacancy and re-rental thereafter. If the owner/
managing agent/occupant refuses to consent to an inspection of the
subject property, or if consent is otherwise unobtainable, the City of
Olean shall not make such inspection without first obtaining a search
warrant.
(a) Except as otherwise specifically provided, in the event any provision of
this article shall be in conflict with any statute, ordinance, or regulation
governing land and property, the provision which establishes the higher
standard for promotion and protection of the health and safety of the
people of the City shall be controlling.
(b) If a term, part or provision, section, subdivision or paragraph of this
article shall be held unconstitutional, invalid or ineffective, in whole or
in part, such determination shall not be deemed to affect, impair or
invalidate the remaining terms, parts, provisions, sections, subdivisions
and paragraphs.
(a) Fees for certificate of rental occupancy inspection or status report. The
minimum fee for any inspection made under this section shall be $60;
there shall be no fee for any initial reinspection should the property fail.
Any subsequent reinspections related to the initial failure shall be $30
each visit. If a change in occupancy occurs within 12 months of the
issuance of a rental occupancy permit, the subsequent reinspection fee
shall be $30. This certificate is nontransferable. The fee for any status
report under this section shall be $10.
(b) Rental registration fee. There shall be no fee for properly completed
rental registration forms submitted within 90 days of the enactment of
this chapter. The fee for applications received after 90 days, if any, shall
be as set by the Common Council.
(c) No fee for new buildings. There shall be no fee charged for the initial
inspection for a certificate of rental occupancy registration certificate
for new rental dwellings at the completion of their construction which is
covered by a building permit.
Sec. 12-82 CHARTER Sec. 12-85
C:357
Sec. 12-85. Penalties for offenses.
Any violation of any provision of this article, or any provision of any rule
or regulation adopted by the enforcement officer pursuant to authority
granted by this chapter, shall be deemed an offense and any person found
guilty thereof shall be liable to a fine which shall not be less than $250
and not to exceed $1,000, or to imprisonment not to exceed 15 days, or to
both such fine and imprisonment, and each day's failure to comply with such
provision, rule or regulation shall constitute a separate violation.
Sec. 12-86. through Sec. 12-95. (Reserved)
Sec. 12-85 OLEAN CODE Sec. 12-86
C:358
ARTICLE IV
Designation of Unfit Dwellings
Sec. 12-96. General provisions.
Any dwelling unit, dwelling, rooming house, or rooming unit, having any of
the following defects may be designated by the Fire Chief as unfit for human
habitation and may be so placarded:
Sec. 12-97. Abandoned property.
All property abandoned for a period of one year with no upkeep by the
owner may be removed by the City with the serving of notice to the owner.
Serving of notice shall give the owner 90 days to make the necessary repairs
to the property. The expense of the removal of property shall be paid by the
owner or the expenses shall be charged against the property as a lien.
Sec. 12-98. Notice of intent to vacate.
Whenever the Fire Chief determines that a dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming
house, or rooming unit is unfit for human habitation, as provided in Section
12-96 or 12-97, he shall include such finding within the notice of violation
provided for in Section 12-18. He shall also include a statement of his
intent to vacate and placard the dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming house, or
rooming unit if compliance with the provisions of the notice of violation has
not been secured.
(1) The structure lacks illumination, ventilation, sanitation, heat, or other
facilities, adequate to protect the health and safety of the occupants or
the public.
(2) The structure is damaged, decayed, dilapidated, unsanitary, unsafe, or
vermin-infested, in such a manner as to create a serious hazard to the
health and safety of the occupants or the public.
(3) The structure, because of the location, general conditions, state of the
premises, or number of occupants, is so unsanitary, unsafe,
overcrowded, or otherwise detrimental to health and safety that it
creates a serious hazard to the occupants or the public.
(4) The structure, because of the failure of the owner or occupant to
comply with such notice or orders issued pursuant to this Code, is unfit
for human habitation.
(5) The structure, whether or not a dwelling, dwelling unit, lodging house,
or lodging unit, in whole or in part, has been made unfit for human
habitation by catastrophe of fire, wind damage, lightning, impact from
falling objects of any nature, impact of vehicles, or damage from any
cause whatsoever.
Sec. 12-96 CHARTER Sec. 12-99
C:359
Sec. 12-99. Order to vacate.
Whenever a notice of violation, as provided in Section 12-98, has not
been complied with, the Fire Chief may order the dwelling, dwelling unit,
rooming house, or rooming unit to be vacated. A copy of such notice to
vacate shall be served on the owner, agent, operator, and the occupant, as
provided in Section 12-18.
Sec. 12-100. Vacation procedure.
Any dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming house, or rooming unit, designated
as unfit for human habitation pursuant to Section 12-96 or 12-97, and
ordered vacated as provided in Section 12-99, shall be vacated within
such reasonable time as the Fire Chief may specify in the order. No such
dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming house, or rooming unit shall again be used
for human habitation, and the placard shall not be removed until written
approval is secured from the Fire Chief.
Sec. 12-101. Removal of placard.
No person shall deface or remove the placard from any dwelling, dwelling
unit, rooming house, or rooming unit which has been designated as unfit for
human habitation, except as provided in Section 12-100.
Sec. 12-102. Vacated dwelling made secure.
The owner, agent, or operator of any dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming
house, or rooming unit which has been designated as unfit for human
habitation and vacated shall make such dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming
house, or rooming unit, safe and secure in whatever manner the Fire Chief
shall deem necessary. Any vacant building, open at the doors and windows,
if unguarded, shall be deemed dangerous to human life and a nuisance
within the meaning of this section.
Sec. 12-103. Notice of intent to demolish.
Whenever the Fire Chief designates a dwelling or rooming house unfit for
human habitation, as provided in this division, and determines that the cost
necessary to correct the violation is not reasonably related to the value
of the building, he shall include within the notice of violation, provided
for in Section 12-18, a statement of his intent to order the demolition
of the structure. A copy of such notice shall be served on the owner,
occupant, lessee, and mortgagee, as provided in Section 12-18. The owner
may demolish such structure as provided in Section 12-20, or correct the
violation regardless of cost provided that the requirements of the building
code in effect at the time of attempted compliance are satisfied.
Sec. 12-104. Order to demolish.
Whenever a notice of violation, as provided in Section 12-103 has not been
complied with, the Fire Chief may order the building demolished. Such
Sec. 12-99 OLEAN CODE Sec. 12-104
C:360
order shall be served as provided in Section 12-18, and demolition shall be
completed within the time specified by the Fire Chief.
Sec. 12-105. Fire Chief to make repairs or demolish.
Whenever a notice or order to remove a violation, or to secure, vacate,
or demolish a building has not been complied with, and when such failure
to comply is deemed by the Fire Chief to constitute a nuisance, he may
proceed to cause the structure to be demolished, repaired, altered, secured,
vacated, or take such other action as is necessary to abate the nuisance.
Whenever the Fire Chief determines that such nuisance exists, he shall
record sufficient proof to support such determination. The owner, occupant,
lessee, and mortgagee shall be notified of such finding pursuant to Section
12-18. Abatement authorized by this section shall not commence until at
least 10 days after service of such notice.
Sec. 12-106. Recovery of expenses.
The expenses incurred pursuant to Section 12-105 shall be paid by the
owner or occupant of the premises, or by the person who caused or
maintained such nuisance or other matter. The Fire Chief shall file among
his records an affidavit stating with fairness and accuracy the items of
expense that each item was necessary, that the cost thereof does not exceed
the current hourly rate of wages for the action, and the date of execution of
actions authorized by Section 12-105. The Fire Chief may institute a suit to
recover such expenses against any person liable for such expenses or may
cause such expenses to be charged against the property as a lien. A notice
of such lien shall be mailed to or served upon the owner, operator, agent,
and occupant claimed liable to pay such lien. A similar copy may be filed
in the office of the City Treasurer and the commissioner of assessments of
the City and may be noted on the records of liens and assessments against
the property. Except with respect to a lien imposed for expenses incurred in
demolition, nothing in this section shall be construed as placing a lien upon
the property which supersedes the lien of any mortgage on such property
executed and recorded prior to the existence of a lien authorized in this
section.
Sec. 12-107. through Sec. 12-120. (Reserved)
Sec. 12-104 CHARTER Sec. 12-107
C:361

ARTICLE V
Recreational Fires
Sec. 12-121. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
RECREATIONAL FIRE — An outdoor fire burning only dried seasoned hard
woods for the purpose of pleasure, religious, ceremonial, cooking, warmth
or similar purposes. The fuel being burned shall be contained to an outdoor
fireplace, barbeque grill or barbeque pit and have a total fuel area of three
feet (914 mm) or less in diameter and two feet (610 mm) or less in height.
Fuel being burned shall not include rubbish, lumber, garbage or other
offensive materials.
Sec. 12-122. Recreational fires.
Sec. 12-123. Purpose; guidelines.
Request for outdoor recreational fires have become a popular activity and
concern within the City of Olean, especially with the recent marketing
and sales of portable outdoor fireplaces, made of metal, ceramic and like
materials. The Department of Building, Fire and Emergency Services will
allow burning for recreational purposes consistent with the state, county,
and local codes and laws, provided the following guidelines are followed:
(a) General. A person shall not kindle or maintain or authorize to be
kindled or maintained any open burning unless conducted and
approved in accordance with this section.
(b) Prohibited recreational burning. Open burning that will be offensive or
objectionable because of smoke or odor emissions when atmospheric
conditions or local circumstances make such fires hazardous shall be
prohibited.
(c) Recreational fires. A recreational fire shall not be conducted within 15
feet of a structure or combustible material. The fire shall be contained
in an approved container and where the pile size is three feet or less in
diameter and two feet or less in height. Conditions which would cause a
fire to spread within 15 feet of a structure shall be eliminated prior to
ignition. These recreational fires do not include approved cooking grills
that are fueled by charcoal, propane, or natural gas.
(d) Attendance. Recreational fires shall be constantly attended until the fire
is extinguished. A minimum of one portable fire extinguisher with a
4-rating or approved on-site fire extinguishing equipment, such as dirt,
sand, water barrel or garden hose or water truck, shall be available for
immediate utilization.
(1) Fire safety must always be followed.
Sec. 12-121 CHARTER Sec. 12-123
C:363
Sec. 12-124. Nuisance.
Sec. 12-125. Penalties for offenses.
Violations of this article shall be a minimum fine of $50 for a first offense
and a $250 fine for each offense thereafter within a one-year period. If
further expenses are incurred by the City, all expenses will be added to the
fine to cover any and all costs the City incurred.
(2) Recreational fires must be of the same size as in fireplaces (no larger
than three feet in diameter; no taller than two feet in height), located 15
feet from combustible structures (houses, fences, sheds, garages,
wooden decks, and similar structures) and conducted on
noncombustible surfaces.
(3) Materials for burning must be clean seasoned firewood (wet wood,
fresh cut wood, painted or stained wood creates smoky conditions and
is not allowed to be burned).
(4) Competent adult supervision must be on site while fire is burning. A
competent adult is someone over 18 years of age, not impaired by
drugs, alcohol or having medical or mental conditions which could
impair their ability to take proper action if required.
(5) A source of water must be available to control or extinguish any fire
(charged garden house hooked up to a water supply, multiple pails of
water or a 4-A fire extinguisher).
(6) No new materials can be added to the fire after 10:00 p.m.; fire must be
extinguished before abandoning.
(7) Fire cannot create a nuisance. Smoke and/or odors may be considered a
nuisance.
(8) Outdoor portable fireplaces made of metal, ceramic and like materials
and contained with that approved appliance. The approved appliances
must follow these same rules and not be placed on any combustible
surfaces (decks, porches, tables, etc.). They may not be located less
than 15 feet from a combustible structure and must be extinguished
before abandoning.
(a) Recreational fires are a privilege and allowed for special occasions by
the Department of Building, Fire and Emergency Services. A
recreational fire which creates property damage, personal injury or is
deemed a nuisance may be cause for further legal actions to be taken by
the Department of Building, Fire and Emergency Services and/or the
City of Olean Police Department.
(b) Any fire causing the Olean Fire Department or Olean Police Department
to be called may be considered by the responding official as a nuisance
fire. Nuisance fires shall be extinguished immediately.
Sec. 12-123 OLEAN CODE Sec. 12-125
C:364
Chapter 13
LICENSES, PERMITS AND MISCELLANEOUS BUSINESS
REGULATIONS
CROSS REFERENCES
Definitions and rules of construction
generally, § 1-2.
Finance, § 2-161 et seq.
Advertising and signs, ch. 3.
Amusements, ch. 4.
Private ambulances, § 10-46 et seq.
Junked motor vehicles, § 16-26 et seq.
License for private collectors of solid waste,
§ 20-7.
Taxation and assessments, ch. 23.
Trailers, trailer camps and tourist camps, ch.
25.
Vehicles for hire, ch 26.
Sewer contractors, § 27-81 et seq.
Zoning, ch. 28.
STATE LAW REFERENCES
Authority to license and regulate businesses,
General City Law § 20(13).
Hawkers and peddlers generally, General
Business Law § 32 et seq.
Authority to license and regulate hawkers and
peddlers, General Business Law § 35.
Children in bowling alleys, General Business
Law § 399-d.
Sec. 12-125 CHARTER Sec. 12-125
C:365

ARTICLE I
IN GENERAL
Sec. 13-1. Fee for lost City license. [Res. No. 80-94, 7-26-1994]
The City Clerk is hereby directed to charge a fee of $5 for processing and
replacing any City license which has been lost for which a replacement is
required.
Sec. 13-2. through Sec. 13-20. (Reserved)
Sec. 13-1 CHARTER Sec. 13-2
C:367

ARTICLE II
BOWLING ALLEYS
DIVISION 1
GENERALLY
Sec. 13-21. through Sec. 13-35. (Reserved)
Sec. 13-21 CHARTER Sec. 13-21
C:369

DIVISION 2
(RESERVED)10
Sec. 13-36. through Sec. 13-100. (Reserved)
10.Editor's Note: Former Division 2, License, was repealed 4-8-2014 by Res. No. 23-14
Sec. 13-36 CHARTER Sec. 13-36
C:371

ARTICLE III
GARAGE SALES
DIVISION 1
GENERALLY
Sec. 13-101. Definitions. [Code 1971, § 17-21]
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:
GARAGE SALES — Includes all sales entitled "garage sale," "lawn sale,"
"rummage sale," "flea market sale," or any similar casual sale of tangible
personal property which is advertised by any means whereby the public at
large is or can be made aware of such sale, excluding bona fide estate sales.
GOODS — Any goods, warehouse merchandise, or other property capable
of being the object of a sale regulated by this article.
Sec. 13-102. Persons and sales excepted. [Code 1971, § 17-25]
The provisions of this article shall not apply to or affect the following
persons or sales:
Sec. 13-103. through Sec. 13-115. (Reserved)
(1) Persons selling goods pursuant to an order or process of a court of
competent jurisdiction;
(2) Persons acting in accordance with their powers and duties as public
officials;
(3) Any person selling or advertising for sale items of personal property
which are specifically named or described in the advertisement and
which separate items do not exceed five in number;
(4) Sales which are conducted on Fridays and/or Saturdays.
Sec. 13-101 CHARTER Sec. 13-103
C:373

DIVISION 2
LICENSE
Sec. 13-116. Required. [Code 1971, § 17-22]
It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct a garage sale in the City
without first filing with the Clerk the information specified in this division
and obtaining from the Clerk a license to hold such sale, to be known as a
garage sale license.
Sec. 13-117. Information to be filed. [Code 1971, § 17-24]
The information to be filed with the Clerk, pursuant to this division, shall be
as follows:
Sec. 13-118. Fee. [Code 1971, § 17-22]
The fee to be paid to the City for a garage sale license shall be as now or
hereafter established by ordinance.
Sec. 13-119. Duration and display. [Code 1971, § 17-23]
Sec. 13-120. through Sec. 13-140. (Reserved)
(1) Name of person, firm, group, corporation, association, or organization
conducting the sale;
(2) Name of owner of the property on which the sale is to be conducted,
and consent of the owner if the applicant is other than the owner;
(3) Location at which sale is to be conducted;
(4) Number of days of sale;
(5) Dates, nature of any past sale during the prior twelve-month period;
(6) Relationship or connection applicant may have had with any other
person, firm, group, organization, association, or corporation
conducting the sale and the dates of such sale;
(7) Whether or not applicant has been issued any other vendor's license by
any local, state, or federal agency;
(8) Sworn statement or affirmation by the person signing that the
information therein given is full and true and known by him to be so.
(a) Such license shall be issued to any one person only three times within a
twelve-month period, and no such license shall be issued for more than
two consecutive calendar days.
(b) Each license issued under this division must be prominently displayed
on the premises upon which the garage sale is conducted throughout
the entire period of the licensed sale.
Sec. 13-116 CHARTER Sec. 13-120
C:375

ARTICLE IV
JUNK DEALERS
DIVISION 1
GENERALLY
Sec. 13-141. Definitions. [Code 1971, § 16-16]
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:
JUNK MERCHANT — Every person, as principal, agent, or employee, who
shall carry on the business of buying, selling, or storing any of the articles
enumerated in section 13-161 at an established place of business.
JUNK PEDDLER — Every person, as principal, agent, or employee, who
shall go, with or without vehicle, from house to house or place to place,
buying, offering to buy, collecting, or gathering any of the articles
enumerated in section 13-161.
Sec. 13-142. From whom and when purchases not to be made.
[Code 1971, § 16-20]
It shall be unlawful for any junk merchant or peddler licensed under this
article to purchase any item enumerated in section 13-161 from any person
under the age of 18 years, apprentice, or servant, knowing or having reason
to believe the seller to be such, or from any person between sunset and 7:00
a.m.
Sec. 13-143. Licensees not to act as pawnbrokers or secondhand
dealers, etc. [Code 1971, § 16-21]
It shall be unlawful for any person licensed under the provisions of this
article to, during the continuance of such license, use, exercise, or carry
on the business or trade of a pawnbroker or dealer in secondhand articles,
or for any pawnbroker or dealer in secondhand articles to receive a license
under the provisions of this article.
Sec. 13-144. Records of purchases. [Code 1971, § 16-22]
Every junk merchant licensed under this article shall keep, in such form
as the Chief of Police or City Clerk may prescribe, and written in ink
or indelible pencil, a daily record of all articles purchased; the name,
residence, age, and occupation of the person from whom each article was
purchased; the name of the employer of such person; the day of such
purchase; and the price paid. The record shall at all reasonable times be
open to the inspection of any police officer, the Mayor, Chief of Police, any
magistrate, or any person duly authorized in writing for such purpose by
the Chief of Police or any magistrate, who shall exhibit such authorization
Sec. 13-141 CHARTER Sec. 13-144
C:377
to the junk merchant, his agent, or employee. No entry in such records shall
be changed, erased, obliterated, or defaced.
Sec. 13-145. Reports to Chief of Police. [Code 1971, § 16-23]
Every junk merchant licensed under this article, upon being served with
a written notice so to do by a member of the Police Department, shall
report to the Chief of Police, on blank forms to be furnished by the Police
Department, an accurate description of all goods, articles, or things
purchased or received by him in the course of business as a junk merchant,
at such time and during such period of time specified in the notice, stating
the amount paid for, and the name, residence, and general description of
the person from whom such goods, articles, or things were received.
Sec. 13-146. Lost or stolen goods, etc. [Code 1971, § 16-24]
If any goods, articles, or things whatsoever shall be advertised in any
newspaper printed in the City as having been lost or stolen, and the goods,
articles, or things, or any articles answering the description advertised, or
any part or portion thereof, shall be or come into the possession of any junk
merchant or peddler licensed under this article, he shall give information
thereof, in writing, to the Chief of Police and state from whom the items
were received. Any junk merchant or peddler who shall have or receive any
goods, articles, or things lost or stolen, or alleged or supposed to have been
lost or stolen, shall exhibit them on demand to any police officer, the Mayor,
Chief of Police, or any magistrate, or any person duly authorized in writing
for such purpose by the Chief of Police or any magistrate, who shall exhibit
such authorization to such merchant or peddler.
Sec. 13-147. through Sec. 13-160. (Reserved)
Sec. 13-144 OLEAN CODE Sec. 13-147
C:378
DIVISION 2
LICENSE
Sec. 13-161. Required. [Code 1971, § 16-30]
It shall be unlawful for any person, within the limits of the City, to engage in
or carry on the business of collecting, buying, selling, or otherwise dealing
in rags, old rope, bottles, bones, tin ware, rubber, bagging, or any other
article or thing, except old metal, as defined in General Business Law Art.
6 [§ 60 et seq.], which from its worn condition renders it useless for the
purpose for which it was made, whether at a fixed place of business or as
an itinerant peddler, without first having obtained and paid for a license as
provided in this division.
Sec. 13-162. Application; contents. [Code 1971, § 16-31]
Any person desiring to procure the license required by this division shall file
with the City Clerk a written application upon a blank form prepared and
furnished by the City. Such application shall contain the name and residence
of the applicant, if an individual, partnership or firm, or the names of the
principal officers and their residences if the applicant is an association or
corporation. Such application shall also describe in detail the character
of the business in which he desires to engage and the kind of materials
he desires to collect, buy, sell, or otherwise deal in. It shall also state the
following:
Sec. 13-163. Bond. [Code 1971, § 16-32]
The application for a license under this division shall be accompanied by a
bond payable to the City, approved as to form by the City Attorney, in the
penal sum of $250 for a junk merchant and $250 for a junk peddler, with
sufficient collateral security, conditioned for the due observance during the
term of the license of any and all ordinances which are now in force or may
hereafter be adopted by the Common Council respecting the collection of,
(1) Whether the applicant is licensed to sell old metal in accordance with
General Business Law art. 6 [§ 60 et seq.).
(2) The length of time such applicant, if an individual, or the manager or
person in charge if the applicant is a firm, partnership, corporation or
association, has resided in the City; his place of previous employment;
whether married or single; whether he has been convicted of a felony or
misdemeanor and, if so, for what offense, when, and in what court.
(3) The premises where such business is to be located or carried on, giving
street and number.
(4) Such other information that may be required by the Mayor. Such
application shall be signed and acknowledged before a notary public or
other officer authorized to administer oaths in the City.
Sec. 13-161 CHARTER Sec. 13-163
C:379
buying, selling, or otherwise dealing in the articles enumerated in section
13-161.
Sec. 13-164. Fees. [Code 1971, § 16-33]
Sec. 13-165. Issuance; refusal. [Code 1971, § 16-34]
Sec. 13-166. New application after refusal. [Code 1971, § 16-35]
No applicant to whom a license has been refused shall make further
application until a period of at least six months shall have elapsed since
the last previous rejection, unless he can show that the reason for such
rejection no longer exists.
Sec. 13-167. To be numbered; contents. [Code 1971, § 16-36]
(a) Every junk merchant prior to the issuance of a license under this
division shall pay an annual license fee in the amount now or hereafter
established by ordinance for each established place of business.
(b) Every junk peddler prior to issuance of a license under this division
shall pay an annual fee in the amount now or hereafter established by
ordinance.
(a) Upon the filing of the application and the bond, as provided in this
division, the Mayor may, upon his approval of such application after
investigation, and of such bond as to sufficiency of the surety or
collateral security, and after payment to the City of the license fee
provided in this division, issue to the applicant a license to engage in
business as provided in section 13-161.
(b) No license shall be refused except for a specific reason and for the
protection of the public safety, good order, or morals.
(c) No license as a junk merchant or peddler under this division shall be
granted to any person who shall have been convicted within two years
of the date of application of a violation of this article, or, if an
association or corporation, of which a member shall have been so
convicted.
(d) No such license shall be granted to any person who has, within five
years of the date of application, been convicted of a felony for
knowingly receiving stolen goods, or to any association or
copartnership of which any member has been so convicted.
(a) All licenses issued under this division shall be numbered in the order in
which they are issued and shall state clearly the date of issuance and
expiration of the license and the name and address of the licensee.
(b) Every license which shall be granted in pursuance of this division shall
designate the location of the place of business in or from which the junk
Sec. 13-163 OLEAN CODE Sec. 13-167
C:380
Sec. 13-168. Term. [Code 1971, § 16-37]
All licenses shall be issued under this division as of January 2 and shall
continue in force until December 31 next succeeding the date of issuance
thereof, unless sooner revoked by the Mayor.
Sec. 13-169. Separate licenses for junk merchants and junk
peddlers. [Code 1971, § 16-38]
It shall be unlawful for any junk merchant to engage in business as a junk
peddler under this division without paying a separate license therefor.
Sec. 13-170. Junk peddler's license limited to one person. [Code
1971, § 16-39]
No junk peddler's license issued under this division shall give authority for
more than one person to buy, offer to buy, or collect under it.
Sec. 13-171. To be carried and exhibited upon demand. [Code 1971,
§ 16-40]
Each junk merchant or peddler, while exercising his license under this
division, shall carry his license and exhibit such license whenever requested
so to do by a police officer of the City.
Sec. 13-172. Badges and vehicle plates. [Code 1971, § 16-17]
The City shall supply badges and vehicle plates to licensed junk peddlers
under this division. Such badges and plates shall not be transferable. On the
expiration of the license, the licensee shall surrender his badge to the City
Clerk. It shall be unlawful for any person to wear or have in his possession
such badge, unless he is the licensed junk peddler in whose name the
license is issued. Each licensee shall, while exercising his license, wear on
the front of his outermost garment the badge so provided. Such badge shall
state the character and number of the license and the date when it expires.
The vehicle plates shall be displayed by every licensee operating a vehicle,
one on each side of the body of the vehicle used by him in the exercise of
his license. Such vehicle plates shall state the character and number of the
license and the date of expiration.
Sec. 13-173. Identification of vehicles. [Code 1971, § 16-18]
The vehicle kept or used by a junk peddler in the exercise of his license
under this division shall be marked on both sides with the number
corresponding to the number of his license, in plain figures at least two
inches in length.
merchant or peddler receiving such license shall be authorized to carry
on such business.
Sec. 13-167 CHARTER Sec. 13-174
C:381
Sec. 13-174. Signs at places of business. [Code 1971, § 16-19]
Every licensed junk merchant under this division shall have and keep a sign
on the outside and in front of each of his places of business, on which shall
be plainly set forth in conspicuous letters his name, licensed business, and
the number corresponding to the number of his license.
Sec. 13-175. Use by another prohibited. [Code 1971, § 16-41]
No license issued under this division shall be used by any person other than
the original licensee, and any holder of such license who permits it to be
used by any other person, and any person who uses such license granted to
any other person, shall each be guilty of a violation of this section.
Sec. 13-176. Loss or destruction. [Code 1971, § 16-42]
Whenever a license issued under this division shall be lost or destroyed
without fault on the part of the holder or his agent or employees, a duplicate
license in lieu thereof under the original application and bond may be issued
by the Mayor in his discretion.
Sec. 13-177. Change of location of place of business. [Code 1971,
§ 16-43]
In case any licensee under this division shall remove his place of business
from the place designated in the license, he shall immediately thereon give
notice to the City Clerk and have the same endorsed upon such license.
Sec. 13-178. Business to be carried on at designated location.
[Code 1971, § 16-44]
It shall be unlawful for any junk merchant or peddler licensed under this
division to carry on the business at or from any other place than the one
designated in the license therefor.
Sec. 13-179. Unlawful to carry on business after revocation or
expiration. [Code 1971, § 16-45]
It shall be unlawful for any junk merchant or peddler licensed under this
division to continue to carry on business after such license has been
revoked or has expired.
Sec. 13-180. Revocation, forfeiture of bond. [Code 1971, § 16-46]
(a) The Mayor may, at any time, for such cause as he, upon investigation,
deems sufficient, revoke any license granted under the provisions of
this division. Whenever any license shall be so revoked, no refund of
any unearned portion thereof shall be made and no license shall be
granted to any person whose license has been so revoked within a
period of one year from the date of such revocation. Notice of such
revocation and the reason therefor, in writing, shall be served by the
Sec. 13-174 OLEAN CODE Sec. 13-180
C:382
Sec. 13-181. through Sec. 13-200. (Reserved)
Chief of Police upon the person named in the application by mailing
such notice to the address given in the application. A copy thereof shall
be filed with the City Clerk.
(b) For any violation of this division, in addition to the penalty imposed by
section 1-8, the license of the person violating such division shall be
cancelled or revoked, and the bond upon such license shall be forfeited.
Upon such forfeiture, the amount of the bond shall thereupon become
due and payable to the City, and the amount thereof may be recovered
in a civil action based upon such forfeiture.
Sec. 13-180 CHARTER Sec. 13-181
C:383

ARTICLE V
JUNKYARDS
DIVISION 1
GENERALLY
Sec. 13-201. Purpose of article. [Code 1971, § 16-57]
Sec. 13-202. Definitions. [Code 1971, § 16-58]
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:
JUNK, SECONDHAND MATERIALS, AND USED MATERIAL — Used or
secondhand material or used material of any kind, including rags, paper,
(a) A clean, wholesome, attractive environment is declared to be of
importance to the health and safety of the inhabitants and the
safeguarding of their material rights against unwarrantable invasion,
and, in addition, such an environment is deemed essential to the
maintenance and continued development of the economy of the City
and the general welfare of its citizens. By the adoption of this article,
the City declares its intent in so doing to regulate, control, and license
the activities or businesses known as auto junkyards and those
establishments having facilities for processing iron, steel, or nonferrous
scrap. The Common Council hereby declares that such activities or
businesses can contribute a hazard to property and persons and be a
public nuisance. Gasoline tanks on old autos often contain in some
quantity combustible gasoline, and the engine and other parts of such
autos are frequently covered with grease and oil which is also
inflammable. The tires, plastic seats, tops, and other elements of such
autos are also inflammable. Batteries and other elements of such autos
can contain acids and other matter potentially harmful to humans.
These autos can constitute attractive nuisances to children and some
adults.
(b) The presence of such auto junkyards and establishments for the
processing of iron, steel, or nonferrous scrap is unsightly and tends to
detract from the value of surrounding land and property, unless such
areas are properly maintained and operated. At the same time, it is
recognized that the maintenance of the auto junkyards and
establishments for the processing of iron, steel, or nonferrous scrap is a
useful and necessary business and ought to be encouraged when not in
conflict with the express purposes of this section.
(c) No license will be issued for any junkyard located or to be located
outside district I-industrial district. No junkyard may be operated or
maintained hereinafter within the City excepting those junkyards
located within district I-industrial district of the zoning ordinance of the
City [chapter 28 of this Code].
Sec. 13-201 CHARTER Sec. 13-202
C:385
rubbish, bottles, glassware, crockery, bags, cloth, rubber, tin, steel, iron,
brass, copper, silver, clothing, furniture, used motor vehicles or the parts
thereof; any repaired, reconstructed, renewed, renovated, partly ruined
or damaged materials, merchandise, or personal property; and including
secondhand materials and articles of every kind and character. The holding
or storing or depositing of any of the materials described in this definition in
order that they may be treated or prepared so as to be used again in some
form shall be a violation of this article, unless the licensee requirements
stated in this article are complied with.
JUNKYARD — Any place of storage or deposit, whether in connection with
another business or not, where two or more unregistered old or secondhand
motor vehicles, no longer intended or in condition for legal use on the
public highways are held, whether for the purpose of resale of used parts
therefrom, or the purpose of reclaiming for use some or all of the materials
therein, whether metal, glass, fabric, or otherwise, for the purpose of
disposing of such materials, or for any other purpose. Such term shall
include any place of storage or deposit for any such purposes of used
parts or waste materials from motor vehicles which, taken together, equal
in bulk two or more such vehicles. The term "junkyard" shall also mean
an establishment having facilities for processing iron, steel, or nonferrous
scrap, and whose principal products are scrap, iron, steel, or nonferrous
scrap for sale, resale, melting, remelting, or other purposes.
MOTOR VEHICLES — All vehicles propelled or drawn by power other than
muscular power originally intended for use on public highways.
Sec. 13-203. Management. [Code 1971, § 16-59]
The licensee under this article must personally manage or be responsible
for the management of the activity or business for which the license is
granted.
Sec. 13-204. Office and employees. [Code 1971, § 16-60]
The licensee under this article must maintain an office and a sufficient
number of employees on the premises to assure the proper and safe conduct
of such activity or business, to minimize the fire hazard therefrom, and to
prevent improper trespass thereon by children and others.
Sec. 13-205. Fencing. [Code 1971, § 16-61]
(a) All licensees under this article must erect an eight-foot high solid board
fence or its equivalent completely surrounding the property. This fence
must be painted, well maintained, and adequate to prohibit the
entrance of children and others into the area of the activity or business
and to contain within such fence the materials dealt in by the licensee.
All materials dealt in by the licensee shall be kept within such fence at
all times. The area outside the fence must be kept in orderly condition.
Weeds and trash shall not be allowed to accumulate in the area.
Sec. 13-202 OLEAN CODE Sec. 13-205
C:386
Sec. 13-206. Not to be used as dump area, etc. [Code 1971, § 16-62]
The area of the licensee's activity or business shall not be used as a dump
area or as a place for the burning and disposal of junk or trash.
Sec. 13-207. Open fires prohibited; exception. [Code 1971, § 16-63]
Sec. 13-208. Fire extinguishers. [Code 1971, § 16-64]
Adequate fire extinguishers shall be maintained. Each fire extinguisher
shall be hung or mounted in a conspicuous place, clearly marked and
available.
Sec. 13-209. Right of entry. [Code 1971, § 16-65]
The City Police, the City Clerk, the Common Council, or any of its
representatives shall be granted access to the area of the activity or
business of the licensee under this article at all reasonable hours to inspect
the area for compliance with this article.
Sec. 13-210. through Sec. 13-225. (Reserved)
(b) All licensees located in zone I (heavy industrial districts) shall construct
and maintain such fence within their own property lines.
(c) When the area is not supervised by the licensee or his employees, the
fence shall be locked at a gate in a secure manner.
(a) Open fires of any type are prohibited within the licensed premises
except as permitted under Subsection (b) of this section.
(b) Processing of auto parts and materials by burning shall be permitted
only at such times and places within the licensed premises as the Fire
Chief may permit after personal inspection of the area. Application to
burn within the area under this paragraph must be made to the Fire
Chief, and may be made orally. Burning shall be allowed by the Chief at
a time and place set by him within his presence or the presence of a
person duly authorized by him, to observe the conditions of the burning.
The Fire Chief shall complete a record of all requests for burning within
each licensed area.
Sec. 13-205 CHARTER Sec. 13-210
C:387

DIVISION 2
LICENSE
Sec. 13-226. Required. [Code 1971, § 16-72]
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in or conduct on real property
within the City limits, either for himself and/or on behalf of any other
person, directly or indirectly, as agent, employee, or otherwise, any activity
or business, either for profit or otherwise, at wholesale or retail, which
involves the collection, storage, burning, dumping, disassembling,
dismantling, salvaging, sorting, or otherwise handling for sale, resale,
storage, or disposal of any materials without first having procured a license
from the City Clerk.
Sec. 13-227. Application. [Code 1971, § 16-73]
Sec. 13-228. Bond required of applicant. [Code 1971, § 16-74]
Before the application shall be approved and a license issued under this
division, the applicant shall file with the City Clerk a bond payable to the
City, approved as to form by the City Attorney, in the penal sum of $500,
with sufficient collateral security, conditioned for the observance during the
term of the license of any and all ordinances which are now in force or
may hereafter be adopted by the Common Council respecting the collection
of, buying, selling, or otherwise dealing in the articles enumerated in this
article.
(a) Every person desiring to obtain a license required by this division shall
file a written application, duly subscribed, describing the character of
the business in which the applicant desires to engage, the kind of
materials which he desires to deal in, and an accurate description of the
business to be conducted in such place within the City, including a
sketch of the premises.
(b) The application for such license shall also state:
(1) Whether or not the applicant is the owner and lessee of the
premises to be used;
(2) Whether or not the applicant has ever been convicted of a
misdemeanor or felony, and the place and date of such conviction;
and
(3) A certificate from the zoning board that the proposed location is not
within an established district restricted against such uses or
otherwise contrary to the prohibitions of such zoning ordinance. If
the junkyard has been maintained and operated prior to April 11,
1967, and is being maintained and operated in violation of the
zoning ordinance of the City, a certificate that the proposed
junkyard is operating under a nonconforming use should
accompany the application.
Sec. 13-226 CHARTER Sec. 13-229
C:389
Sec. 13-229. Investigation of applicant; inspection of premises.
[Code 1971, § 16-75]
All applications for licenses under this division for junkyards or junk shops
or any annual renewals thereof shall be made to the City Clerk who shall,
before any licenses are issued, cause an investigation to be made of the
applicant and an inspection to be made of the premises involved.
Sec. 13-230. Refusal; public hearing. [Code 1971, § 16-76]
(a) If the City Clerk shall refuse a license under this division, he shall
promptly report such refusal together with the reasons therefor to the
Common Council. Not less than two nor more than four weeks from the
date of the transmission of the refusal to the Common Council by the
City Clerk, a public hearing on the application shall be held at a time
and place to be fixed by the Common Council within the above stated
four-week period. Notice of the public hearing shall be given to the
applicant by mail, postage prepaid to the address given in the
application, and shall be published once in the Olean Times Herald. The
date of publication shall be not less than seven days before the date of
the hearing.
(b) At the time and place set forth for the hearing, the Common Council
shall hear the applicant and all other persons wishing to be heard on
the application for a license to operate, establish, or maintain the
junkyard. The Common Council in considering the application may
consider the suitability of the applicant with reference to his ability to
comply with the fencing requirements or other reasonable regulations
concerning the junkyard, as well as the applicant's record of
convictions for any type of larceny or receiving stolen goods.
(c) At the time and place of the hearing, the Common Council shall hear all
persons wishing to be heard on the application for certificate of
approval for the location of the junkyard. The Council may take into
account the nature and development of the surrounding property, and
whether or not the proposed location can be reasonably protected from
affecting the health and safety by reason of offensive or unhealthy
odors, smoke, or other causes. The Council may also take into account
the clean, wholesome, and attractive environment which the legislature
has declared to be of vital importance to the continued general welfare
of the citizens of the state and may consider whether or not the
proposed location can be reasonably protected from an unfavorable
effect thereof. The Common Council may consider the type of road
surfacing the junkyard has, the natural or artificial barriers protecting
the junkyard from view, the proximity of the proposed yard or the
existing yard to established residential and recreational areas, as well
as the reasonable availability of other suitable sites for the junkyard.
(d) The Common Council may refuse a license under this division, if after a
public hearing as set forth in this section, it appears either that:
Sec. 13-229 OLEAN CODE Sec. 13-230
C:390
Sec. 13-231. Issuance. [Code 1971, § 16-77]
Within two weeks following the public hearing under this division, the
Common Council must make a finding as to whether or not the application
will be granted, give notice of its finding to the applicant by mail, postage
prepaid, to the address given on the application. If approved, the license
including the certificate of approved location shall be forthwith issued to
remain in effect until the following April 1. Approval shall be personal to
the applicant and not assignable. The determination of the Common Council
may be reviewed under Civil Practice Law and Rules art. 78 [§ 7801 et seq.].
Sec. 13-232. Fee. [Code 1971, § 16-78]
The fee for the license under this division shall be paid to the City Clerk for
the deposit in the general fund at the time of issuance. The fee shall be in an
amount now or hereafter established by ordinance and covers not only the
cost of issuing the license itself but also the cost of making the necessary
inspections of the premises to ascertain compliance with the regulations
prescribed in this division.
Sec. 13-233. Term; renewal. [Code 1971, § 16-79]
A license issued under this division shall be effective from the date of its
issuance until March 31 of the year of such issuance, after which a new
application for a license must be made yearly if the licensee desires to
continue such activity or business.
Sec. 13-234. Personal with licensee; not to be sold, assigned, or
transferred. [Code 1971, § 16-80]
A license issued under this division is personal with the licensee and does
not go with the title of the land, nor may it be sold, assigned, or transferred.
Sec. 13-235. More than one junkyard at single location prohibited.
[Code 1971, § 16-81]
It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or maintain more than one
junkyard at a single location by virtue of one license issued under this
division.
(1) The applicant has been convicted of larceny or knowingly receiving
stolen goods; or
(2) That the general health, safety, and welfare of the community
would be adversely affected. In considering this subsection, the
Council may take into consideration the aesthetic considerations
set forth in this division.
Sec. 13-230 CHARTER Sec. 13-236
C:391
Sec. 13-236. Revocation. [Code 1971, § 16-82]
The Common Council may revoke any license issued under this division if it
shall be determined under a public hearing held thereon that the licensee
has for any reason violated any provisions of this article. Upon revocation of
a license, the Common Council may require the removal of all salvage and
waste materials from the site.
Sec. 13-237. through Sec. 13-244. (Reserved)
Sec. 13-236 OLEAN CODE Sec. 13-237
C:392
ARTICLE VI
Peddlers, Solicitors, Vendors, Transient Merchants, Farmers
[9-8-1992 By ReMs.a Nrkoe. t9s 8A-9n2d; S3p-e2c4i-a2l0 E1v5eBntysRes. No. 14-15]
DIVISION 1
GENERALLY
Sec. 13-245. Purpose.
The purposes of this article are the protection of government, order,
conduct, the general welfare, safety, morals, health and well-being of the
persons and property of the City of Olean. It is adopted pursuant to
Municipal Home Rule Law § 10, Subdivision 1(ii)(a)(11) and (12), § 10,
Subdivision 2, and General City Law § 20(13).
Sec. 13-246. Definitions.
The following definitions shall be applicable to this article:
AUCTION — Includes any sale to the public where a person or his/her
agent offers for sale to the highest bidder any goods, wares, merchandise
or property.
CHURCH — A religious organization as defined under the Religious
Corporation Law of the State of New York.
CITY-SPONSORED EVENT — A special event which is sponsored and hosted
by the City of Olean or its designee by a resolution of the Common Council.
ESTABLISHED PLACE OF BUSINESS — Any location within the City where
any person regularly sells, displays, or offers goods, services, produce,
wares and merchandise to the general public.
GARAGE SALE — Includes all sales defined under Chapter 13, Article III of
the Code of Ordinances of the City of Olean.
GOODS, WARES, MERCHANDISE, SERVICES — Shall include but not be
limited to fruits, vegetables, farm products, fish, game, poultry, meats,
plants, flowers, appliances, wearing apparel, jewelry, ornaments, art work,
cosmetics and beauty aids, health products, medicines, household needs or
furnishings, food of any kind, whether or not for immediate consumption,
confections or drinks, or personal services immediately offered or rendered.
NOT-FOR-PROFIT CORPORATION — An organization formed in accordance
with the Not-For-Profit Corporation Law of the State of New York.
NOT-FOR-PROFIT SPECIAL EVENT — A special event which is sponsored
by a not-for-profit corporation or association either as a fund-raiser or
otherwise.
PEDDLER — A person who offers goods, wares, merchandise or services for
sale door to door, including house to house, business to business, street to
street, or any other type of place-to-place movement. Delivery and payment
occur immediately.
Sec. 13-245 CHARTER Sec. 13-246
C:393
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, corporation, limited-liability
company, voluntary association, club or any other business organization,
and any principal or agent thereof.
QUALIFIED CHARITABLE ORGANIZATION — Any unincorporated religious
or other organization which has been organized and operated exclusively
for exempt purposes and has been qualified as an exempt organization
under Section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code of the United States
of America.
REGULARLY — For the purpose of this section, "regularly" is defined as a
period of more than six months.
SPECIAL EVENT — Any occasion, including but not limited to street fairs,
shows, exhibitions, City-wide celebrations and festivals taking place within
a specifically defined area of the City of Olean for a period of time not to
exceed seven days.
SOLICITOR — Any person who goes from door to door, including house to
house, business to business, street to street, or any other type of placeto-
place movement or who stands in any street or public place taking or
offering to take orders for goods, wares or merchandise or services to
be delivered or performed in the future, or for making, manufacturing or
repairing any article or thing whatsoever for future delivery.
TEMPORARY — For the purpose of this section, "temporary" is defined as a
period of less than six months.
TRANSIENT MERCHANT — Any person engaging in temporary retail sale
or display of goods, wares, merchandise, services, produce or prepared
foods; where the value of any single item offered for display or sale exceeds
$1,000; and for the purpose of conducting said business, occupies any lot,
building, room, or structure of any kind within the City.
VENDOR — Any person engaging in the temporary retail sale or display of
goods, wares, merchandise, services, produce, or prepared foods and for
the purpose of conducting said business:
Sec. 13-247. License required.
It shall be unlawful for any person to peddle, solicit, vend, or to operate as a
transient merchant, on any public or private outdoor walk, street, alley, lot,
building, room, or structure of any kind, without having first applied to and
obtained a license from the City of Olean in accordance with this article.
The license type provided in this article shall be in addition to and not in
Travels by foot, wagon, vehicle or any other conveyance from street
to street, carrying or conveying, or transporting goods, wares, or
merchandise, and offering them for sale; or
(1)
Without traveling from place to place, exhibits, displays, sells, offers to
sell or perform services to be delivered immediately and occupies any
lot, building, room, or structure of any kind within the City for a period
of six months or less.
(2)
Sec. 13-246 OLEAN CODE Sec. 13-247
C:394
lieu of any other consent, permit or license as may be otherwise required by
law.
Sec. 13-248. Application for license.
The application for any license under this article shall be on a form
proscribed by the City Clerk and approved by a resolution of the Common
Council and shall contain all the information relevant and necessary to
determine whether a particular license may be issued, including but not
limited to:
Sec. 13-249. Certificates, permits, authorizations required.
Any application for a license this article shall be accompanied with the
appropriate certificates of authority, permits or letters of authorization from
any governmental agency under which the applicant has been issued a
license to conduct business.
Sec. 13-250. Issuance of license.
(1) The applicant's and any worker's full name, current address, telephone
number, proof of identity;
(2) A brief description of the nature, character, and quality of goods, wares
or merchandise to be offered for sale;
(3) The specific location, if any, where the applicant intends to conduct
business;
(4) If the applicant is employed by another, the name and address of the
person on behalf of whom the applicant is representing;
(5) If a motor vehicle is to be used, displayed or sold, a description of the
vehicle, together with the VIN, registration number, license plate
number and insurance information;
(6) A complete listing of any other licenses, permits, or authorizations
issued to the applicant by the City, state or any governmental entity
within the five years immediately preceding the date of this application;
(7) Evidence satisfactory to the City Clerk of compliance with any public
health law related to the sale of food;
(8) Evidence satisfactory to the City Clerk of compliance with any other
federal, state, or local law relating to the merchandise proposed to be
offered for sale; and
(9) Any fee, bond or surety as may be required by this article.
(a) The applicant shall be notified of the City's decision to issue or deny the
license within 30 days after the acceptance of the application by the
City Clerk.
Sec. 13-247 CHARTER Sec. 13-250
C:395
Sec. 13-251. Application after denial.
No applicant to whom an application has been denied shall make further
application until a period of at least six months has elapsed since the date
of the last previous denial unless the applicant can establish that the reason
for such denial no longer exists.
Sec. 13-252. License fees.
Sec. 13-253. Display of identification and other permits.
Sec. 13-254. Enforcement; inspections; penalties for offenses.
(b) Each license shall show the name and address of the license, the name
and address of the licensed workers, if applicable, the type of license
issued, the kind of goods to be sold, the amount of the license fee, the
license number, and, where applicable, the identifying description of
any vehicle used or to be sold in connection with the license.
(a) Any person granted a license under this article shall pay a license fee in
accordance with the type of license issued under Divisions Two, Three,
Four and Five of this article.
(b) In addition to the license fee for the type of license issued, all applicants
applying for a license under this article shall be required to pay a
license application surcharge in the amount of $25 to offset the cost of
administering the license application process. This fee shall be required
annually; however, the same shall be deemed as paid by the applicant
on any subsequent application submitted by the license one year from
the date of issuance of the first license.
(a) Any license or permit issued by the City shall be issued to the licensee
whenever he or she is engaged in activity authorized by the license.
Photo identification must be carried by the licensee or any worker
operating under the license and presented upon request to any City
official verifying the identity of the license holder.
(b) Any license, permit or authorization issued in connection with the
license must be prominently and conspicuously displayed at all times
during operation under the license.
(a) The Chief of Police or his designee shall make sufficient inspections to
insure the compliance with the licensing and other applicable
provisions of this article. The Chief of Police shall have full authority to
summarily suspend or revoke any license granted for failure to comply
with the laws, regulations, or ordinances of the City of Olean, State of
New York, of the United States of America.
(b) The penalty for violating any provision of this article or any other
applicable section of the Code of the City of Olean shall be a fine not
less than $250 and not more than $500, together with the suspension or
Sec. 13-250 OLEAN CODE Sec. 13-254
C:396
Sec. 13-255. Suspension and revocation of license.
Sec. 13-255.1. Appeals.
If the City Clerk denies the issuance of a license under this article or if
any license issued under this article is suspended or revoked, the aggrieved
party may appeal to the Common Council at the next regularly scheduled
work session, at which time the Council, by majority vote, shall have the
authority to uphold the denial, issue the license, issue the license with
conditions, or to table the application and require the submission of further
revocation of the license or imprisonment not exceeding 30 days, or
both fine and imprisonment.
(a) In addition to the penalties contained in Section 13-254, any license
issued under this article may be suspended or revoked for any of the
following reasons:
(1) Fraud, misrepresentation, or knowingly making a false statement
contained in the application for the license; or
(2) Fraud, misrepresentation or knowingly making a false statement in
the course of carrying on business under the license; or
(3) Conducting business in any manner contrary of the conditions of
the license;
(4) Conducting business under the license in such a manner to create a
public nuisance, cause a breach of the peace, constitute a danger to
the public health, safety, welfare or morals, interfere with the
rights of property owners; or
(5) Failure to display any license, permit or authorization issued by any
other governmental entity in connection with the license; or
(6) Cancelation of any license, permit, or display issued by any other
government entity in connection with the license;
(7) Failure of any person working under the license to produce
identification upon the request of any City official charged with the
enforcement of this article.
(b) The City official charging a violation under this article shall provide a
written notice of the suspension or revocation in a brief statement
setting forth the complaint, the grounds for suspension or revocation,
and notifying the licensee of his right to appeal.
(c) If the City revokes a license issued under this article, the fee already
paid for the license shall be forfeited.
(d) Any person who has had a license revoked under this section shall be
prohibited from applying for a license under this article for a period of
one year from the date of revocation.
Sec. 13-254 CHARTER Sec. 13-255.1
C:397
information from the applicant, or in the instance of a suspension or
revocation, uphold the same.
Sec. 13-256. Exceptions.
Any provision of this division to the contrary notwithstanding, no license
shall be required in the following circumstances:
Sec. 13-257. through Sec. 13-260. (Reserved)
(1) Of a garage sale, estate sale, auction, circus or carnival which is itself
licensed as may be required by the ordinances of the City; or
(2) Of sales conducted pursuant to statute or by any court; or
(3) Of any honorably discharged soldier, sailor or marine what has
procured a license as provided by the General Business Law of the
state; or
(4) Sales or events conducted by any church, not-for-profit corporation or
qualified charitable entity, which sale is conducted by bona fide
members of such church or organization, and all net proceeds from the
sale of goods, wares or merchandise are retained by such church or
organization.
(5) Sales of in-season vegetables by the grower thereof from a stand, table
or booth.
(6) Sales from a stand, table or booth open for business for a period of not
exceeding four hours during a twenty-four-hour period nor more than
three days in any seven-day period.
Sec. 13-255.1 OLEAN CODE Sec. 13-257
C:398
DIVISION 2
PEDDLERS
Sec. 13-261. License required.
Sec. 13-262. Applications.
Sec. 13-263. License Fee.
The license fee for engaging in carrying on or conducting business as a
peddler shall, as specified below, be payable in advance for each day such
business shall continue. Such license fee shall be $7.50 per day.
Sec. 13-264. through Sec. 13-275. (Reserved)
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to offer goods, wares, merchandise
or services for sale door to door, including house to house, business to
business, street to street, or any other type of place-to-place movement
and where delivery of goods and services and payment occur
immediately, within the City, without having first obtained a license and
paid the license fee, as hereinafter provided.
(b) The license provided in this division shall be in addition to and not in
lieu of any other consent or permit as may be otherwise required by
law.
(a) An application for a license pursuant to this division shall be submitted
no later than 30 days prior to the start date requested for the license.
(b) The application shall be in a form proscribed by the City Clerk and shall
contain the information as set forth in Section 13-248 above.
Sec. 13-261 CHARTER Sec. 13-264
C:399

DIVISION 3
SOLICITORS
Sec. 13-276. License required.
Sec. 13-277. Applications.
Sec. 13-278. License fee.
The license fee for engaging in carrying on or conducting business as a
solicitor shall be as specified below, payable in advance for each day such
business shall continue. Such license fee shall be $25.
Sec. 13-279. Surety requirement; regulations.
There shall be required of any licensed solicitor a surety bond in the penal
sum of $500 issued by a bonding company authorized to do business in the
State of New York or a cash bond in like amount.
Sec. 13-280. (Reserved)
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to go from door to door, including
house to house, business to business, street to street, or any other type
of place-to-place movement or who stands in any street or public place
taking or offering to take orders for goods, wares or merchandise or
services to be delivered or performed in the future, or for making,
manufacturing or repairing any article or thing whatsoever for future
delivery, without having first obtained a license and paid the license fee,
as hereinafter provided.
(b) The license provided in this division shall be in addition to and not in
lieu of any other consent or permit as may be otherwise required by
law.
(a) An application for a license pursuant to this division shall be submitted
no later than 30 days prior to the start date requested for the license.
(b) The application shall be in a form as proscribed by the City Clerk and
shall contain the information as set forth in Section 13-248 above.
Sec. 13-276 CHARTER Sec. 13-280
C:401

DIVISION 4
VENDORS
Sec. 13-281. License required.
Sec. 13-282. Applications.
Sec. 13-283. License fee.
The license fee for engaging in carrying on or conducting business as a
vendor shall be as specified below, payable in advance for each day such
business shall continue. Such license fee shall be $7.50.
Sec. 13-284. through Sec. 13-285. (Reserved)
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the retail sale or display
of goods, wares, merchandise, services, produce, or prepared foods and
for the purpose of conducting said business, travel by foot, wagon,
vehicle or any other conveyance from street to street, carrying or
conveying, or transporting goods, wares, or merchandise, and offering
them for sale, or without traveling from place to place, exhibit, display,
sell, offer to sell or perform services to be delivered immediately and
occupy any lot, building, room, or structure of any kind within the City
for a period of six months or less, without having first obtained a license
and paid the license fee, as hereinafter provided.
(b) The license provided in this division shall be in addition to and not in
lieu of any other consent or permit as may be otherwise required by
law.
(c) This section shall not apply to any established place of business in the
City that vends on any sidewalk abutting the established place of
business, with the consent by resolution of the Common Council, and
shall not be considered a vendor for the purpose of this article.
(a) An application for a license pursuant to this division shall be submitted
no later than 30 days prior to the start date requested for the license.
(b) The application shall be in a form prescribed by the City Clerk and shall
contain the information as set forth in Section 13-248 above.
(c) Notwithstanding Section 13-256 above, all vendors must file an
application with the City Clerk; however, there shall be no fee charged
for the issuance of a license for anyone engaging in carrying on or
conducting business as a vendor for the benefit of a not-for-profit or
other qualified charitable organization.
Sec. 13-281 CHARTER Sec. 13-284
C:403

DIVISION 5
TRANSIENT MERCHANTS
Sec. 13-286. License required.
Sec. 13-287. Applications.
Sec. 13-288. License fee.
The license fee for engaging in carrying on or conducting business as a
transient merchant shall be as specified below, payable in advance for each
day such business shall continue. Such license fee shall be $100 per day for
items $1,000 to $4,999; $500 per day for items $5,000 and above.
Sec. 13-289. through Sec. 13-290. (Reserved)
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the temporary retail
sale or display of goods, wares, merchandise, or services, where the
value of any single item offered for display or sale exceeds $1,000, and
for the purpose of conducting said retail sale or display, occupy any lot,
building, room, or structure of any kind within the City, without having
first obtained a license and paid the license fee, as hereinafter
provided.
(b) The license provided in this division shall be in addition to and not in
lieu of any other consent or permit as may be otherwise required by
law.
(c) This section shall not apply to any established place of business located
within the City of Olean participating in a special event, not-for-profit
special event, or City-sponsored event.
(a) An application for a license pursuant to this division shall be submitted
no later than 60 days prior to the start date requested for the license.
(b) The application shall be in a form prescribed by the City Clerk and shall
contain the information as set forth in Section 13-248 above.
Sec. 13-286 CHARTER Sec. 13-289
C:405

DIVISION 6
FARMERS MARKETS
Sec. 13-291. License required.
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a farmers market in the
City unless such person has first been approved by a resolution of the
Common Council. Such resolution shall set forth the times and location
for the market. Upon approval of such farmers market by the Common
Council, the applicant shall be required to obtain a farmers market license
in accordance with the provisions of this division. The license shall entitle
persons who would otherwise be peddlers, solicitors, or vendors and who
have been approved by the applicant and only operate during and at the
licensed farmers market or similar markets to engage in business that
would otherwise require a license under this article.
(1) The sponsoring or hosting organization of such farmers market shall
pay an annual fee of $25 in advance for the year that such market shall
be open for business.
(2) The sponsoring or hosting organization shall complete and file with the
Clerk a license application which shall include:
a. The name, address and telephone number of the applicant and the
name, address and telephone number of each officer and his or her
address, if a corporation, church, association, club or charitable
institution.
b. The location of the place or places and the date(s) where and when
such merchandise, goods, wares, produce or vegetables are to be
so displayed and sold.
c. The New York sales tax number, social security number or federal
identification number of the applicant, if any.
d. The estimated number of sponsored or hosted hawkers, peddlers
and/or transient merchants that will be participating in the event.
e. Evidence satisfactory to the City Clerk of compliance with any
public health law related to the sale of food.
f. Evidence satisfactory to the City Clerk of compliance with any
other federal, state, or local law relating to the merchandise
proposed to be offered for sale.
(3) The sponsoring or hosting organization shall comply with such other
restrictions, limitations, rules or regulations as may be established by
the Common Council or any responsible department of the City.
(4) Each such sponsored peddler, solicitor, or vendor shall be required to
prominently display in plain view a distinctive badge or other evidence
that such peddler, solicitor or vendor is sponsored by the not-for-profit
organization. During the event, upon request of any City official, the
Sec. 13-291 CHARTER Sec. 13-291
C:407
Sec. 13-292. through Sec. 13-300. (Reserved)
sponsoring organization shall produce for inspection a list of all
sponsored peddlers, solicitors and vendors.
Sec. 13-291 OLEAN CODE Sec. 13-292
C:408
DIVISION 7
SPECIAL EVENTS
Sec. 13-301. License required.
Sec. 13-302. Application.
The applicant shall complete and file with the Clerk a license application no
later than 30 days prior to the start of the event, which shall include:
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to host an event, including but not
limited to a street fair, shows, exhibitions, City-wide celebrations or
festival, taking place within a specifically defined area of the City of
Olean, without having first obtained a license and paid the license fee,
as hereinafter provided.
(b) The license provided in this division shall be in addition to and not in
lieu of any other consent or permit as may be otherwise required by
law.
(c) The license provided in this division shall entitle the license holder to
invite those who would otherwise be classified as peddlers, solicitors,
and vendors requiring individual licensing under this article to operate
during the event without having first obtained the appropriate
individual license pursuant to this article.
(1) The name, address and telephone number of the applicant and the
name, address and telephone number of each officer, member or
shareholder or other responsible person and his or her address, if a
corporation, church, association, club or charitable institution.
(2) The location of the place or places and the date(s) where and when such
merchandise, goods, wares, produce or vegetables are to be so
displayed and sold.
(3) The New York sales tax number, social security number or federal
identification number of the applicant, if any.
(4) The number of peddlers, solicitors and vendors that will be
participating in the event.
(5) Immediately prior to the start of the event, a roster containing the
names, addresses, and telephone numbers of the peddlers, solicitors
and vendors that will be participating in the event.
(6) Evidence satisfactory to the City Clerk of compliance with any public
health law related to the sale of food.
(7) Evidence satisfactory to the City Clerk of compliance with any other
federal, state or local law relating to the merchandise proposed to be
offered for sale.
(8) Any fee, bond, or surety as may be required by this article.
Sec. 13-301 CHARTER Sec. 13-303
C:409
Sec. 13-303. Fees.
Sec. 13-304. through Sec. 13-350. (Reserved)
(a) Special event fee schedule.
(1) The host applicant shall pay in advance the required fee as
provided by this section. The fee shall be calculated on a per-event
basis as follows:
Number of Vendors Fee
1 to 25 $25
26 to 50 $50
51 to 75 $75
76 or more $100
(2) If an event shall have a duration of greater than seven days, an
additional full fee for each seven-day period of the event's duration
shall be required to be paid at the time of application.
(b) Not-for-profit special event fee schedule. Notwithstanding Section
13-256 above, all not-for-profit and qualified charitable organizations
must file a special event application with the City Clerk; however, there
shall be no fee charged for the issuance of a license under this section.
Sec. 13-303 OLEAN CODE Sec. 13-304
C:410
ARTICLE VII
CONTRACTORS
DIVISION 1
GENERALLY
Sec. 13-351. through Sec. 13-370. (Reserved)
Sec. 13-351 CHARTER Sec. 13-351
C:411

DIVISION 2
HOME BUILDERS AND HOME IMPROVEMENT CONTRACTORS
Sec. 13-371. License required; licensing requirements. [Res. No.
146-92, 11-24-1992; Res. No. 29-97, 4-22-1997; Res. No. 27-02,
3-26-2002; Res. No. 118-06, 10-24-2006]
All contractors and subcontractors providing home construction and
improvement services for hire in the City, prior to providing such services,
shall be required to obtain from the City a license to perform such services.
It shall be unlawful to provide home construction and improvement services
for hire in the City without obtaining such license. Application for the
license shall be obtained from the Fire Chief or his designee. Applications
shall contain the following information:
(1) Name of applicant;
(2) Company name, if different;
(3) Address of applicant;
(4) Address of company, if different;
(5) Telephone number;
a. Applicant;
b. Company, if different;
(6) If a corporation:
a. The state of incorporation;
b. The contact person of corporation;
c. The assumed name of corporation, if any;
(7) If a partnership:
a. The name of each general partner and his or her residential
address;
b. The contact person, if different;
(8) If a proprietorship:
a. The name of the proprietor;
b. Residential address, if different;
(9) Federal identification number/social security number;
(10) New York State sales tax number, if any;
(11) Number of employees:
Sec. 13-371 CHARTER Sec. 13-371
C:413
Sec. 13-372. Definitions. [Res. No. 146-92, 11-24-1992; Res. No.
118-06, 10-24-2006]
a. Full-time;
b. Part-time.
(12) The license fee shall be established by the Common Council from time
to time by resolution. Renewal license applications shall be subject to
renewal upon payment of the fee which is established from time to time
by the Common Council by resolution. Licenses shall be valid for one
year and shall expire on the last day of the month of which it was
obtained.
(13) A certificate of insurance reflecting an in force and effect liability policy
at the time of application and the duration of said license, for the
provision of home construction and improvement services in the
minimum amount of $100,000, and the declaration page of said policy
of insurance under the title "description of operations" shall state with
reasonable particularity the underlined activities to be covered by said
policy and shall name the City of Olean as a certificate holder.
(14) Prior to the issuance of the initial license and renewal license by the
Fire Chief or his designee, the applicant shall obtain from the Chief of
the Fire Department a certification that the applicant has been
informed of such laws, rules and regulations as may be applicable to the
business of providing home improvement services in the City; said
certification form shall be signed and dated by the applicant.
(15) Prior to the issuance of the initial license the applicant shall complete
that section of the application form indicating any prior convictions and
obtain the countersignature of the Chief of the City of Olean Police
Department or his designee certifying the status of the applicant's local
criminal record. The applicant shall also provide the Chief of the City of
Olean Fire Department or his designee with a copy of applicant's
criminal record, which applicant shall obtain and pay any applicable
fees through an approved criminal record search procedure. Any
contractor licensed prior to the adoption of this ordinance shall obtain a
copy of the criminal record through the aforementioned procedure at
next renewal. All licensed contractors shall repeat same every five
years thereafter. A conviction of a misdemeanor or felony may be
grounds for denial of a license if, in the judgment of the Fire Chief, it
involves a crime of fraud, larceny, moral turpitude and the like. An
outstanding monetary judgement pertaining to the work of construction
may be grounds for denial, suspension or the revocation of a license.
Any applicant denied a license for a criminal conviction or for any other
reason thereof may follow the procedures contained in § 13-376 for
reconsideration on the grounds that such denial is improper,
unwarranted or unjust. Renewal applications shall require a follow-up
criminal record check by the Chief of Police or his designee as provided
by procedures set from time to time by the office of Code Enforcement.
Sec. 13-371 OLEAN CODE Sec. 13-372
C:414
Sec. 13-373. License fee. [Res. No. 146-92, 11-24-1992; Res. No.
28-02, 3-26-2002; Res. No. 118-06, 10-24-2006]
Sec. 13-374. Exceptions. [Res. No. 146-92, 11-24-1992; Res. No.
118-06, 10-24-2006]
This division shall not be applicable to:
Sec. 13-375. Enforcement. [Res. No. 146-92, 11-24-1992; Res. No.
51-95, 8-22-1995; Res. No. 118-06, 10-24-2006]
This article shall be enforced by the Police Department and the Code
Enforcement Office in accordance with policies as may be approved from
time to time by the Mayor. Unless another penalty is expressly provided,
every person convicted of a violation of any provision of this article shall
be punished by a fine not less than $250 and not more than $500 or by
(a) A "home construction and improvement contractor or subcontractor"
shall be any person who shall provide or offer to provide residential
home construction and/or improvement services for hire, or shall
employ one or more employees to provide residential home
construction and/or improvement services for hire to any homeowner
as a general contractor or subcontractor, house painter, carpenter,
mason, roofing contractor, electrician, excavator, landscape contractor,
heating contractor, house mover, window contractor, chimney sweep,
siding contractor, fence installer, driveway/sidewalk repair and/or
installation contractor, and/or tree trimming and/or removal contractor.
(b) A "person" shall be any person, partnership, corporation, limited
liability company or other business entity.
(a) The license fees for home improvement contractors and subcontractors
shall be:
(1) Annual license (12 months from date of issuance): $50.
(2) Renewal (by expiration date of annual license): $35.
(b) All licenses are valid for a period of 12 months from the date of
issuance. All licenses shall expire 12 months from the date of issuance,
and any license not renewed prior to expiration shall be deemed
expired. Any application for renewal received after the date of
expiration will be treated as a new application and subject to the annual
license fee of $50.
(1) Plumbers;
(2) Lawn maintainers;
(3) Bona fide employees of a licensed proprietorship, partnership,
corporation, limited-liability company or other business entity
providing home improvement services for hire.
Sec. 13-372 CHARTER Sec. 13-375
C:415
a term of imprisonment not to exceed 15 days, or by both such fine and
imprisonment.
Sec. 13-376. Conditions for maintenance of license. [Res. No.
146-92, 11-24-1992; Res. No. 29-97, 4-22-1997; Res. No. 118-06,
10-24-2006]
Sec. 13-377. through Sec. 13-389. (Reserved)
(a) The Fire Chief shall refuse to issue any license for conviction of any
felony or after issuance of a license refuse to issue a renewal license for
conviction of any felony or suspend for a period not exceeding 60 days
or revoke for a period not to exceed one year any license upon the
conviction of licensee, or the agent(s) or employee(s) of licensee, of a
misdemeanor failure to comply with the laws, rules or regulations of the
State of New York, the County of Cattaraugus or the City of Olean in
connection with the business of home improvement contracting,
including, without limitation, consumer protection laws, environmental
protection laws and/or building construction and permitting laws. In
such event the Fire Chief shall provide the applicant/licensee with a
statement mailed to the address shown on the license application by (1)
U.S. mail certified return receipt requested and by (2) regular mail,
each containing the grounds for the proposed action and its proposed
effective date. This action shall be final unless the applicant/licensee
shall, within 15 days, make written request for reconsideration to the
Fire Chief specifying why the action proposed is improper, unwarranted
or unjust. The Fire Chief shall consider the matter, make such
investigation deemed warranted, and render a written decision within
20 days. The Fire Chief's determination shall be deemed final, unless
within 10 days thereafter the applicant shall make a written appeal
addressed to the Common Council of the City requesting that the
Common Council hear and finally decide the matter. Such hearing shall
be within 30 days. The Common Council shall hear the Fire Chief, the
licensee and any other interested party and shall render a written
decision within 30 days.
(b) The Fire Chief shall have the power to issue conditional reinstatement
of such or any license revoked or suspended.
(c) Any revoked license or suspended license may be reinstated upon
application of licensee together with the payment of the reinstatement
fee established by the Common Council.11
11.Editor's Note: Former § 13-377, Phase-in period, added 11-24-1992 by Res. No. 146-92,
which immediately followed this section, was repealed 10-24-2006 by Res. No. 118-06.
Sec. 13-375 OLEAN CODE Sec. 13-377
C:416
DIVISION 3
(RESERVED)
(Reserved)
CHARTER Sec. 13-377
C:417

DIVISION 4
LANDSCAPE AND SNOW REMOVAL CONTRACTORS
[Added 11-24-2015 by Res. No. 107-15]
Sec. 13-390. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ACTIVE LICENSE — A license obtained by a person pursuant to this chapter
which has neither expired nor been revoked.
APPLICANT — Any person who owns or leases at least one motor vehicle
used in conducting a snow removal and/or landscape business.
LANDSCAPE MATERIAL — All grass, weeds, brush, leaves, flowers, shrubs,
limbs up to six inches in diameter and small stumps not to exceed 12 inches
in diameter.
LANDSCAPER — Any person providing services of planting, trimming,
cutting or removing bushes, shrubs, flowers, vegetables, trees or grass for
which a contract or agreement for services has been established orally or in
writing by means of an invoice, sales receipt or other competent evidence. A
landscape contractor constructs, maintains, repairs, installs or subcontracts
the development of landscaping systems and facilities for public and/or
private gardens and other areas which are designed to aesthetically,
architecturally, horticulturally or functionally improve the grounds within or
surrounding a structure or a tract or plot of land. In connection therewith,
a landscape contractor prepares and grades plots and areas of land for the
installation of any architectural, horticultural and decorative treatment or
arrangement.
MOTOR VEHICLE — Any vehicle used for landscaping or snow removal
purposes by a landscaper or snow remover as defined by this article.
PERSON — Any individual, firm, partnership, contractor, subcontractor,
association or corporation for which a New York State tax identification
number has been issued.
PRIVATE PROPERTY — All real property, improved or unimproved, owned
by any municipal corporation, person or otherwise and which is not included
in the definitions of "public highway" and "public place."
PUBLIC HIGHWAY — Any street open to the public for its full use by all
residents of the City of Olean.
PUBLIC PLACE — All real property available to or open to use by all
residents of the City of Olean.
SNOW REMOVER — Any person providing services of removing, dumping,
heaping or plowing snow by means of a motor vehicle for which a contract
or agreement for services has been established orally or in writing by means
of an invoice, sales receipt or other competent evidence.
Sec. 13-391. License required.
Sec. 13-390 CHARTER Sec. 13-391
C:419
Sec. 13-392. Application procedure.
(a) No person who is a landscaper or snow remover shall conduct
landscape or snow removal activities or remove any landscape
materials or snow or transport the same through or upon any street,
avenue, parkway, road, boulevard or highway within the City of Olean,
unless he or she shall have first obtained a license from the Code
Enforcement Office and shall have agreed to conform to the provisions
of this chapter.
(b) Failure to comply with this section shall constitute a violation of this
section and shall be punishable by a fine in the amount of $250. This
shall be in addition to any other penalty provided in the Code of the City
of Olean or in any other law.
(a) All landscapers and/or snow removers shall apply to the Code
Enforcement Office for a license upon forms to be furnished by said
Office. In addition to the license, a vehicle tag for each motor vehicle,
including trailers, is to be used in the furtherance of the landscape and/
or snow removal business.
(b) The license application shall specify the following:
(1) Name, address, telephone number and New York State tax
identification number of the landscaper and/or snow remover.
(2) Name, address and telephone number of each principal partner or
corporate officer of the landscaper and/or snow remover.
(3) Make, serial number, license number and load capacity of each
motor vehicle, including trailers, to be utilized by the landscaper
and/or snow remover and a current copy of each vehicle
registration for which a vehicle tag shall be issued.
(c) All new applications and the renewals therefor shall be referred to the
Chief of Police for his or her investigation regarding the moral
character of the applicant and an incident history of the applicant, with
a recommendation for approval or disapproval of the application. All
recommendations for disapproval must state the reason for such
disapproval in writing.
(d) The City of Olean reserves the right to make unannounced, periodic onsite
inspections during business hours to ensure compliance with all
applicable laws and ordinances.
(e) Tags for motor vehicles shall be placed on the center top of the
windshield in line with the rearview mirror.
(f) A substitute replacement tag shall be issued upon the payment of a fee
for each replacement, upon the filing of an affidavit or such other proof
as may be required by the Commissioner of Permit and Inspection
Services.
Sec. 13-391 OLEAN CODE Sec. 13-393
C:420
Sec. 13-393. Insurance.
The applicant shall furnish a certificate from an insurance company licensed
to do business in the State of New York, evidencing that the applicant and
any motor vehicles are covered by general liability, personal injury and
property damage insurance and shall provide evidence that employees of
the applicant are covered by workers' compensation or by an exemption
certificate meeting the requirements of the State of New York and
containing a ten-day notice of cancellation clause directed to the
Commissioner of Permit and Inspection Services, before any license
hereunder shall be issued.
Sec. 13-394. Reporting of active licenses.
Sec. 13-395. Availability of Active License Summary Report on
City's website.
Sec. 13-396. Regulation of landscaper services.
(a) It shall be the duty of the Code Enforcement Office to ensure that, at all
times, an up-to-date Active License Summary Report is maintained
which shall contain the name, address, telephone number and New
York State tax identification number of each person in possession of an
active license approved pursuant to this chapter.
(b) It shall be the duty of the Commissioner of Permit and Inspection
Services to ensure that a copy of the Active License Summary Report
referenced in Subsection (a) of Section 13-394 shall be filed with the
City Clerk for review by the Common Council at the following times:
(1) Each year, no later than the filing deadline established by the
Common Council for its first regularly scheduled meeting held in
the month of December.
(2) Whenever any change shall occur in the status of an active license
approved pursuant to this chapter, including but not limited to
revocation or expiration of a license.
(3) At any other times as the Common Council may direct.
(a) It shall be the duty of the City Clerk, whenever an Active License
Summary Report shall be filed with his or her office pursuant to Section
13-394, to ensure that a copy of such report is forwarded to the Director
of Management Information Systems.
(b) It shall be the duty of the City's Data Processing Department, whenever
he or she shall be forwarded a copy of an Active License Summary
Report by the City Clerk pursuant to Subsection (a) of this section, to
ensure that a copy of the most recently received Active License
Summary Report shall be made available for public viewing and
downloading on the City website.
Sec. 13-393 CHARTER Sec. 13-396
C:421
Sec. 13-397. Enforcement.
This article shall be enforced by the Code Enforcement Office and the City
of Olean Police Department and such other departments or persons as may
be designated by the Mayor.
Sec. 13-398. Suspension and revocation of license; hearings;
penalties for offenses.
Sec. 13-399. Expiration and transferability of license.
Sec. 13-400. License and renewal fees.
Fees for license as a landscape contractor and/or snow removal contractor
shall be in addition to any other license under this chapter and shall be:
(a) Landscape material for disposal in the City of Olean shall not contain
any foreign objects, such as stone, brick, concrete, plastic or metal.
(b) Burning of landscape material within the City of Olean is prohibited.
(c) All landscape materials shall be removed from the serviced property by
the landscaper and be transported to the City of Olean composting
facility for disposal or composted at the landscaper's facility.
(d) The placing or dumping of landscape material on public highways,
public places or private property is prohibited.
(a) All persons holding a license as a landscape contractor and/or snow
removal contractor shall be subject to the rules and proceedings as
contained in Section 13-376 relating to hearings and decisions on
charges arising from complaints or improper conduct.
(b) In addition to a license revocation by the City of Olean, a violation of
any provision of this chapter by a person shall be deemed an offense
punishable by a fine not to exceed $1,500 or imprisonment for a period
not to exceed 15 days, or both.
(a) Each license and vehicle tag shall expire on the first day of November in
each year.
(b) No license or vehicle tag issued under this chapter shall be transferable
or assigned or used by any person other than the one to whom it is
issued.
(1) Annual license (November 1 through October 31): no fee.
Sec. 13-396 OLEAN CODE Sec. 13-400
C:422
ARTICLE VIII
CHARITABLE SOLICITATIONS
DIVISION 1
GENERALLY
Sec. 13-401. Findings. [Ord. No. 57-95, § 1, 9-12-1995]
The Common Council finds that support of charitable organizations by the
contribution of money and time by interested residents of the City is to be
encouraged and that the public good will be served by requiring certain
organizations intending to solicit the community door-to-door to register
with the City Clerk in order that those who may choose to support those
organizations will have ready access to certain information concerning the
organization.
Sec. 13-402. Definitions. [Ord. No. 57-95, § 2, 9-12-1995]
For the purpose of this article, the following words shall have the same
definition as provided by New York Executive Law Article 7-A, Section
171-a: Charitable organization, contribution, person, professional fund
raiser, professional solicitor, commercial coventure, membership, solicit,
law enforcement agency.
Sec. 13-403. through Sec. 13-410. (Reserved)
Sec. 13-401 CHARTER Sec. 13-403
C:423

DIVISION 2
DOOR-TO-DOOR SOLICITATION
Sec. 13-411. Registration required. [Ord. No. 57-95, § 3, 9-12-1995]
It shall be unlawful for charitable organizations to engage in residential
door-to-door solicitation of money unless the charitable organization has
been registered with the City.
Sec. 13-412. Registration requirements. [Ord. No. 57-95, § 4,
9-12-1995]
Charitable organizations desiring to engage in residential door-to-door
solicitation within the City shall register with the City Clerk at least three
days before the first solicitation. The registering organization shall provide
the following information: name of soliciting organization; address of
organization; federal identification number; date(s) of solicitation; names
and social security number of persons soliciting, (only if such persons are
paid); evidence of registration with the State of New York in accordance
with Article 7-A of the New York Executive Law; and a copy of the charity's
most recent NY State DOS 497; annual financial report; together with all
accompanying IRS 990 Form and audited financial reports.
In the event a professional fund raiser or professional solicitor is doing
the solicitation on behalf of the charity the following further information is
required: Name of the professional fund raising organization, its address, its
federal ID number, copy of its contract with the charity, and if not otherwise
disclosed percentage of charitable donation retained by professional fund
raiser.
In the event the applicant charitable organization is not required to file
annual financial reports in accordance with Article 7-A of the New York
Executive Law, the City Clerk shall obtain such additional information as
may establish the applicant is a bona fide charitable organization.
All applicants shall register with the City Clerk who shall require the
counter signature of the Police Chief on the registration.
Upon receipt of the registration requirements the City shall issue a license
without fee for the date(s) requested.
Sec. 13-413. Exemptions. [Ord. No. 57-95, § 5, 9-12-1995]
This division shall not apply to the following organizations and persons:
(1) Religious organizations including charities, agencies and organizations
operated, supervised or controlled by or in connection with a religious
organization.
(2) An educational organization registered with the regents of the State of
New York.
Sec. 13-411 CHARTER Sec. 13-413
C:425
Sec. 13-414. Violations and penalty. [Ord. No. 57-95, § 6, 9-12-1995]
Violation of a provision of this division shall be unlawful subject to the
general penalties as provided by this Code.
Sec. 13-415. through Sec. 13-500. (Reserved)
(3) Organizations registered with the State of New York having as a
business address a location in Cattaraugus County, New York.
Sec. 13-413 OLEAN CODE Sec. 13-415
C:426
ARTICLE IX
BODY ART
DIVISION 1
BODY PIERCING
Sec. 13-501. Findings and purpose. [Res. No. 16-05, 3-8-2005; Res.
No. 19-06, 3-14-2006]
Sec. 13-502. Definitions. [Res. No. 16-05, 3-8-2005; Res. No. 19-06,
3-14-2006]
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, firm, association, trust, company,
joint venture or corporation.
Sec. 13-503. (Reserved) [Res. No. 16-05, 3-8-2005; Res. No. 19-06,
3-14-2006]
Sec. 13-504. Determination of "for compensation." [Res. No. 16-05,
3-8-2005; Res. No. 19-06, 3-14-2006]
If the body piercing is offered in conjunction with the sale of an item of
jewelry actually being used in connection with the body piercing, then that
service shall be deemed to have been provided for compensation.
Sec. 13-505. Penalties for offenses. [Res. No. 16-05, 3-8-2005; Res.
No. 19-06, 3-14-2006]
Any person who knowingly and willfully violates this article shall be guilty
of a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of up to $500 and up to six months
in jail.
(a) The City of Olean finds and determines that there is presently no law
relating to the practice of body piercing within the City of Olean. The
City of Olean wishes to protect the health, well-being and safety of its
citizens relating to the body piercing industry within the City of Olean.
(b) The City further finds that the practice of body piercing involves the
penetration of skin, which if done improperly can lead to potential
health risks.
(c) The City of Olean further finds and determines that a growing number
of minors are engaging in the practice of body piercing. Therefore, the
purpose of this article is to prohibit the body piercing of minors,
pursuant to the City's exercise of its inherent power to protect the
public health, safety and general welfare of its citizens.
Sec. 13-501 CHARTER Sec. 13-506
C:427
Sec. 13-506. Exception. [Res. No. 16-05, 3-8-2005; Res. No. 19-06,
3-14-2006]
The prohibition contained in this article shall not apply in those instances in
which at least one parent or legal guardian of such individual under the age
of 18 years consents, in writing, to such body piercing. This writing shall
be notarized and filed in person at the place of business where the body
piercing takes place.
Sec. 13-507. Applicability. [Res. No. 16-05, 3-8-2005; Res. No.
19-06, 3-14-2006]
This article shall apply to actions occurring on or after the effective day of
this article.
Sec. 13-508. through Sec. 13-599. (Reserved)
Sec. 13-506 OLEAN CODE Sec. 13-508
C:428
ARTICLE X
[AddedSE3C-2O4N-2D0H1A5NBDy DREesA.L NEoR.S 15-15]
DIVISION 1
GENERALLY
Sec. 13-600. Purpose; legislative authority.
The purpose of this article is the protection of government, order, conduct,
the general welfare, safety, morals, health and well-being of the persons and
property of the City of Olean. It is adopted pursuant to Municipal Home
Rule Law § 10, Subdivision 1(ii)(a)(11) and (12), § 10, Subdivision 2, and
General City Law § 20(13).
Sec. 13-601. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
DEALER IN SECONDHAND ARTICLES — Any person, corporation,
partnership, association, limited-liability corporation, and the agents,
associates or employees thereof who, in any way or as a principal broker or
agent specifically, but not limited to:
SECONDHAND ARTICLE — Any goods sold at resale, except as specifically
provided for herein.
Deals in the purchase or sale of any secondhand manufactured article
composed wholly or in part of gold, silver, platinum or other metals; or
(1)
(2) Engages in melting previous metals for the purpose of selling; or
Deals in the purchase or sale of any secondhand article, including
but not limited to any used electrical appliance, electronic equipment,
component parts or tools.
(3)
Sec. 13-600 CHARTER Sec. 13-601
C:429

DIVISION 2
LICENSE AND RECORDS
Sec. 13-602. License required; exceptions.
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person, within the limits of the City or Cityowned
facilities, to engage in or carry on the business of collecting,
buying, selling, or otherwise dealing in secondhand articles, as defined
under this division, without currently possessing a valid license to deal
in secondhand articles as provided in this division.
(b) Nothing contained in this division shall be construed to apply to:
(1) Pianos, books, magazines, rugs, tapestries, artists' burlaps,
paintings, sculpture, drawings, etchings, engravings, motor
vehicles and motorcycles;
(2) The acceptance or receipt of merchandise which is not secondhand
as a return, exchange, or for credit or refund if such merchandise
was originally purchased as new merchandise from the person
accepting or receiving the same, nor to the resale of such
merchandise;
(3) The acceptance or receipt of secondhand merchandise as a return,
trade-in, exchange, or for credit or refund if such merchandise was
originally purchased as new merchandise from the person
accepting or receiving the same, nor to the first subsequent sale or
exchange of such merchandise to any person other than an ultimate
consumer;
(4) The first sale, at retail, of merchandise which has been rebuilt by
the manufacturer or vendor originally manufacturing it, or the
licensed agents thereof, and sold as factory rebuilt merchandise;
(5) The sale of any item sold at a garage sale, yard sale, estate sale, or
moving sale (collectively referred to herein as "garage sale"),
provided that all of the following conditions are met:
a. The garage sale is held on residential property owned, rented,
leased, or occupied by the seller or by at least one seller if
there are multiple sellers; and
b. The items offered for sale are owned by the seller, and/or the
seller is authorized by the owner to sell said items;
c. The garage sale does not exceed a period of 96 consecutive
hours;
d. The seller does not conduct more than three garage sales in
any consecutive twelve-month period;
e. None of the items offered for sale were purchased by the seller
for resale or received on consignment for purposes of resale.
Sec. 13-602 CHARTER Sec. 13-602
C:431
Sec. 13-603. Application for license contents.
(6) The sale of used furniture, used clothing, used baby/children's
items, or household goods;
(7) Any transaction involving the sale or disposal of secondhand
articles regulated by state or federal law;
(c) No license granted under this division shall be assignable.
(a) Any person desiring to obtain the license required by this division shall
file with the City Clerk a written application upon a blank form
prepared and furnished by the City. Such application shall contain the
following:
(1) The exact name, residence and telephone number of the applicant,
if an individual, partnership or firm; or
(2) The names of the principal officers and their residences, if the
applicant is an association or corporation; or
(3) The name, business address, residential address, and telephone
number of the operator of such business if other than the applicant.
(b) Such applicant shall also describe in detail the character of the
business in which he desires to engage and the kind of materials he
desires to collect, buy, sell, or otherwise deal in.
(1) He shall also state the following:
a. Whether the applicant is licensed to sell old metal in
accordance with General Business Law Art. 6 (§ 60 et seq.).
b. The length of time such applicant, if an individual, or operator,
if the applicant is a firm, partnership, corporation or
association, has resided in the City; his place of previous
employment; whether he has been convicted of a felony or
misdemeanor and, if so, for what offense, when, and in what
court.
c. The premises where such business is to be located or carried
on, giving street and number.
d. The days and hours during which such business will be
customarily open to the public.
e. Such other information that may be required by the Mayor.
(2) Such application shall be signed and acknowledged before a notary
public or other officer authorized to administer oaths in the City.
(c) The Police Chief or his designee shall review and, at his discretion,
grant approval of this license.
Sec. 13-602 OLEAN CODE Sec. 13-603
C:432
Sec. 13-604. Applicability and enforcement.
This division shall have applicability within the City and at facilities owned
and operated by the City wherever located. The City of Olean Police
Department shall enforce the provisions of this division.
Sec. 13-605. Record of purchases.
(d) The fee for the processing of an application for a license under this
division shall be $25. [Amended 9-22-2015 by Res. No. 85-15]
(a) Every dealer in secondhand articles shall keep a book in which shall be
legibly written, in English, the following:
(1) The time of every purchase; and
(2) A description of every article so purchased, including the number
or numbers and any monograms, inscriptions or other marks of
identification that may appear on such article; and
(3) A description of the articles or pieces comprising old gold, silver,
platinum, or other metals, and any monogram, inscription or marks
of identification thereon; and
(4) In the case of precious metals, jewelry, and gems, a photograph of
the article; and
(5) The secondhand dealer shall require identification from the seller
which contains the name, residence and a general description, and
record in his book the name and residence from whom such
purchase was made.
(b) Such book, at all reasonable times, shall be open to the inspection of
any police officer, to the Police Chief or his designee, or any judge of the
criminal court, or any person duly authorized, in writing, for such
purposes by the Commissioner or by any judge of the criminal court,
who shall exhibit such written authority to the dealer.
(c) The burden of proof that an article was originally purchased from the
person accepting or receiving it, that it was the first subsequent sale or
exchange thereof to a person other than an ultimate consumer or that it
was a first sale at retail of such factory rebuilt merchandise shall be
upon the person asserting the same.
(d) Records retention/inspection.
(1) Every secondhand dealer shall maintain for a period of five years
all of the information required in Subsection (a). Computerized
records may be used to satisfy the requirements of this division,
provided that such records include the required information and
are available upon reasonable request for inspection in printed
format.
Sec. 13-603 CHARTER Sec. 13-605
C:433
Sec. 13-606. Holding period.
A holding period applies if there is an alteration or disposal of property
within less than 10 days, but a secondhand dealer can seek release from the
holding provision by application to the Chief of the Police Department or his
designee along with providing of any inspection or description required for
such determination.
Sec. 13-607. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 9-22-2015 by Res.
No. 85-15]
Any licensee under this division who commits or permits any acts in
violation of the provisions of this division shall be deemed to have
committed an offense against such division and shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor, and also liable for any such violation or the penalty therefor,
including a fine not less than $250. Each day any violation of any provision
shall continue shall constitute a separate offense.
Sec. 13-608. Revocation of license.
Upon failure of the licensee who shall have received a license under this
division to comply with any or all of the terms applicable, the Police Chief
may, at any time, revoke the permit granted to such licensee, and it shall be
grounds for denial of license application under this division.
Sec. 13-609. Severability.
If any provision, sentence or clause of this division is held unconstitutional,
illegal or invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such findings shall
not affect or impair any of the remaining provisions, sentences or clauses or
their application to persons and circumstances.
Sec. 13-610. through § 13-699. (Reserved)
(2) On or before 10:00 a.m. every Tuesday, every secondhand dealer
shall forward to the Police Chief, on electronic forms provided by
the Police Chief, a copy of the seller information required by
Subsection (a) of this section for each secondhand article acquired
in the immediately preceding seven days, and shall cause such
forms to be delivered via electronic mail to the Police Chief at the
address designated on said form. Photographs of precious metals,
jewelry and gems shall not be required to be transmitted with these
forms.
(3) Failure to maintain the records required by this section shall
constitute a presumptive evidence of a crime.
Sec. 13-605 OLEAN CODE Sec. 13-610
C:434
Chapter 14
MISCELLANEOUS OFFENSES AND PROVISIONS
CROSS REFERENCES
Noise, ch. 15 Traffic, ch. 24.
STATE LAW REFERENCES
Authority to legislate for the public peace,
health, safety and welfare, General City Law
§ 20(13).
Trespass, Penal Law § 140.00 et seq.
Sec. 14-1. Unauthorized entry upon public storage reservoir lands
prohibited. [Code 1971, § 18-5]
Sec. 14-2. Spitting. [Code 1971, § 18-6]
Spitting is hereby prohibited either on the sidewalk, crosswalk, or footway
of any public street, way, park, or square; upon the floor of any hall or office
in any hotel, apartment house, tenement, or lodging house which is used in
common by guests or tenants thereof; or upon the floor, platform, steps, or
stairs of any public building, hall, church, theater, railway station, store, or
factory, streetcar, or other public conveyance in the city.
Sec. 14-3. Open alcoholic beverage containers. [Code 1971, § 18-8]
(a) Any person who enters upon the public storage reservoir lands in the
city without first having obtained permission shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor.
(b) Permission to enter upon public storage reservoir lands must be
obtained from the public works department of the city and must be in
writing.
(c) Public storage reservoir lands must be posted by appropriate signs not
more than 250 feet apart.
(a) Purpose of section. This section is enacted to regulate the possession of
open containers of alcoholic beverages by persons on public lands
except under controlled conditions. The unrestricted and unregulated
possession of such containers is detrimental to the health, safety, and
welfare of the inhabitants of the city, and such uncontrolled possession
contributes to the development of unsanitary conditions and the
creation of nuisances within the city.
(b) Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following terms shall
have the meanings ascribed to them. All other words shall have the
meanings normally ascribed to them in regular usage.
Sec. 13-610 CHARTER Sec. 14-3
C:435
Chapter 15
NOISE
CROSS REFERENCES
Environmental control, ch. 8.
Miscellaneous offenses and provisions, ch. 14.
Nuisances, ch. 16.
STATE LAW REFERENCES
Authority to legislate for the public peace,
health, safety and welfare, General City Law
§ 20(13).
Sec. 15-1. Short title of chapter. [Code 1971, § 19-1]
This chapter shall be known as the Anti-Noise Ordinance.
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE — Includes alcohol, liquor, wine, beer, cider,
and every other liquid, patented or not, containing alcohol, wine, or
beer and capable of being consumed by a human being.
CONTAINER — Any bottle, can, glass, or other receptacle suitable for
or used to hold any liquid.
PUBLIC LANDS — Any highway, street, sidewalk, park, playground,
public parking lot, or other public land.
(c) Possession on public lands prohibited. No person shall have in his
possession any open container of an alcoholic beverage on any public
land within the city.
(d) Exceptions to prohibition. Application for a waiver of the foregoing
prohibition may be made to the city clerk in the event of any cityapproved
community gathering, entertainment, or controlled meeting,
which application must be approved by the common council and which
application will allow a waiver to any city-approved gathering, event, or
meeting, and which waiver will allow consumption of alcoholic
beverages to be permitted on those portions of public lands wherein the
gathering will be conducted and during those hours when the function
is open to the public.
(e) Applicability of provisions. This section shall apply to all persons on
public lands in the city, except as provided in this section.
(f) State law excepted. This section, by its terms, does not apply to conduct
addressed by Vehicle and Traffic Law § 1227.
Sec. 14-3 OLEAN CODE Sec. 15-2
C:436
Sec. 15-2. Exemptions from chapter. [Code 1971, § 19-5]
Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed to prevent the
production of music in connection with any military, civic, or authorized
parade, funeral procession, or religious ceremony, nor to prevent any
musical performance conducted under the consent of municipal authorities,
or noncommercial events conducted by the national, state, county, or
municipal government.
Sec. 15-3. Aircraft. [Code 1971, § 19-2]
The making of any noise in any street, park, or public place in the city by
means of any aircraft by operation of sound producing or sound amplifying
equipment thereon for any purpose whatsoever is prohibited.
Sec. 15-4. Noise-making equipment—Commercial business or
advertising purposes. [Code 1971, § 19-3]
Sec. 15-5. Same—Noncommercial purposes; permit. [Code 1971,
§ 19-4]
(a) The advertisement or calling of attention to any advertisement, article,
business, calling, or profession upon any public street, sidewalk, park,
or public place or entrance to a place of business, building, or premises
within the city by means of any horn, musical instrument, whistle,
megaphone, siren, bell, radio, mechanical piano, phonograph, or other
sound producing or sound amplifying mechanism, instrument, or
device, is prohibited.
(b) The operation and use in or upon any automobile, truck, or other
vehicle or conveyance upon any public street, park, or public place
within the city of any horn, mechanical instrument, megaphone, siren,
bell, radio, mechanical piano, phonograph, or other sound producing or
sound amplifying mechanism, instrument, or device for such
commercial, business, or advertising purposes, is hereby prohibited.
(c) Subsection (b) of this section shall not apply to duly authorized public
parades, that is, parades of public interest, as contrasted with private
parades conducted for commercial purposes.
(a) The operation and use in and upon any building, structure, premises; on
any street, park, or public place; or on any automobile, truck, or other
vehicle or conveyance, of any sound producing or sound amplifying
mechanism, instrument, or device, producing or reproducing the
human voice and speech only, whereby the sound of such voice and
speech is cast upon the public streets, parks, and places shall not be
deemed a violation of this chapter under the following conditions and
circumstances, with complete compliance with all requirements of this
section, the proper application for issuance of a permit, and the proper
use of the permit mentioned in this section:
Sec. 15-2 CHARTER Sec. 15-5
C:437
(1) Such use and operation shall be on matters of public interest and
concern or religious purposes only.
(2) Such volume of sound of the human voice shall be so controlled that
it will not be audible for a distance in excess of 100 feet from its
source, and so that such volume is not unreasonable, loud, raucous,
jarring, disturbing, or a nuisance to persons within the area of
audibility. No sound amplifying equipment shall be operated with
an excess of 15 watts of power in the last stage of amplification.
(3) The only sounds permitted are human speech, voice, and music.
(4) No such sound amplifying equipment shall be permitted to be used
so as to interfere with and be disturbing to any public gathering
lawfully assembled within audible range of such sound equipment
and assembled for purposes other than to hear the program
emanating from such sound equipment.
(5) No such sound amplifying equipment placed upon a sound truck,
vehicle, or other conveyance shall be continued in operation while
such sound truck, vehicle, or conveyance is in motion or in transit.
(6) Sound shall not be issued within 500 feet of hospitals, schools, or
churches.
(b) No person shall use or cause to be used a sound truck with its sound
amplifying equipment for noncommercial purposes in the city before
filing a registration statement with the city clerk in writing. This
registration statement shall be filed in duplicate and shall state the
following:
(1) Name and home address of applicant.
(2) Address of place of business of applicant.
(3) License number and motor number of the sound truck to be used by
applicant.
(4) Name and address of person having direct charge of sound truck.
(5) Name and address of all persons who will use or operate the sound
truck.
(6) The purpose for which the sound truck will be used.
(7) The place in the city in which the sound truck will be used.
(8) The proposed hours of operation of the sound truck.
(9) A general description of the sound amplifying equipment which is
to be used.
(c) The city clerk shall return to each applicant under this section one copy
of the registration statement, duly certified by the city clerk as a correct
Sec. 15-5 OLEAN CODE Sec. 15-5
C:438
Chapter 16
NUISANCES
CROSS REFERENCES
Definitions and rules of construction
generally, § 1-2.
Animals, ch. 5.
Dangerous buildings, § 6-236 et seq.
Environmental control, ch. 8.
Health and human services, ch. 10.
Housing code, ch. 12.
Junk dealers license, § 13-141 et seq.
License to operate junkyards, § 13-201 et seq.
Noise, ch. 15.
Solid waste, ch. 20.
Trees and shrubs, § 21-56 et seq.
Water, sewer and sewage disposal, ch. 27.
STATE LAW REFERENCES
Authority to legislate for the public peace,
health, safety and welfare, General City Law
§ 20(13).
copy of the application. Such certified copy of the application shall be
in the possession of any person operating the sound truck at all times
while the sound truck and sound amplifying equipment is in operation.
The copy shall be prominently displayed and shown to any policeman of
the city upon request.
Sec. 15-5 CHARTER Sec. 15-5
C:439

ARTICLE I
IN GENERAL
Sec. 16-1. Lots or excavations containing stagnant water, etc., to be
filled or drained. [Code 1971, § 14-1]
When any lot or any part of any lot or excavation on any land in the City
shall, from any cause whatever, become, in whole or in part, the repository
of stagnant water, or of any decaying or offensive substance, liquid or solid,
it shall be the duty of the owner, lessee, or agent of such owner, if so
ordered by the building inspector to cause such lot, part of lot, or premises
to be filled with clean dirt, earth, or ashes, or other sanitary or inoffensive
substances, or cause the proper drainage of the area, or both, within 10
days as given in a written notice from the building inspector.
Sec. 16-2. Abatement of noxious weeds and grass. [Code 1971,
§ 14-2; Res. No. 98-90, §§ A—F, 7-24-1990; Res. No. 107-04,
10-26-2004; Res. No. 54-07, 7-24-2007]
(a) Owner's responsibility. It is hereby declared to be a nuisance for any
owner of lands within the City to fail to cut or cause to be cut down all
Canadian thistle, milkweed, sweet clover, or other noxious weeds
growing on the land of such owner. It shall be the duty of such owner of
the land to cut such weeds or cause to be cut, in each year, between
June 1 and July 1, and so often as shall be sufficient to prevent the
noxious weeds from going to seed.
(b) Height requirements. It is hereby declared to be a nuisance, and it shall
be the duty of the owner of lands within the City to cut or cause to be
cut, as required, the grass and weeds in such a manner that the weeds
and grass shall not exceed eight inches in height at any time between
May 1 and October 15 of each year.
(c) Enforcement; notice; lien. The Code Enforcement Office shall have the
authority and power to enforce such ordinance and shall notify the
owner of the lands affected in the event of a violation. The notice shall
be in writing and shall be personally delivered or mailed to the owner of
the lands by regular mail, and a hang tag with such notice placed on the
door of the property. The notice shall specify the violation and inform
the person to whom it is mailed that such person has five days from the
receipt of the notice to remedy the defect, or the city will cut or cause to
be cut all Canadian thistle, milkweed, sweet clover, other noxious
weeds, and/or all weeds and grass exceeding eight inches in height with
the cost thereof to be charged as a lien to the premises. The owner may
be charged with an offense for violating this section. [Amended
3-25-2014 by Res. No. 18-14]
(d) Owner's failure to remove; city abatement procedure; hearing. If, after
five days after the notice is personally delivered or mailed, and placed
on the door of the property as provided for in Subparagraph (c), the
Sec. 16-1 CHARTER Sec. 16-2
C:441
Sec. 16-3. Abandoned vehicles. [Code 1971, § 18-7; Res. No. 123-93,
9-15-1993]
owner of the land fails to cut, or cause to be cut, all Canadian thistle,
milkweed, sweet clover, other noxious weeds, and/or all weeds and
grass exceeding eight inches in height, from the lot within five days
after the receipt of notice from the Code Enforcement Officer, the Code
Enforcement Officer may thereafter arrange for the mowing of the
premises and the property owner shall be charged with the cost thereof,
as provided in this section. Within 30 days of the completion of the
work by the City, a notice advising the owner of the property of the
cost of such work shall be sent to the property owner who shall have
seven days to make a written request for a hearing before the Code
Enforcement Officer or his designee. If a hearing is requested, the Code
Enforcement Officer shall mail a notice of the time and place of such
hearing to the owner of lands within the city by regular mail. Notice of
hearing shall set a time and place for the hearing which will be not less
than six or more than 10 days from the date of mailing of the notice
of hearing required under this section. The code enforcement officer or
his designee shall hold a hearing at the time and place set forth in the
notice of hearing. [Amended 3-25-2014 by Res. No. 18-14]
(e) Following the hearing, the code enforcement officer or his designee
shall make written findings of fact. If it is concluded that this section
has been violated, or if there shall have been no request for a hearing
made by the owner, the amount provided by subsection (f) of this
section shall be charged the owner, become a lien on the affected
property, and shall be added to and included with all subsequent tax
bills until paid, commencing with the tax bills on May 1, following
completion of the work. A notice of this amount shall be sent to the
owner of the land and the City Clerk. The City Clerk shall not accept the
City tax on the parcel affected under this section, unless the special lien
created pursuant to this section is paid at that time and place.
(f) The code enforcement officer shall keep separate account of all such
work done on lots within the City and shall forward such account to the
City Clerk, who shall file the lien in accordance with City policies and
procedures. The charges levied by the City for any such work shall be a
minimum of $50 or such greater amount actually expended by the City.
There shall be an administrative fee of a minimum of $50 and not to
exceed $250 above all other fines, fees, expenses and charges to cover
any costs the City incurred. [Res. No. 32-13, 5-28-2013]
(a) No person shall cause any vehicle to be abandoned within the public
streets of the City.
(b) A motor vehicle shall be deemed to be an abandoned vehicle under the
circumstances described in Vehicle and Traffic Law § 1224. Such
vehicles shall be impounded and disposed of in the manner described in
such statute.
Sec. 16-2 OLEAN CODE Sec. 16-3
C:442
Sec. 16-4. through Sec. 16-25. (Reserved)
(c) For violation of the provisions of this section there shall be a fine of at
least $250, not to exceed $1,000.
Sec. 16-3 CHARTER Sec. 16-4
C:443

ARTICLE II
INOPERABLE MOTOR VEHICLES12
Sec. 16-26. Defined. [Code 1971, § 16-83; Res. No. 10-00, 3-14-100]
As used in this article, "inoperable motor vehicle" means any motor vehicle
that:
Sec. 16-27. Outdoor storage on private property; exceptions. [Code
1971, § 16-84; Res. No. 10-00, 3-14-100]
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation, either as owner,
occupant, lessee, agent, tenant, or otherwise, of property within the City to
store or deposit, or cause or permit to be stored or deposited, an inoperable
motor vehicle, or part of piece thereof, on any private property within the
City unless:
(a) Is without license plates for a period of more than 24 hours; or
(b) Fails to display a current registration for a period of more than 24
hours; or
(c) Fails to display a current inspection certification for a period of more
than 24 hours; or
(d) Is in the state of major disassembly, disrepair, or in the process of being
stripped or disassembled for a period of more than 24 hours.
(1) Such motor vehicle is stored or deposited on premises legally used and
operated as a junkyard, automobile repair shop, or automobile sales; or
(2) Such motor vehicle is:
a. Stored or deposited in a completely enclosed building;
b. Is completely covered by a custom or ready-fitted cover designed
and manufactured to cover motor vehicles, such cover to be of a
material commonly used for the purposed of covering motor
vehicle, and maintained in good condition and repair;
(3) Such motor vehicle is under repair, construction, or refurbishing by the
owners thereof, who must actually be residing on the premises; not
more than one such motor vehicle must be so maintained and protected
as not to create any safety hazard or nuisance to surrounding property
owners and shall not remain on the premises more than 15 days in any
twelve-month period of time; or
(4) An owner actually residing on the premises where such a motor vehicle
is stored has applied for and obtained a permit to repair, reconstruct, or
12.Editor’s Note: Res. No. 10-00, Adopted March 14, 2000, Amended Article II §§ 16-26,
16-27, In Their Entirety. Formerly, Said Sections Pertained To Similar Subject Matter. See
The Code Comparative Table.
Sec. 16-26 CHARTER Sec. 16-27
C:445
refurbish such motor vehicle. Written applications to permit such work
shall be made to the fire chief or his designee on forms provided by him.
The enforcement officer, upon approving the application, shall issue a
permit. The permit shall be valid for a period of 30 days from its date
of issuance and shall not be renewed. Only one permit shall be issued
to an owner of any motor vehicle in any twelve-month period of time.
Upon the filing of an application for a permit under the provisions of
this subsection, a filing fee of $5 shall be payable. The enforcement
officer shall maintain a permanent record of all matters considered and
all action taken by him under this article.
Sec. 16-27 OLEAN CODE Sec. 16-27
C:446
Chapter 17
PARKS AND RECREATION
CROSS REFERENCES
Definitions and rules of construction
generally, § 1-2.
Animals, ch. 5.
Trees and shrubs, § 21-56 et seq.
Operating motor vehicles in public parks,
§ 24-255.
Riding bicycles in public parks or
playgrounds, § 24-256.
STATE LAW REFERENCES
Power of city to lay out, establish, etc., parks,
playgrounds and public places, General City
Law § 20(7).
Playgrounds and neighborhood recreation
centers, General Municipal Law § 240 et seq.
Sec. 16-27 CHARTER Sec. 16-27
C:447

ARTICLE I
IN GENERAL
Sec. 17-1. Definition. [Code 1971, § 20-1]
In this chapter "parks and public grounds" mean all the adjacent land to the
curbline of adjoining streets, as fixed by the common council of the city.
Sec. 17-2. Liability of city. [Code 1971, § 20-8]
Any person using any public place, park, playground, street, creek, or river,
for the purpose of recreation, amusement, or bathing, or using any of the
apparatus therein contained furnished therefor by any person within the
city, shall do so at his own risk. The city will not be responsible in any way
for the safety of any child or adult patronizing such places for their private
purposes or otherwise.
Sec. 17-3. Adult baseball and softball leagues. [Res. No. 93-92,
6-9-1992]
All adult softball and baseball leagues must pay a seasonal fee of $75 per
team to reserve fields for adult softball and baseball league play.
Sec. 17-4. through Sec. 17-20. (Reserved)
Sec. 17-1 CHARTER Sec. 17-4
C:449

ARTICLE II
PARK RULES
Sec. 17-21. Charges for events in city park facilities. [Res. No.
47-92, 6-9-1992; Res. No. 92-93, 7-27-1993; Res. No. 3-95,
2-28-1995; Res. No. 61-96, 7-23-1996; Res. No. 92-96, 10-8-1996;
Res. No. 60-97, 6-10-1997]
The city shall charge fees to individuals and organizations for the use of city
recreational facilities as shall be established by time to time by the common
council by resolution.
Sec. 17-22. Injuring or defacing park property generally. [Code
1971, § 20-5]
It shall be unlawful for any person to climb any tree or pluck any flowers or
fruit, whether wild or cultivated, or break, cut down, trample upon, remove,
or in any manner injure or deface any statue, flower bed, turf, or any of the
buildings, fences, bridges, or other structures within the several parks or
public grounds.
Sec. 17-23. Digging or removing dirt, trees, shrubs, or bushes.
[Code 1971, § 20-2]
It shall be unlawful for any person to enter upon any parks or public
grounds and dig or remove any dirt, tree, shrub, or bush which may be in,
upon, or a part of any of such parks or public grounds, except under the
direction of the parks director.
Sec. 17-24. Injuring trees, shrubs, bushes, flowers. [Code 1971,
§ 20-3]
It shall be unlawful for any person to cut down, bruise, cut into, or in any
way injure any tree, shrub, growing bush, or flowers that are at present, or
may hereafter be growing in or upon any of the parks or public grounds.
Sec. 17-25. Cutting, marking, or writing on trees, etc. [Code 1971,
§ 20-4]
It shall be unlawful for any person to cut or mark any name or device or
write upon any tree, paling, fence, rock, stone, bench, statue, building, or
structure situated or located in the parks.
Sec. 17-26. Discharging firearms or fireworks, or throwing stones
or missiles. [Code 1971, § 20-6]
It shall be unlawful for any person to fire or discharge any gun, pistol, or
other firearm; any rocket, torpedo, or other fireworks of any description; or
throw stones or missiles within the several parks or public grounds.
Sec. 17-21 CHARTER Sec. 17-27
C:451
Sec. 17-27. Wilfully killing, injuring or annoying animals or birds.
[Code 1971, § 20-7]
It shall be unlawful for any person to wilfully kill, injure, destroy, annoy,
capture, or in any manner interfere with any squirrel or other animals or
birds placed in the public parks of the city by the common council or by
persons authorized by them to do so.
Sec. 17-28. City parks opening and closing hours. [Code 1971,
§ 20-12; Res. No. 150-93, 10-26-1993; Res. No. 88-94, 9-13-1994]
Sec. 17-29. Gargoyle Park opening and closing hours. [Code 1971,
§ 20-13]
Sec. 17-30. (Reserved)13
Sec. 17-31. Glass beverage containers prohibited in city parks.
[Res. No. 13-95, 3-28-1995]
It shall be unlawful for any person to utilize glass beverage bottles within
city parks except this prohibition shall not apply to wine or liquor bottles.
(a) Except when extended by the parks director, all city parks shall be open
to the public from 6:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. daily.
(b) No person may enter upon any city park during those hours when the
park is not open except for the purpose of crossing over the park on
sidewalks or public ways used for that purpose and kept and
maintained by the city for the purpose of egress and ingress across the
park.
(c) This section shall not be applied to Gargoyle Park.
(a) Gargoyle Park shall be open to the public from 6:00 a.m. to midnight
daily, except as otherwise provided by the parks director.
(b) No person may enter upon Gargoyle Park during those hours when the
park is not open to the public.
13.Editor's note — Res. No. 27-93, adopted March 9, 1993, repealed § 17-30, which pertained
to dispensing, consumption of alcohol at Bradner Stadium prohibited. See the Code
Comparative Table.
Sec. 17-27 OLEAN CODE Sec. 17-31
C:452
Chapter 18
PLANNING AND DEVELOPMENT
CROSS REFERENCES
Boards, commissions, etc., § 2-81 et seq.
Signs, § 3-21 et seq.
Buildings, building regulations and fire
prevention, ch. 6.
Flood damage prevention, ch. 9.
Historic preservation, ch. 11.
Subdivision regulations, ch. 22.
Trailers, trailer camps and tourist camps, ch.
25.
Zoning, ch. 28.
STATE LAW REFERENCES
Statute Local Governments § 10(7).
Municipal planning, General City Law § 26 et
seq.
Official map, General City Law § 26.
Planning boards, General City Law § 27 et seq.
Mandatory provisions, General City Law § 32.
Approval of plats, General City Law §§ 32, 33.
General Municipal Law § 234 et seq.
Sec. 17-31 CHARTER Sec. 17-31
C:453

ARTICLE I
IN GENERAL
Sec. 18-1. Official map. [Code 1971, § 24-1]
Sec. 18-2. through Sec. 18-20. (Reserved)
(a) The map prepared by the department of public works, dated July 31,
1951, and approved by the city planning commission on June 25, 1952,
is adopted as the official map of the city.
(b) The official map of the city adopted by subsection (a) of this section is
hereby declared to be established to conserve and promote the public
health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens of the city.
(c) The clerk of the city is hereby directed and empowered to file with the
clerk of the county a certificate attesting that the city has established
an official map or plan.
Sec. 18-1 CHARTER Sec. 18-2
C:455

ARTICLE II
PLANNING BOARD
Sec. 18-21. Created; composition; terms of members. [Code 1971,
§ 24-2]
There is hereby created under the General City Law of the state and under
the powers vested in the common council, a planning board of and for the
city. Such board shall consist of seven members; two members to hold office
for a term of three years, three members to hold office for a term of two
years, and two members to hold office for a term of one year. Such members
of the board hereby created shall hold office according to the provisions of
General City Law art. 3 [§ 26 et seq.].
Sec. 18-22. Approval of plats. [Code 1971, § 24-3]
For the purpose of providing for the future growth and development of
the city and affording adequate facilities for the housing, transportation,
distribution, comfort, convenience, safety, health, and welfare of the city,
the planning board of the city is hereby authorized and empowered to
approve all future plats showing lots, blocks or sites, with or without streets
or highways.
Sec. 18-23. Filing of certificate in office of county clerk. [Code
1971, § 24-4]
The city clerk is hereby empowered and directed to file a certificate in the
office of the county clerk attesting to the creation of the planning board
and specifying that the city clerk is the officer of the city who shall issue
on behalf of the city the certificate of failure of the planning board to take
action on any application for approval of a plat pursuant to General City
Law art. 3 [§ 26 et seq.].
Sec. 18-24. Powers.
In addition to the powers granted under General City Law art. 3 [§ 26 et
seq.], the planning board has all powers granted to planning commissions
under General Municipal Law art. 12-a [§ 234 et seq.].
Sec. 18-21 CHARTER Sec. 18-24
C:457
Chapter 19
POLICE
CROSS REFERENCES
Identification of police vehicles, § 2-2.
Sec. 19-1. User fees established for certain activities. [Res. No.
62-92, § 25-11, 4-28-1992; Res. No. 35-06, 4-11-2006; Res. No.
49-06, 5-9-2006]
The city hereby establishes user fees to be charged in connection with
the following activities/services performed or rendered by the Police
Department:
Chapter 19.7
SEX OFFENDERS
(1) Escort for bank deposits, per trip. . .$25. Upon the request of any
person residing or operating a place of business in the city, the Police
Department will provide escort services from the place of residence or
business in the city to any bank located in the city. Any such escort shall
be with the consent of the Chief of Police, who may establish such
conditions for the escort as are deemed advisable. The Chief of Police
may decline to provide such service for reasons of public safety. The
applicant for such service shall be required to make advance payment
to the City Clerk of the user fee established by the Common Council. If
there will be required to be disbursed any cost other than for city
services in connection with the escort, such cost shall be collected from
the applicant, in advance, in addition to the user fee charged pursuant
to this section.
(2) Fingerprinting services, per card . . . $20. Upon the request of any
person, subject to the availability of officers to perform fingerprinting
services, and upon the payment in advance of the user fee established
by the Common Council, the Police Department will provide
fingerprinting services to the public. There will be no charge to parents
for having their children fingerprinted.
(3) Research fees . . . $10. Upon request of any person or entity duly
authorized by law to receive a local arrest record check, subject to the
availability of authorized personnel to perform such duties, the Police
Department may provide research services to any person or entity so
authorized to receive the information requested upon receipt of a
signed permission release from the individual. A research fee shall be
charged in an amount established by the Olean Common Council from
time to time.
Sec. 18-24 OLEAN CODE Sec. 19-1
C:458
ARTICLE I
RESIDENCY RESTRICTIONS
Sec. 19.7-1. Legislative intent. [L.L. No. 4-08, 9-23-2008]
The adoption of Megan's Law has increased public awareness of sexual
offenders by requiring them to become registered with authorities and
making such information available to the public. The Common Council of
the City of Olean hereby enacts this chapter to prevent sex offenders from
residing or living near areas where children regularly meet and congregate.
The common Council believes this legislation is necessary to further protect
the best interests of all children and to protect the health, safety and
welfare of residents in the City of Olean.
Sec. 19.7-2. Definitions. [L.L. No. 4-08, 9-23-2008]
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
DAY-CARE CENTER — A licensed nursery or day-care facility for the care of
small children during the day, especially while their parents are at work.14
PARK — A tract of ground kept in its natural state in the City of Olean and
owned by the city of Olean as for gaming, walking, riding or the like.15
PLAYGROUND — A piece of ground in the City of Olean and owned by the
City of Olean which has been set aside for recreational purposes.16
SCHOOL — An institution for teaching children in the City of Olean.17
14.The Olean City Clerk, in collaboration with the City of Olean Police Department Sex
Offender Management Officer, shall prepare a list contemporaneously with the adoption of
this local law identifying the properties and/or facilities situate in the City of Olean which
fall within the above definitions, and said official list shall be on file at the Olean City
Clerk's office and shall be updated and amended as needed on or before February 1 of
each year.
15.The Olean City Clerk, in collaboration with the City of Olean Police Department Sex
Offender Management Officer, shall prepare a list contemporaneously with the adoption of
this local law identifying the properties and/or facilities situate in the City of Olean which
fall within the above definitions, and said official list shall be on file at the Olean City
Clerk's office and shall be updated and amended as needed on or before February 1 of
each year.
16.The Olean City Clerk, in collaboration with the City of Olean Police Department Sex
Offender Management Officer, shall prepare a list contemporaneously with the adoption of
this local law identifying the properties and/or facilities situate in the City of Olean which
fall within the above definitions, and said official list shall be on file at the Olean City
Clerk's office and shall be updated and amended as needed on or before February 1 of
each year.
17.The Olean City Clerk, in collaboration with the City of Olean Police Department Sex
Offender Management Officer, shall prepare a list contemporaneously with the adoption of
this local law identifying the properties and/or facilities situate in the City of Olean which
fall within the above definitions, and said official list shall be on file at the Olean City
Clerk's office and shall be updated and amended as needed on or before February 1 of
each year.
Sec. 19.7-1 CHARTER Sec. 19.7-3
C:459
Sec. 19.7-3. Residency restricted. [L.L. No. 4-08, 9-23-2008]
No person over the age of 18 years who has been convicted of a violation
of a sexual offense upon a child of the age of 16 years or under, as defined
by the New York State Penal Law, which would require that individual
to register as a sex offender under state and/or federal laws, shall be
permitted to reside or live with 1,000 feet of the real property of any school,
park, playground and day-care center, unless such residence has been
assigned by a supervised release program which provides close supervision
of the sex offender's daily activity or the residency of said offender was
established prior to the enactment of this chapter.
Sec. 19.7-4. Penalties for offenses. [L.L. No. 4-08, 9-23-2008]
Failure to comply with this article within 30 days of written notice by
the City of Olean Police Department Sex Offender Management Officer or
designee of the requirements of this article shall be considered a violation
punishable by a fine not to exceed $1,500 or by imprisonment not to exceed
15 days, or both.
Sec. 19.7-3 OLEAN CODE Sec. 19.7-4
C:460
Chapter 20
SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT AND RECYCLING
CROSS REFERENCES
Definitions and rules of construction
generally, § 1-2.
Environmental control, ch. 8.
Health and human services, ch. 10.
Licenses, permits and miscellaneous business
regulations, ch. 13.
Garbage and refuse in residential areas,
§ 12-161.
Nuisances, ch. 16.
Water, sewers and sewage disposal, ch. 27.
STATE LAW REFERENCES
Environmental Conservation Law § 27-0101 et
seq.
Navigation Law § 33-c.
General Municipal Law §§ 120-w, 120-aa.
Vehicle and Traffic Law §§ 377, 380-a, 1220.
Sec. 19.7-4 CHARTER Sec. 19.7-4
C:461

ARTICLE I
IN GENERAL
Sec. 20-1. Definitions. [Res. No. 36-91, § 13-1, 3-26-1991; Res. No.
86-95, 10-24-1995]
Whenever used in this chapter or in the rules and regulations duly adopted
by the common council pursuant to this chapter, the following words or
phrases shall have the respective meanings set forth in this section. Any
word or phrase not defined in this section but which appears in this chapter
in the rules and regulations duly adopted by the common council shall
have the meaning as defined in title 6 of the Official Compilation of Codes,
Rules and Regulations of the State of New York Part 360 (Solid Waste
Management Facilities), or any successor to such part. Any words or
phrases not otherwise defined shall have the meaning in accordance with
their common usage.
ASHES — All substances or material which remain after combustion.
AUTHORIZED AGENT — A person who has been designated to issue
distinctively labeled stickers on behalf of the city and to pay the necessary
fees therefor.
COMMERCIAL — Any motel, hotel, congregate living facilities, boarding
houses, multiple dwelling (four or more units), church, school, mercantile
or service nonprofit or profit making establishments, and multiple dwelling
projects operated by the city housing authority.
DISTINCTIVELY LABELED STICKER — An adhesive sticker of such size,
price, material, and design as may be determined by the common council
to be affixed or attached to refuse containers in the manner prescribed by
the common council for use in the collection and disposal of nonrecyclable
refuse in the city.
DUMPSTER — A refuse receptacle designed to be emptied by mechanical
means into a transport vehicle.
INDUSTRIAL — Any plant, factory, or facility operated for the fabrication,
assembly, or manufacture of products.
PERSON IN CHARGE — An individual, trust, corporation, partnership, firm,
proprietorship, or association that occupies, manages, uses, or controls real
property.
RECYCLABLES — Those items or materials appearing on the official list of
mandatory recyclable materials as adopted by the common council of the
city.
REFUSE — Any waste, putrescible and non-putrescible, permitted to be
disposed of with distinctively labeled stickers attached or affixed pursuant
to the rules and regulations of the city solid waste management program.
RESIDENTIAL — Any building consisting of three or fewer units for the
housing of individuals.
Sec. 20-1 CHARTER Sec. 20-1
C:463
SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT PROGRAM — The ordinance, rules,
regulations, policies, and procedures for disposal of waste generated in the
city.
VEHICLE — A motor vehicle designed or adapted for use in the removal of
garbage, recyclables, and trash.
WASTE — Any ashes, garbage, refuse, white goods, hazardous waste,
infectious waste, yard waste, recyclables, and all other waste material not
otherwise specifically defined.
WHITE GOODS — Washing machines, clothes dryers, refrigerators,
freezers, and all other similar types of materials that are of recyclable value.
YARD WASTE — Grass clippings, weeds, leaves, or brush.
Sec. 20-2. Penalties for violations of chapter. [Res. No. 36-91,
§ 13-18(2), 3-26-1991; Res. No. 9-95, 3-14-1995]
Unless otherwise provided, a person convicted of violating any provision of
this chapter may be punished as follows:
Sec. 20-3. Alternate disposal methods allowed. [Res. No. 36-91,
§ 13-8, 3-26-1991]
Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to prohibit any commercial and/or
industrial establishment from contracting with a public or private disposal
service for removal of waste. Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed
to prohibit any person from disposing or causing disposal of waste at a
transfer station operated by the county.
Sec. 20-4. Administration, enforcement of chapter. [Res. No. 36-91,
§ 13-18(1), 3-26-1991]
The provisions of this chapter shall be enforced by the city police
department. The administration of this chapter shall be by the city clerk and
the director of public works.
Sec. 20-5. Rules and regulations pertaining to waste management
and disposal. [Res. No. 36-91, § 13-7, 3-26-1991)
The common council is hereby empowered to adopt by resolution rules
and regulations pertaining to the city solid waste management program,
including without limitation refuse and recyclables preparation
(1) For a first conviction, by a fine of $100, or imprisonment for 15 days, or
both.
(2) For a second conviction, by a fine of $250, or imprisonment for 15 days,
or both.
(3) For a third and subsequent conviction, by a fine of $500, or
imprisonment for 15 days, or both.
Sec. 20-1 OLEAN CODE Sec. 20-5
C:464
requirements and such other rules and regulations as may be necessary
to effectively and efficiently ensure sound solid waste management and
disposal pursuant to this chapter. Such rules are hereby incorporated by
reference, and compliance with the provisions of this chapter shall require
compliance with such rules and regulations. Such rules and regulations may
be changed from time to time by resolution. Failure to comply with the rules
and regulations shall be unlawful.
Sec. 20-6. Presumption concerning depositing of waste in the city.
[Res. No. 36-91, § 13-14, 3-26-1991]
If waste is placed or deposited within the city, it shall be presumed that such
waste was placed or deposited by and is the responsibility of the person that
may be identified as a result of an inspection of the contents of the container
or bag. If identification cannot be determined by such inspection, it will be
presumed that the waste is the responsibility of the person that owns or
is in charge of the real property where such placement has been made. If
placement of waste is made on a public or private right-of-way, the abutting
private real property will be deemed to be the location of the violation.
Sec. 20-7. License for private collecting, handling, or transporting
of waste. [Res. No. 36-91, § 13-19, 3-26-1991; Res. No. 29-92,
3-24-1992; Res. No. 119-92, 7-28-1992]
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person, other than the city, to engage in the
business for hire of collecting, handling, or transporting through the
streets or public ways of the city any waste originating or generated in
the city. Licensing by the city shall not waive any obligations to obtain
required state or federal permits.
(b) Every person desiring to engage in such business shall make
application to the city clerk by setting forth the name and residence of
the applicant, or the name and place of business, if a firm or
corporation, and pay a fee for such license in the sum of $250 for each
vehicle to be used in the conducting of such business.
(c) Each such license so issued shall expire on May 15 following such date
of issue.
(d) The city clerk shall, before issuing such a license, require the owner to
get written approval from the director of public works to the effect that
the vehicle to be used for such purpose is satisfactorily constructed to
prevent littering the city streets and that tarps, where necessary, are
provided so they shall cover any refuse or bulk that is not otherwise
transported in a totally enclosed container.
(e) Any person violating this section shall be, upon conviction, punished by
a fine of not more than $250, or by imprisonment for not more than 30
days, or by both fine or imprisonment.
Sec. 20-5 CHARTER Sec. 20-8
C:465
Sec. 20-8. Prohibited disposal of waste. [Res. No. 36-91, § 13-2,
3-26-1991]
Sec. 20-9. Disposal of waste from outside the city prohibited. [Res.
No. 36-91, § 13-3, 3-26-1991]
Sec. 20-10. Deposit of materials into waste receptacles located on
city property restricted. [Res. No. 36-91, § 13-4, 3-26-1991]
It shall be unlawful to place any waste into a waste receptacle located
on city property or right-of-way, unless such waste was generated at that
location.
Sec. 20-11. Materials subject to mandatory recycling. [Res. No.
36-91, § 13-5, 3-26-1991]
The common council is hereby empowered to adopt by resolution an official
list of mandatory recyclable materials. This list may be changed from time
to time by resolution of the common council. Failure to recycle waste on this
official list, unless otherwise permitted by the city solid waste management
program, shall be unlawful.
Sec. 20-12. [ecycling exceptions.
The requirement to recycle waste shall not be applicable to any commercial
or industrial business establishment which has a contract with a public
or private disposal service, if such disposal service permits refuse and
recyclables to be comingled, and such waste is otherwise disposed of
properly.
(a) Public property. It shall be unlawful for any person to place, throw, or
deposit or cause to be placed, thrown, or deposited any waste upon any
sidewalk, subway, street, alley, lane, gutter, or any public ground in the
city or into any stream or upon the banks of any stream running
through or adjacent to the city, except when placement is permitted
pursuant to the city solid waste management program.
(b) Private property. It shall be unlawful for any person to place, throw, or
deposit or cause to be placed, thrown, or deposited any waste upon the
private property of another person without the permission of such
person.
(c) Burning or burying. It shall be unlawful for any person to bury or openly
burn or cause to be buried or openly burned any waste within the city
limits, except the composting of organic material shall be permitted.
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to bring in, place, or deposit in the
city any waste originating from outside the city.
(b) It shall be unlawful for any person or person in charge to permit
another to bring in, place, or deposit in the city any waste originating
from outside the city.
Sec. 20-8 OLEAN CODE Sec. 20-13
C:466
Sec. 20-13. Yard waste, white goods. [Res. No. 36-91, § 13-16,
3-26-1991]
Yard waste and white goods shall be disposed of in accordance with the
rules and regulations adopted by the common council from time to time.
Sec. 20-14. Clean-up week. [Res. No. 65-94, 7-26-1994]
Sec. 20-15. Dumpsters. [Res. No. 86-95, 10-24-1995]
(a) The city may from time to time establish a residential clean-up week(s)
during which the city will cause to be picked up and disposed of cleanup
items and materials from curbside on a per lot basis. For this
regulation a "lot" shall be deemed to be each separately identified lot
reflected on the official zoning map of the city. Prohibited items include:
Animal waste; asbestos (including roof and siding shingles containing
asbestos); batteries; concrete; hazardous waste (household or
otherwise); infectious waste; large metal items; paint, solvents, or any
liquids; pipe other than household plumbing pipe one inch diameter or
less, cut into four-inch lengths; railroad ties; refuse and garbage; soil;
tires; white [goods] (stoves, refrigerators, washers, etc.); yard waste
(leaves, twigs, grass clippings, trees).
(b) No clean-up week debris shall be deposited on the public right-of-way
unless a distinctively labeled sticker for that debris has been purchased
from the city and is displayed.
(c) The commingling of debris from two or more lots into one lot shall be
prohibited unless a sticker is purchased for each lot commingling such
debris.
(d) No clean-up debris is to be placed at the curbside more than two days
prior to the appropriate clean-up week as determined and set by the
city.
(a) It shall be unlawful, within the limits of the city to place on any lot
within 25 feet of a required exit of any building, within 10 feet of any
fire department connection to sprinklers or standpipe or controlling
valve or within 15 feet of any hydrant or within a fire lane.
(b) No dumpster may be placed within 25 feet of any natural gas or LPG
tank or regulating device or any storage (except underground) or
dispensing area of any flammable liquids or electrical service.
(c) It shall be unlawful to place or cause to be placed any dumpster within
the city not having fully operational covers and/or doors. Lids and doors
must be closed except when placing refuse in a dumpster or emptying
of it. It shall be unlawful to fill a dumpster to over capacity or prevent
the closing of doors and lids or to prevent the intended operation of the
lids and doors.
Sec. 20-13 CHARTER Sec. 20-16
C:467
Sec. 20-16. through Sec. 20-34. (Reserved)
Sec. 20-16 OLEAN CODE Sec. 20-16
C:468
ARTICLE II
MUNICIPAL COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL SERVICE
Sec. 20-35. Unlawful removal of solid wastes including recyclables.
[Res. No. 50-95, 8-22-1995]
The city may from time to time operate or contract the operation of a
municipal collection and disposal service for solid waste including
recyclables. Unless otherwise authorized by the rules and regulations of
the city solid waste management plan, waste properly left for municipal
collection by the person in charge thereof shall not be taken, removed or
disposed of or cause to be taken, removed or disposed of by any person
except by or with the consent of the city.
Sec. 20-36. Distinctively labeled stickers—Use. [Res. No. 36-91,
§ 13-9, 3-26-1991; Res. No. 50-95, 8-22-1995]
Unless otherwise provided by the city solid waste management program,
it shall be the duty of all persons utilizing city-operated or city-contracted
disposal services for disposal of refuse to separate refuse from waste, and
to prepare, place, and seal such refuse in containers authorized by the rules
and regulations of the city solid waste management program. The city shall
have no obligation to remove any refuse placed for collection, unless there
has been attached or affixed thereto a distinctively labeled sticker having a
value at least equivalent to the volume of refuse to be collected. No person
shall duplicate or imitate any distinctively labeled sticker issued by the city.
No person shall give, sell, or issue a duplicated or imitated distinctively
labeled sticker. Any prohibited action of this section shall be unlawful.
Sec. 20-37. Same—Use by nonresidents. [Res. No. 36-91, § 13-10,
3-26-1991]
It shall be unlawful for nonresidents of the city to purchase or otherwise use
the distinctively labeled stickers for the purpose of depositing garbage and
trash in the city for collection and disposal.
Sec. 20-38. Same—Reuse prohibited. [Res. No. 36-91, § 13-12,
3-26-1991]
It shall be unlawful to reuse, or permit to be reused, a distinctively labeled
sticker that has previously been collected by the city-operated waste
disposal program.
Sec. 20-39. (Reserved)
Editor's Note: Res. No. 48-00, adopted June 12, 2000, repealed § 20-39 in its
entirety. Formerly, said section pertained to the sale of distinctively labeled
stickers by agents. See the Code Comparative Table.
Sec. 20-35 CHARTER Sec. 20-40
C:469
Sec. 20-40. City refuse disposal fee schedule. [Res. No. 36-91,
§ 13-15, 3-26-1991]
The common council shall establish by resolution the fees for the
distinctively labeled stickers which shall be applicable to all users of the
city-operated refuse collection and disposal services. Fees may be changed
from time to time by resolution of the common council.
Sec. 20-41. Hours of collection; commercial and residential
premises. [Res. No. 9-94, 3-8-1994]
Except in areas of the city zoned industrial, it shall be unlawful to collect
refuse, garbage and recyclables at anytime prior to 7:00 a.m. or after 9:00
p.m.
Sec. 20-40 OLEAN CODE Sec. 20-41
C:470
Chapter 21
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
CROSS REFERENCES
Definitions and rules of construction
generally, § 1-2.
Boards, commissions, etc., § 2-81 et seq.
Signs, § 3-21 et seq.
Buildings, building regulations and fire
prevention, ch. 6.
Fires in street, § 6-3.
Moving buildings, § 6-266 et seq.
Nuisances, ch. 16.
Removing trees from parks, § 17-23.
Injuring trees and parks, § 17-24.
Cutting or writing on trees, § 17-25.
LOCAL LAW REFERENCES
Streets and sidewalks, ch. LL5. Improvements, § LL5-16 et seq.
STATE LAW REFERENCES
Power of city relative to streets, General City
Law § 20(7), (10), (11).
Municipal tree conservation, General
Municipal Law § 96-b.
Sec. 20-41 CHARTER Sec. 20-41
C:471

ARTICLE I
IN GENERAL
Sec. 21-1. Obstructing passage of persons on sidewalks. [Code
1971, § 26-1]
It shall be unlawful for any person in any manner to block or impede the
free and unobstructed passage of persons upon the sidewalks of the City,
either by hawking and crying goods and merchandise, attracting a crowd,
or otherwise.
Sec. 21-2. Raising or lowering railroad tracks in streets. [Code
1971, § 26-2]
Any railroad company raising or lowering its rails above or below the
established grade of the City streets must first receive the consent of the
common council.
Sec. 21-3. Gates for stairways to basements. [Code 1971, § 26-3]
Every stairway in any of the streets of the City leading to a basement shall
be protected by an iron gate at the top of the stairway at least 30 inches in
height. Such gate shall be kept closed and fastened at all times when the
rooms to which the stairway leads are not in actual use.
Sec. 21-4. Responsibility of owners of property abutting subways.
The owners of property abutting subways shall maintain the portion of the
subway abutting their property. "Subway," as used in this chapter shall have
the same meaning as provided in section 1-2.
Sec. 21-5. Removal of snow and ice from sidewalks. [Code 1971,
§ 26-4; Res. No. 52-92, 4-14-1992; Res. No. 20-92, 2-23-1993; Res.
No. 140-03; 3-9-2004; Res. No. 14-04, 3-9-2004; Res. No. 22-04,
4-13-2004; Res. No. 53-07, 7-24-2007]
(a) The purpose of section shall be to preserve the public peace and good
order in the City, and to contribute to the public welfare, safety and
good order of its people and to contribute to the safe conveyance of its
people over the streets and sidewalks of the City by establishing certain
regulations for the removal of snow and ice from the streets and
sidewalks of the City that are consistent with the rights and privileges
of other residents of the City.
(b) It shall be the duty of the owner and occupant, jointly, of every parcel of
real estate adjoining a public sidewalk, whether the parcel of real
estate is occupied by a structure or not, to keep such sidewalks
adjoining such property free from snow and ice for the full paved width
of such sidewalk. [Amended 2-14-2017 by Res. No. 02-17]
Sec. 21-1 CHARTER Sec. 21-5
C:473
(1) For those parcels of real estate located in General Commercial and
City Center zoning districts where the paved sidewalk extends
across the full width of the subway to the street, it shall be the duty
of the owner and occupant, jointly, to maintain a passage free from
snow and ice of a width of no less than eight feet.
(2) For those parcels of real estate located in all other zoning districts
where the paved sidewalk extends across the full width of the
subway to the street, it shall be the duty of the owner and occupant,
jointly, to maintain a passage free from snow and ice of a width of
no less than four feet.
(c) Every owner and occupant, jointly, of lands, premises or buildings
fronting on any street or public place within the City shall clear and
remove from the sidewalk along any such lands, premises or buildings
all snow and ice which may at any time be thereon. At no time shall any
portion of any such walk be permitted to be or remain in an icy or
slippery condition.
(d) Snow and ice shall be removed within 24 hours after the end of a
snowfall. In addition, sidewalks in front of commercial establishments
and commercial parking lots shall be kept free of snow and ice at all
times between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m.
(e) It shall be unlawful for any person to use or cause to be used the public
street or any sidewalk for the deposit, piling or placement of plowed or
shoveled snow. Every owner and occupant, jointly, of any lands,
premises or buildings fronting upon any street or public place in the
City shall, upon notification of the Code Enforcement Department, be
required to immediately remove any snow placed or piled contrary to
this provision.
(f) It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit, pile or place, or cause to
be deposited, piled or placed on any corner lot, plowed or shoveled
snow piles greater than 2 1/2 feet in height vertically measured from
the sidewalk grade with the triangular area formed by the intersecting
street lines and a straight line joining such street lines at points which
are 35 feet distant from the point of intersection, measured along said
street.
(g) It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit, pile or place, or cause to
be deposited, piled or placed, plowed or shoveled snow or to blow, or
cause to be blown, snow so as to cover or obstruct accessibility to fire
hydrants.
(h) Nothing contained herein shall prohibit any person from utilizing the
streets, subways, sidewalks or rights-of-way of the City for temporary
deposit, piling or placement of snow in connection with a snow removal
project actually underway.
(i) Removal by City. Whenever the owner or occupant of a parcel of real
estate adjoining a public sidewalk fails to remove the snow and ice from
Sec. 21-5 OLEAN CODE Sec. 21-5
C:474
Sec. 21-6. Deposit of building, paving, sewer, or other materials.
[Code 1971, § 26-5]
It shall be unlawful for any person to use any part of a public street,
sidewalk, subway, or public grounds in the City for the deposit of any
building, paving, sewer, or other materials, except for immediate transfer
of such materials to the premises adjoining the portion of such street,
sidewalk, subway, or public grounds so occupied. No such substance shall
be allowed to remain upon such street, sidewalk, subway, or grounds longer
than until 6:00 p.m. of the same day. The director of public works may,
however, permit any owner of the premises or the contractor for work
thereupon to use the sidewalk and subway and not more than one-third of
the street adjoining any premises for the deposit of any such materials for
a period to be designated by him. In all such cases, the person to whom
such permit is granted shall keep such materials so piled that they shall
not encumber any other portion of such street, subway, sidewalk, or public
grounds and shall, if required by the director of public works, guard such
areas against accidents by suitable barriers and lights at night. In case any
person shall refuse or neglect to comply with the directions of the director
of public works with reference to such material, such refusal or neglect
shall forfeit all rights and privileges under such permit, and such person
shall be liable to the same penalty as if such permit had not been granted.
such sidewalk adjoining such property within the time specified in this
section or within four hours after notice by the City Code Enforcement
Office or Director of Public Works to remove same, the snow and ice
shall be removed by the City of Olean from such sidewalk and the City
Clerk shall be notified of the expense incurred by the amount of labor,
equipment and materials used. The charge shall be not less than a
minimum of $50 or such greater amount equivalent to actual costs and
expenses incurred by the City. There shall be an administrative fee of
a minimum of $50 and not to exceed $250 above all other fines, fees,
expenses and charges to cover any costs the City incurred. [Res. No.
33-13, 5-28-2013]
(j) Collection of the costs for removal by the City. The City Clerk shall
promptly present to the owner and occupant of each parcel a bill for the
removal of snow and ice as certified by the Code Enforcement Office or
Director of Public Works. If not paid within 30 days, the cost thereof
shall be assessed against the property, added to their tax bill and
become a lien thereon, collectible in the same manner as delinquent
City taxes.
(k) Notwithstanding anything contained herein, any property owner who
shall permit snow or ice so as to accumulate and remain upon any
sidewalk adjacent to or abutting on any lot or premises owned by him or
her, in the City of Olean, shall be liable to any party for injuries
sustained as a result thereof.
Sec. 21-5 CHARTER Sec. 21-7
C:475
Sec. 21-7. Depositing or leaving merchandise, boxes, etc. [Code
1971, § 26-6]
Sec. 21-8. Awnings. [Code 1971, § 26-7]
It shall be unlawful for any person to erect or maintain any awning over the
sidewalk on any of the streets of the City at a height of less than seven feet
above the sidewalk. Any person who shall violate this section shall be guilty
of a misdemeanor.
Sec. 21-9. Erection of utility poles and wires. [Code 1971, § 26-8]
(a) Except as otherwise permitted in this section, it shall be unlawful for
any person to deposit or leave any goods, wares, merchandise, boxes,
barrels, tanks, cans, or other receptacles or packages upon any street,
sidewalk, or subway in the City. When any of the aforementioned
articles shall be so deposited upon the street, sidewalk, or subway in
the course of delivery to the person permitting such articles to be
deposited or for the purpose of removing from the premises adjoining
on which such articles are deposited, such articles may be allowed to so
remain upon the sidewalk or subway and next to the curb or curbline of
the street for a period not to exceed two hours from the time of deposit.
(b) The common council of the City, upon application of any vendor, may
permit any vendor to display merchandise on the subway, providing
such display does not extend beyond that vendor's building lines in
excess of 36 inches. Permits for the purposes of such display shall be
effective for a period of one year unless sooner revoked by the common
council in its sole discretion.
(a) No telegraph, telephone, or other similar poles shall be erected in any
of the streets of the City, and no telegraph, telephone, or similar wires
shall be strung over or across any of the streets of the City by any
person who shall not have previously obtained a franchise or consent
granted by the common council.
(b) No telegraph, telephone, or similar poles shall be hereafter erected in
any of the streets of the City by any person, until the person proposing
to erect such poles shall obtain a written permit for the erection thereof
signed by the director of public works. Such permit shall specify the
location where such poles are to be set.
(c) All telegraph, telephone, railway, or electric light or other poles used or
to be used for the stringing of wires by telephone, telegraph, railway, or
electric light and power companies, hereafter set along paved streets or
set along streets which are hereafter paved, shall be placed, under the
supervision of the director of public works, inside the curb. Such pole
shall not be less than six inches, nor more than 12 inches from the curb,
as the director of public works may designate. All such poles, however,
shall be placed under the supervision of the director of public works.
Sec. 21-7 OLEAN CODE Sec. 21-10
C:476
Sec. 21-10. Acceptance of streets by City. [Code 1971, § 26-13]
Sec. 21-11. Curb cuts procedure and fee. [Res. No. 30-92,
3-24-1992; Res. No. 37-13, 6-11-2013; amended 2-9-2016 by Res.
No. 06-16]
The Director of Public Works shall have the power to approve or deny any
curb cut application subject to the procedure herein specified. In making
his determination the Director shall take into consideration the benefit to
the applicant if the application is granted, as weighed against the detriment
to the character of and the impact to on-street parking in the immediate
neighborhood impacted by such application if granted.
Sec. 21-12. through Sec. 21-30. (Reserved)
(a) The City shall not accept as part of the street system of the City any
street not improved with paving and sanitary sewers according to the
requirements of the department of public works in effect at the time of
such acceptance.
(b) The provisions of subsection (a) of this section shall not affect any
unpaved street of the City for which petitions for sanitary sewers have
been submitted and accepted by the City prior to May 22, 1956.
(1) All applications made to the Director shall be in writing, on forms
prescribed by said Director.
(2) Prior to approval or denial of the application, the Director shall set a
public comment period whereby immediate neighborhood property
owners and occupants may comment on the application to the Director
in writing.
(3) All applicants shall mail notices of the application to the owners or
occupants of all lands on the fronting City street on which the curb cut
sought. Such notices shall be postmarked at least 10 days prior to the
expiration of the public comment period, as established by the Director.
(4) Any applicant or property owner noticed under Section 21-11(3) shall
have the right to appeal to the Common Council at the first Council
work session immediately following the determination of the
application by the Director.
(5) The Common Council, on any appeal pursuant Section 21-11(4), by
majority shall have the power to uphold or reverse the decision of the
Director or modify the parameters of any curb cut granted by the
Director under this section.
(6) The fee for any such curb cut made in addition to an existing curb cut
performed by the Department of Public Works shall be charged at $100
per lineal foot.
Sec. 21-10 CHARTER Sec. 21-12
C:477

ARTICLE II
SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION, MAINTENANCE, ETC.
Sec. 21-31. Definitions. [Code 1971, § 26-12.1]
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:
PEDESTRIANS — All persons making use of public streets for foot passage.
SIDEWALK — That portion of a street outside of the roadway used, or set
aside, for the use of pedestrians.
STREET — The entire area conveyed, acquired, or dedicated to public use
and passage. The word "street" shall include in its meaning the words
"avenue," "alley," "drive," "place," or any other words used to designate the
public thoroughfare as defined in this subsection.
Sec. 21-32. Construction of sidewalks—Permit required. [Code
1971, § 26-10]
It shall be unlawful for any person hereafter to construct any sidewalk in
any of the streets of the City, or to replace or reconstruct any sidewalk
or any portion thereof within the streets of the City, until such person
shall have first obtained a written permit from the director of public works
approving of the materials, the grade, width, and other filed specifications,
as required by this article.
Sec. 21-33. Same—Grade and line. [Code 1971, § 26-11]
All sidewalks hereafter constructed in the City shall be laid upon the grade
and line to be established by the director of public works. The permit
provided for in section 21-32 shall specify that such grade and line have
been established and shall require such walk to be built upon the grade and
line so fixed by the director of public works.
Sec. 21-34. Same—Materials. [Code 1971, § 26-12)
It shall be unlawful for any person to lay or construct in or along any of the
streets in the City any sidewalk other than that composed of such materials
as may be specified as suitable for sidewalks by the director of public works
on a set of specifications to be filed in his office.
Sec. 21-35. Maintenance of sidewalks. [Code 1971, § 26-12.1]
(a) It is the privilege, and, on notice from the department of public works, it
shall be the duty of any owner of any premises or parcel of land within
the City to grade and level the sidewalk in front of the premises or
parcel between the street line and the curbline.
Sec. 21-31 CHARTER Sec. 21-35
C:479
(b) The department of public works may, at the expense of the City,
undertake any necessary grading in any area of the City where federal
funds are available in full, or in part, for such grading and leveling.
(c) It shall be the duty of the owner of any premises in the City, whenever
such work shall be ordered by resolution of the common council, to
relay and repair existing sidewalks in front of such premises, whenever
such work shall be so ordered. It shall be the duty of the owner of any
premises in the City to lay new sidewalks when ordered to do so by
resolution of the common council, such resolution having been passed
pursuant to a showing by appropriate City officials to the council that a
new sidewalk is needed pursuant to a plan for the development of the
City, or for reasons of safety or health of its citizens.
(d) The department of public works shall notify the owner of any premises
in front of which such work shall be required to be done that if such
work is not done by the owner within 20 days, such work shall be done
by the City, and the expense thereof shall be assessed upon such
premises. This notice shall also notify the owner that he has 20 days to
show cause before the director of public works why such work should
not be done, is not needed, or can reasonably be delayed. Upon the
request of the owner for a hearing, pursuant to this section, such
hearing shall be scheduled no earlier than five days from the receipt of
such request by an owner. Such notice may be served personally or by
mailing it in the manner prescribed for the mailing of notices and the
mailing of taxes due by the City Assessor. If any such work shall not be
done within the time specified in such notice, the department of public
works may cause such work to be done. The expense thereof shall be a
charge and lien assessed thereon, upon such premises. Where federal
funds are available in whole, or in part, in a code enforcement area, or
an urban renewal project area, the cost of grading, installing, or
replacing sidewalks in that area, may be borne by the City.
(e) Whenever the relocation of any installed sidewalks meeting City
standards is necessitated on account of the construction of a widened
pavement, or any street, the cost or expense therefor shall be paid
solely by the City from the general fund. No part of such cost or expense
shall be assessed against the premises abutting the sidewalk.
(f) The taxes and assessments which are levied for the purpose of paying
the expense of sidewalk installation or improvement shall be payable in
equal annual installments over a five-year period, with interest charges
at the current going rate of investment. Owners of property may have
the option to pay the whole of such improvements so assessed to them
within 15 days from the time of the completion of such assessment-roll.
Such option or privilege may be exercised at the time when any
installment becomes due with the current rate of interest paid.
(g) It shall be the duty of the owner of any premises to keep in repair the
sidewalk in front of his premises and the driveways serving the
premises.
Sec. 21-35 OLEAN CODE Sec. 21-35
C:480
Sec. 21-36. Director of public works to close streets for
maintenance. [Res. No. 168-92, 10-27-1992]
The director of public works or his designee shall have the power to close
or restrict through traffic on all streets of the City or to establish detours
when necessary for water, sewer, or street maintenance, construction, snow
removal, leaf removal, or other similar work.
Sec. 21-37. Installation of sloped sidewalk ramps at pedestrian
crossways required. [Res. No. 114-93, § 1-3, 8-24-1993]
(h) If any owner shall neglect to grade or level the sidewalk in front of lands
owned or occupied by him for 20 days after notice to do so by the
director of public works, the director of public works may cause such
work to be done.
(i) If the owner of any lands, the grade or level of which is above the
established grade of the sidewalk in front of his lands, shall neglect or
refuse to protect such land and to grade such land so as to prevent dirt,
earth, stones, or other material from falling or being washed upon the
sidewalk of such lands, for 20 days after service upon him of notice, the
director of public works shall cause such work to be done.
(j) No person shall construct or reconstruct a sidewalk on any street, until
he shall have obtained written permission to do so from the department
of public works. Permission to construct or reconstruct a sidewalk may
be obtained by the issuance of the department of public works of a
permit. Sidewalks constructed under a permit shall be constructed of
such materials and of such width as may from time to time be specified
by the department of public works.
(k) It shall be the duty of every owner of any premises fronting on any
public street to keep the sidewalk in front of his premises in good order
and repair and to allow no accumulation of dirt, refuse, or other
material to remain thereon.
(a) It is the policy of the City to install ramps or sloping walks at pedestrian
crosswalks at walkways serving state and local government offices and
facilities, transportation, places of public accommodation, and
employers.
(b) It is the policy of the City to install, throughout the City, ramps or
sloping walks at pedestrian crosswalks whenever curb slabs are
replaced.
(c) In order to achieve the policy of the common council, the director of
public works shall permit no sidewalk intersection work or undertake
any such intersection sidewalk work within the City without providing
curb ramps or other sloped areas where pedestrian's walks cross curbs.
For the purpose of this provision, sidewalk intersection work shall be
Sec. 21-35 CHARTER Sec. 21-37
C:481
Sec. 21-38. through Sec. 21-55. (Reserved)
any work undertaken on any concrete block which adjoins the curb or
if not concrete block any work undertaken within the right-of-way.
Sec. 21-37 OLEAN CODE Sec. 21-38
C:482
ARTICLE III
TREES AND SHRUBS
Sec. 21-56. Tree board established. [Code 1971, § 26-30]
Sec. 21-57. Permit to plant trees or shrubs required. [Code 1971,
§ 26-24]
(a) The mayor, with the approval of the common council, shall appoint a
tree board consisting of seven persons, two of whom shall be sitting
members of the common council, and the remaining five members shall
be residents of the City. The president of the common council shall be
an ex officio member of the tree board. The term of the common council
members appointed shall be for two years. The term of the other
members shall be three years, except the term of one appointee to the
first board shall be one year, and two appointees of the first board shall
be for two years. All terms shall expire on December 31. If a vacancy
shall occur during the term of any member, his successor shall be
appointed for the unexpired portion of that person's term.
(b) The members of the tree board shall serve without compensation.
(c) It shall be the responsibility of the tree board to administer the tree
ordinances and to recommend to the common council and/or the
director of public works, as the case may be, such proceedings, acts, or
actions as will support the City tree program. It shall be the
responsibility of the board to study, investigate, counsel, update, and
administer a written plan for the care, preservation, pruning, planting,
replanting, removal, or disposition of trees and shrubs in parks, along
streets, and in other public areas. Such plan will be presented by
annual report to the common council. The board, when requested by
the common council, shall consider, investigate, make findings, report,
and recommend upon any special matter or question coming within the
scope of its work.
(a) No trees or shrubbery shall be planted by abutting landowners nor any
trees removed, between the street line and curbline within the City,
without receiving a permit in writing from the common council.
(b) The permit, if granted, may specify such reasonable terms and
conditions to be required for the proposed action, as may be
determined by the common council.
(c) Any person aggrieved by the action of the common council on
application for a permit may apply to the common council, within 15
days of the issuance of such permit or its denial, for a hearing which
shall be held not less than two nor more than four weeks from the date
of request for hearing. Notice of public hearing shall be given to the
applicant by mail and shall be published once in the Olean Times
Herald.
Sec. 21-56 CHARTER Sec. 21-57
C:483
Sec. 21-58. Tree trimming—Required of property owners. [Code
1971, § 26-25]
All persons owning property in the City abutting upon any street and upon
which there are shade trees along such street shall clean out the dead limbs
and otherwise trim such trees so that the same will not become dangerous
to, obstruct, or interfere with public travel or pedestrians.
Sec. 21-59. Same—Notice. [Code 1971, § 26-26]
All persons required by notice from the director of public works to trim
trees, as required under this article, must proceed to do so within 10 days
after receiving such notice.
Sec. 21-60. Same—Failure to do so. [Code 1971, § 26-27]
In case of failure to trim trees, as required under this article, the director of
public works is hereby authorized to do so, and the expense thereof shall be
collected from the owner or occupant in the usual or ordinary way by suit
and shall become a lien upon the premises.
Sec. 21-61. Same—Permit required by utilities. [Code 1971,
§ 26-29]
Unless acting under a contract with the City, or unless there be a bona fide
emergency, no tree shall be trimmed by any utility company without such
utility company's having obtained a permit from the common council of the
City. Utility companies desiring to obtain such permit may make application
to the common council which shall contain its plan for the trimming and/
or topping of trees. The permit shall be for a term of one year and may
contain such reasonable conditions pertaining to the health and welfare of
the citizens of the City as may be deemed appropriate to the circumstances.
The common council shall act upon each permit application within 60 days
of its receipt.
Sec. 21-62. Poplar trees prohibited. [Code 1971, § 26-28]
No poplar trees shall be placed in the subways of the City, and all poplar
trees are hereby declared to be a nuisance and shall be removed by the
owners thereof upon 15 days' notice from the director of public works.
Sec. 21-63. through Sec. 21-80. (Reserved)
(d) At the time of the hearing, the common council shall hear all persons
wishing to be heard on the application. In its decision on the application
for a permit, the common council may take into account and consider
the effects of the proposed action on the environment; the neighboring
properties; and the safety, health, and welfare of the residents of the
community generally.
Sec. 21-57 OLEAN CODE Sec. 21-63
C:484
ARTICLE IV
EXCAVATIONS
DIVISION 1
GENERALLY
Sec. 21-81. Ratification and confirmation.
All rules promulgated by the common council for this article are ratified and
confirmed.
Sec. 21-82. Barriers and lights. [Res. No. 67-92, § 1, 4-28-1992]
Unless otherwise provided by the rules and regulations of the department
of public works in connection with excavations or obstruction of right-ofway,
any person making or causing to be made an obstruction, excavation
or opening in any street, sidewalk or other public place in the City shall
keep the obstruction, excavation or opening properly guarded at all times in
accordance with the rules or regulations of the department of public works.
No unauthorized person shall remove or interfere in any way with any light,
fence, or barricade at the site of an excavation.
Sec. 21-83. Under supervision of director of public works and in
conformity with article. [Code 1971, § 26-40]
All work under a permit issued pursuant to this article shall be under
the supervision of the director of public works and in conformity with the
requirements of this article.
Sec. 21-84. Starting; diligently and continuously pursued. [Res. No.
67-92, § 2(26-41), 4-28-1992]
All work shall be started within two weeks after the receipt of the permit
under this article and shall be pursued diligently and continuously until
such work is completed.
Sec. 21-85. Size and location. [Code 1971, § 26-42]
In no case shall a person open or remove a greater area of surface or make
any excavation or opening at another location than that specified in the
original or supplementary application for a permit pursuant to this article,
provided that if, at the time of actually doing the work, it shall be necessary
to open or remove a greater area of surface than originally applied for, the
applicant shall first notify and procure the consent of the director of public
works to do so, upon the express condition that he shall and will, before
noon of the following business day, file a supplementary application for the
making of the additional excavation.
Sec. 21-86. Maximum width of street to be opened. [Code 1971,
§ 26-43]
Sec. 21-81 CHARTER Sec. 21-86
C:485
Sec. 21-87. Maintenance of backfilling in paved streets. [Code
1971, § 26-44]
When a permit is granted under this article to open a paved street, the
person securing the permit must maintain the backfilling placed in the
trench at the surface of the contiguous pavement until such time as the
director of public works repairs the pavement. If such person does not
maintain such backfilling, the director of public works shall restore the
backfilling to a proper condition, and any and all expense in connection
therewith shall be borne by the person to whom the permit is granted.
Sec. 21-88. Restoration and maintenance of surface of unpaved
streets. [Code 1971, § 26-45]
When a permit is granted pursuant to this article to open an unpaved street,
the person to whom the permit is granted must leave and maintain, for a
period of one year, the surface of the street in as good condition as it was
previous to any work being done under the permit. If such person does not
maintain the surface of the street in as good condition as it was previous to
any work being done, the director of public works shall restore the street to
its proper condition, and any and all expense in connection therewith shall
be borne by the person to whom the permit was granted, who shall promptly
pay to the City the cost of any such expense before any further permits are
granted.
Sec. 21-89. Repairs and restorations of pavements by director of
public works and payment of cost. [Res. No. 67-92, § 3, 4-28-1992]
If the City shall undertake any work on behalf of any applicant, whether at
the request of the applicant or otherwise, in order to provide for the public
safety, the cost thereof shall be billed to the applicant in accordance with
the fee schedule adopted from time to time by resolution by the common
council.
Sec. 21-90. Enforcement. [Added 6-10-2014 by Res. No. 55-14]
Enforcement of the violations and penalties of this article shall be the
responsibility of the Code Enforcement office.
Sec. 21-91. through Sec. 21-105. (Reserved)
(a) Not more than two-thirds of the width of the street shall be opened at
one time. The other third shall remain untouched for the
accommodation of traffic until one-half of the first two-thirds is restored
for safe use. All work shall be prosecuted so as not to interfere with
easy access to fire houses and fire hydrants.
(b) The common council may waive the provisions of this section.
Sec. 21-86 OLEAN CODE Sec. 21-91
C:486
DIVISION 2
PERMIT
Sec. 21-106. Required. [Code 1971, § 26-52]
Unless acting under a contract with the City, it shall be unlawful for any
person, other than a duly authorized City official or employee in the course
of his employment, to make, or cause or permit to be made, any excavation
or opening in or under the surface or pavement of any street, sidewalk, or
other public place within the limits of the City without first having obtained
and having in force a permit so to do, as provided in this division. In
case of an emergency arising out of office hours, at night, on Sundays, or
legal holidays, when an immediate excavation may be necessary for the
protection of public or private property, such emergency shall be reported
to the police department, which shall grant permission to make the
necessary excavation upon the express condition that an application be
made in the manner provided in this division on or before noon of the next
following business day.
Sec. 21-107. Application. [Code 1971, § 26-53]
Any person desiring to procure a permit, as required by this division, shall
file with the director of public works a written application, stating the name
and business or residence address of the applicant, the name of the street,
or public place in or under which it is desired to make the excavation or
opening, the name and business or residence address of the person for
whose benefit the work is to be done, the lot or street number where the
opening or excavation is to be made, and the time during which it is desired
such opening is to be permitted.
Sec. 21-108. Deposit. [Code 1971, § 26-55; Res. No. 67-92, §§ 5, 6,
4-28-1992]
(a) The person applying for a permit under this division shall deposit cash
or a check with the director of public works in such a sum as in the
judgment of the director of public works will be sufficient to cover the
cost and expense of the repaving, repairing, or restoring of any street,
alley, sidewalk, or other public place in which the excavation or opening
shall be made by such person.
(b) If the opening shall be increased in area, as provided in section 21-85,
such an additional sum shall be deposited with the director of public
works, as in his judgment is necessary.
(c) All moneys and checks so deposited with the director of public works
shall be delivered to the City Clerk and become part of the revenue of
the City. During the month of March of each year, the City Auditor shall
transfer from the revenue fund to the maintenance of streets fund the
total amount of all such moneys from this source, deposited with the
City Clerk since the preceding March.
Sec. 21-106 CHARTER Sec. 21-108
C:487
Sec. 21-109. Insurance certificate. [Res. No. 67-92, § 7, 4-28-1992]
Any application for a permit required by this division shall be accompanied
by an in force current certificate of insurance showing liability insurance in
such amount as may be established by the common council by resolution
from time to time.
Sec. 21-110. Fee. [Code 1971, § 26-57; Res. No. 67-92, § 8,
4-28-1992]
In addition to all the other requirements pursuant to this article, with
respect to excavations, a fee in the amount now or hereafter established
by ordinance shall be paid to the City before a permit shall be issued
permitting excavations or openings in or under the surface or pavement of
any street, sidewalk, or public place. Such fee shall cover the cost of the
administration and supervision of such excavation or opening.
Sec. 21-111. Issuance; contents. [Res. No. 67-92, § 9, 4-28-1992]
The director of public works, upon the filing of the application, fee and
insurance certificate as required by this division, may in his discretion issue
a permit which shall state the name and address of the applicant and the
location, nature, purposes and extent of excavation of openings, the dates
of granting and of expiration of the permit and, if applicable, the amount
deposited by the person to cover the cost of restoring the pavement to its
original condition.
Sec. 21-112. through Sec. 21-130. (Reserved)
(d) Violations of this article shall be unlawful and subject to paying double
the permit application fee as listed in the fee schedule adopted from
time to time by resolution of the Common Council, as well as the
following: [Res. No. 86-13, 11-12-2013; amended 5-23-2017 by
Res. No. 37-17]
(1) First offense: $100 fine;
(2) Second offense: up to $250 fine;
(3) Third or subsequent offense: up to $1,000 fine.
Sec. 21-108 OLEAN CODE Sec. 21-112
C:488
ARTICLE V
BUILDING NUMBERS AND STREET NAMES
Sec. 21-131. Buildings to be numbered consecutively in each block;
use of even and odd numbers. [Code 1971, § 26-75]
All places of business and buildings and locations therefor in the City shall
be numbered consecutively and in the regular order, commencing in each
block with the lowest numeral, using even numbers for the right side and
odd numbers for the left side, and numbering the blocks by hundreds.
Sec. 21-132. Streets constituting dividing lines for numbering
buildings. [Code 1971, § 26-76]
As regards streets running east and west, the center of Union Street shall
divide the City into east and west districts. The center of State Street shall
divide the City into north and south districts for streets running north and
south.
Sec. 21-133. Method of numbering buildings. [Code 1971, § 26-77]
On streets running westerly from Union Street, the numbering shall
commence at Union Street, or at the end of the street nearest Union Street,
and proceed westerly. On streets running easterly from Union Street, the
numbering shall commence at Union Street, or at the end of the street
nearest Union Street, and proceed easterly. On streets running southerly
from State Street, the numbering shall commence at State Street, or at the
end of the street nearest State Street, and proceed southerly. On streets
running northerly from State Street, the numbering shall commence at
State Street, or at the end of the street nearest State Street, and proceed
northerly. Thus, the first house in the third block on the south side of State
Street would be in the block between Second and Third Streets and would
be numbered 301, the next house 303, and so on. All streets running east
and west shall be numbered as though commencing at State Street. Thus,
the first house on the north side of Washington Street would be in the block
between Fourth and Fifth Streets and would be numbered 500. Buffalo
Street shall be numbered as though running east and west.
Sec. 21-134. Specifications for numbers. [Code 1971, § 26-78]
The numbers for buildings shall be constructed of such metal and design as
the common council shall prescribe, at least 2 1/2 inches in height and of
corresponding proportions.
Sec. 21-135. Place numbers to be affixed. [Code 1971, § 26-79]
Numbers of buildings shall be affixed to the fronts of the buildings in some
conspicuous place.
Sec. 21-131 CHARTER Sec. 21-136
C:489
Sec. 21-136. Prefixing east, west, north, or south to street names.
[Code 1971, § 26-80]
All streets crossing and extending on both sides of either Union Street or
State Street shall be known and designated by prefixing to the present
name of such street East, West, North, or South, as the case may be.
Sec. 21-137. Street names to be placed at each intersection. [Code
1971, § 26-81]
The names of each of the streets of the City shall be placed at each street
intersection by affixing the name to a corner building or some other suitable
or conspicuous place at such street intersection.
Sec. 21-138. Payment of expense of placing street names and
numbers. [Code 1971, § 26-82]
The expense of placing the names of the streets shall be borne by the City,
and the expense of procuring and affixing the numbers on the buildings or
locations shall be borne by the owners of such buildings or locations.
Sec. 21-139. through Sec. 21-150. (Reserved)
Sec. 21-136 OLEAN CODE Sec. 21-139
C:490
ARTICLE VI
BANNERS ACROSS STREETS
DIVISION 1
GENERALLY
Sec. 21-151. through Sec. 21-165. (Reserved)
Sec. 21-151 CHARTER Sec. 21-151
C:491

DIVISION 2
PERMIT
Sec. 21-166. Required. [Res. No. 84-92, § 26-91, 5-12-1992]
It shall be unlawful for any person without having obtained a permit and
paid the fee therefor as provided in this division to install or cause to be
installed a banner across a street in the City.
Sec. 21-167. Issuance; contents. [Res. No. 84-92, § 26-92,
5-12-1992]
Sec. 21-168. Fees. [Res. No. 84-92, § 26-93, 5-12-1992; Res. No.
38-13, 6-11-2013]
The fee for permits issued under this division shall be $30.
(a) Permits required by this division shall be issued by the director of
public works, who shall establish regulations and policies consistent
with this article to assure public safety.
(b) Permits shall have minimum duration of 14 days and shall be authorized
only at such location as have strain poles installed for such purpose.
(c) Permits shall be issued on a first-come, first-served basis. Permits may
be issued six months in advance of any requested dates. Only one
permit may be issued for any event/activity.
(d) Permits may be issued only for advertising of public and private events
or activities open to the general public. Permits may not be issued for:
(1) The advertising of products or services for sale.
(2) Retail sales promotions.
(3) Political campaign promotions.
(e) The permit applicant shall be responsible for and shall bear all costs of
the installation, maintenance and removal of the banner. Banners shall
be installed only by contractors approved by the director of public
works. Any approved contractor shall have appropriate equipment for
such installation, maintenance and removal, and shall file with the
director an in force certificate of general liability insurance in an
amount to be established by the department regulations, but at least
$300,000 per occurrence.
(f) The permit application shall contain the exact wording as shall appear
on the banner. The director of public works may reject wording deemed
offensive or inappropriate for display over the public streets. Any
applicant rejected for wording deemed offensive or inappropriate for
display over the public streets may appeal to the common council in
writing within 10 days of such rejection.
Sec. 21-166 CHARTER Sec. 21-169
C:493
Sec. 21-169. through Sec. 21-170. (Reserved)
Sec. 21-169 OLEAN CODE Sec. 21-169
C:494
ARTICLE VII
[6-27-1997 By Res. NSoI.D 4E1W-9A5L; K5 -C2A7-F1E9S97 By Res. No. 44-97;
11-10-2015 By Res. No. 96-15]
Sec. 21-171. Permit required.
Any person, firm or corporation may operate a sidewalk cafe (hereinafter
sometimes called "cafe") within the City on the City sidewalk immediately
adjacent to the applicant's place of business upon obtaining a permit from
the City.
Sec. 21-172. Permit criterion.
An applicant, upon presentation to the City Clerk of an application for a
permit to install a cafe and upon payment of any fee established by the
Common Council and upon compliance with the rules and regulations which
may be established shall be authorized to operate a sidewalk cafe. The
sidewalk cafe permit will be issued upon compliance with the following
application standards:
(1) Applicant shall obtain the approval of the Code Enforcement Office.
Applicant shall submit one copy of plans and to the Code Enforcement
Office, approval of which shall be conditioned upon the following:
a. The cafe will allow the maintenance of at least 18 inches of hardsurfaced
sidewalk between the cafe and any planting strip or tree
grate, bench, pole, post sign, flower bed, news rack, parking meter,
curb or other obstacle in the public right-of-way;
b. The cafe will not interfere with ingress and egress points, including
pedestrian entrances and fire escapes, and will maintain a
minimum of five feet of sidewalk clearance at all times;
c. No permanent structure will be erected;
d. A form of temporary enclosure to separate the seating area from
the open portion of the sidewalk will be installed during the time
the cafe is open for business;
e. Any temporary enclosure or structure within the public right-ofway
will be removed if the cafe is not regularly in use between
November 1 and March 31;
f. No signs will be hung or attached to any portion of the cafe; and
g. The facility can be located anywhere in the City where operation of
a restaurant is otherwise permitted.
(2) The applicant must execute an agreement to repair, at the expense of
the applicant, any damage caused to the sidewalk in the operation of
the cafe.
Sec. 21-171 CHARTER Sec. 21-172
C:495
Sec. 21-173. Cafe regulations. [Amended 9-12-2017 by Res. No.
77-17]
A cafe authorized and operated pursuant to this article shall:
Sec. 21-174. Promulgation of rules pertaining to sidewalk cafes.
The Common Council is hereby empowered to adopt by resolution rules,
regulations, permit fees and specification pertaining to sidewalk cafes.
Such rules are hereby incorporated by reference, and compliance with this
article shall require compliance with such rules, regulations, permit fees
and specifications. Failure to comply with the rules and regulations shall be
unlawful.
Sec. 21-175. Permit fees.
Unless hereafter changed by resolution of the Common Council, the annual
permit fee for operation of a sidewalk cafe shall be $25.
Sec. 21-176. Notice of violation; revocation of permit.
Upon finding by the Fire Chief or Police Chief that an applicant has violated
any provision of this article, he/she may give notice to an applicant to
correct operations violations within 24 hours of receipt of the notice. Upon
failure to correct, the Commissioner may revoke the applicant's permit.
(3) The applicant shall execute a hold-harmless agreement indemnifying
the City against loss, including costs and expenses, resulting from
injury to persons or property as a direct or indirect result of the
operation of the cafe.
(4) Applicant shall provide proof of a liability insurance policy naming the
City as an additional insured and agreeing to be primary in coverage.
(5) If applicable, applicant shall provide proof of dram shop, liquor legal
liability insurance.
(6) If different than applicant, applicant shall provide a consent of the
owner(s) of the building to be used as the sidewalk cafe.
(1) Comply with the plans submitted and approved by Code Enforcement;
(2) Sale and consumption of alcoholic beverages in the outdoor cafe must
be authorized by the licensees;
(3) Must not serve or permit consumption of alcoholic beverages on or at
any sidewalk cafe after 11:00 p.m. or before 8:00 a.m.;
(4) Remove from the temporary enclosure furniture and other equipment
used in operation of the cafe no later than one-half hour after closing of
the applicant's adjacent place of business; and
(5) Not permit any music to be played outdoors after 11:00 p.m.
Sec. 21-172 OLEAN CODE Sec. 21-177
C:496
Sec. 21-177. Violations unlawful.
Violations of this article shall be unlawful and subject to the general penalty
provided by this Code.
Sec. 21-177 CHARTER Sec. 21-177
C:497
Chapter 22
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
CROSS REFERENCES
Definitions and rules of construction
generally, § 1-2.
Buildings, building regulations and fire
prevention, ch. 6.
Flood damage prevention, ch. 9.
Planning and development, ch. 18.
Zoning, ch. 28.
STATE LAW REFERENCES
Plat approval, General City Law § 32 et seq.
Sec. 21-177 OLEAN CODE Sec. 21-177
C:498
ARTICLE I
GENERAL PROVISIONS AND POLICY REQUIREMENTS
Sec. 22-1. Legislative authority. [Res. No. 91-96, 9-24-1996]
Pursuant to Sections 32 and 33 of the General City Law of the State
of New York and by resolution dated __________, 19 _____, the Common
Council of the City of Olean is authorized and empowered to approve plats
showing lots, blocks or sites, with or without streets or highways, within the
incorporated limits of the City of Olean.
Sec. 22-2. Title. [Res. No. 91-96, 9-24-1996]
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Subdivision
Regulations of the City of Olean."
Sec. 22-3. General requirements. [Res. No. 91-96, 9-24-1996; Res.
No. 2-01, 1-23-2001]
Whenever any subdivision of land is proposed for residential uses, before
any permit for the erection of a structure in such proposed subdivision shall
be granted and before any subdivision plan may be filed in the Office of the
Cattaraugus County Clerk, the subdivider or a duly authorized agent shall
apply for and secure approval of such proposed subdivision in accordance
with the following procedures.
The Cattaraugus County Clerk's Office shall not record a plat of any
subdivision within the city unless the plat has been approved in accordance
with the provisions of this chapter and contains all of the appropriate
signatures.
Sec. 22-4. Design and review policies. [Res. No. 91-96, 9-24-1996]
The subdivision of land shall conform with these regulations as well as
with appropriate laws, rules and regulations established by all governing
bodies having or claiming jurisdiction over various phases of the proposed
development. It is declared to be the policy of the common council to
consider land subdivision to be part of a process that provides for the
orderly, efficient and economical development of the city in a manner that
is reasonable and in the best interest of the community. In its consideration
of an application for the subdivision of land, the common council shall be
guided by the following general requirements.
(1) Land must be buildable and free of hazards. The physical
characteristics of the land to be subdivided shall be such that it can be
used for building purposes without danger to health and safety or peril
from fire, flood, erosion or other menace. Proper provision shall be
made for vehicular and pedestrian access, stormwater drainage, water
supply and sewage disposal as well as for other needed improvements.
Sec. 22-1 CHARTER Sec. 22-4
C:499
Sec. 22-5. through Sec. 22-25. (Reserved)
(2) Important community resources and natural features shall be
incorporated in the design of the subdivision as much as possible. To
the maximum practicable extent, existing features of the landscape
such as large trees, rock outcrops, water and flood courses, historic
components and other significant community assets shall be preserved.
(3) Subdivisions shall be in conformance with all local legislative
requirements and consistent with the Comprehensive Development
Plan 1990-2010, or as such comprehensive plan document may be
amended in the future.
Sec. 22-4 OLEAN CODE Sec. 22-5
C:500
ARTICLE II
DEFINITIONS AND WORD USAGE
Sec. 22-26. Word usage and definitions. [Res. No. 91-96, 9-24-1996]
(a) The following rules of construction of language shall apply to the text of
this chapter.
(1) All words used in the present tense include the future tense.
(2) All words in the plural number include the singular number and all
words in the singular number include the plural number, except as
to the number of permitted structures, unless the natural
construction of the wording indicates otherwise.
(3) The word "person" includes an individual, firm, association,
partnership, corporation or other similar entity.
(4) Unless otherwise specified, all distances shall be measured
horizontally along the ground.
(5) The word "building" includes the word "structure."
(6) "Lot" includes the words "plot", "parcel", "tract", or "site".
(7) The word "premises" includes a lot and all buildings or structures
thereon.
(8) "To erect", "to construct" and "to build" a building or structure each
have the same meaning and also include "to excavate" for a
building and "to relocate" a building by moving it from one location
to another.
(9) "Used" shall be deemed also to include "designated, intended or
arranged to be used or occupied".
(10) "Shall" is mandatory; "may" is permissive and discretionary.
(11) "He" shall include the feminine gender "she".
(b) The following words or phrases as used in this chapter are defined as
follows:
APPLICANT — To see the definition for subdivider.
CLUSTER DEVELOPMENT — A subdivision design that incorporates
modifications to minimum lot size and setback requirements in order
to provide open space within the development and/or more efficient or
appropriate use of land, provided that the number of lots or dwelling
units does not exceed that which would be permitted in a subdivision
design which meets all of the applicable zoning requirements, including
lot size and setbacks.
COMMON COUNCIL — The legislative body of the City of Olean, New
York.
Sec. 22-26 CHARTER Sec. 22-26
C:501
COMPREHENSIVE DEVELOPMENT PLAN 1990-2010 — The plan,
prepared and adopted by the planning board, which indicates the
general locations recommended for various functional classes of public
works, places and structures and for the general physical development
of the city and includes any unit or part of such plan separately
prepared and any amendment to such plan or parts therein.
CONDITIONAL APPROVAL — Approval of a final plat subject to
conditions set forth in a resolution conditionally approving such plat by
the common council. Such conditional approval does not qualify a final
plat for recording, nor does it authorize the issuance of any building
permits, prior to the signing of the plat by the mayor or a designee and
the recording of the plat in the Office of the Cattaraugus County Clerk.
CURB — A vertical edge along a street.
DEVELOPER — See the definition for subdivider.
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved
real estate including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures,
paving, storage of equipment or materials, mining, dredging, filling,
excavation or drilling operations.
DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC WORKS — The person designated to act on
behalf of the City of Olean by the Common Council.
EASEMENT — Authorization by a property owner involving a
designated part of his property for use by another for a specified
purpose.
ENGINEER — A person licensed as a professional civil engineer by the
State of New York.
ENVIRONMENTAL ASSESSMENT FORM — A form used to determine
the environmental significance of an action, in accordance with the
State Environmental Quality Review Act (SEQR) regulations.
ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT STATEMENT — A written document,
prepared in accordance with State Environmental Quality Review Act
(SEQR) regulations, which documents the potential environmental
impacts of a proposed action and alternatives.
FINAL PLAT — A drawing, in final form, showing a proposed
subdivision containing all information or detail required by law and as
specified in article IV of these regulations, submitted to the common
council for approval and which, if approved, may be filed or recorded
by the applicant in the Office of the Cattaraugus County Clerk.
FINAL PLAT APPROVAL — The signing of a plat in final form by the
mayor or a designee pursuant to a common council resolution granting
final approval of the plat, or after conditions specified in a resolution
granting conditional approval of the plat are completed. Such final
approval qualifies the plat for recording in the Office of the Cattaraugus
County Clerk.
Sec. 22-26 OLEAN CODE Sec. 22-26
C:502
LOT — A parcel of land whose boundaries have been established by
a legal instrument such as a recorded deed or a recorded map and
which is recognized as a separate legal entity for the purpose of use or
transfer of title.
OFFICIAL MAP — The map established by the common council
pursuant to Section 26 of the General City Law, showing existing and
proposed streets, highways, parks and drainage areas.
OWNER — To see the definition for subdivider.
PLANNING BOARD — The Planning Board of the City of Olean.
PRELIMINARY PLAT — A drawing or drawings clearly marked
"Preliminary Plat" showing the salient features of a proposed
subdivision, as specified in article IV of these regulations, submitted to
the common council for consideration prior to the submission of the plat
in final form and of sufficient detail to apprise the common council of
the layout of the proposed subdivision.
RESUBDIVISION — A change to a filed deed description or a change
in a map of an approved or filed subdivision plat if such change affects
any lot lines, any street layout or area reserved for public use.
SIDEWALK — A paved path provided for pedestrian use, usually located
along the side of a street.
SKETCH PLAN — A drawing which illustrates the proposed layout of
streets, lots and other features of a proposed subdivision in relation
to existing conditions for the purpose of obtaining the advice of the
common council before the preparation of a preliminary plat.
STATE ENVIRONMENTAL QUALITY REVIEW ACT (SEQR) — Refers to
the New York State law (Article 8 of the Environmental Conservation
Law) and regulations (6 NYCRR Part 617) which require public
agencies to consider the potential environmental impacts of an action
before such action is approved or undertaken.
STREET — An existing public or private way which affords principal
means of access to abutting properties and is suitably improved; or a
proposed way shown on the Official Map and recorded in the Office of
the Cattaraugus County Clerk.
STREET, ARTERIAL — A street, normally a state highway, which serves
or is designed to serve heavy volumes of traffic and which is used
primarily as a route for traffic between communities and/or other heavy
traffic generating areas.
STREET, COLLECTOR — A street which serves or is designed to carry
traffic from minor streets to the arterial street system.
STREET, MINOR OR LOCAL — A street used primarily to provide
access to abutting properties.
STREET, DEAD-END OR CUL-DE-SAC — A street or a portion of a street
with only one vehicular outlet.
Sec. 22-26 CHARTER Sec. 22-26
C:503
Sec. 22-27. through Sec. 22-40. (Reserved)
STREET, MARGINAL ACCESS — A minor street which is parallel and
adjacent to an arterial street and which provides access to abutting
properties and protection from through traffic.
STREET, PRIVATE — A minor or local street which is not a publicly
dedicated street.
STREET PAVEMENT — The surface of the roadway used by vehicular
traffic.
STREET WIDTH — The width of the right-of-way, measured at right
angles to the centerline of the street.
SUBDIVIDER — Any person who shall lay out any subdivision or part
thereof (as defined herein), either for oneself or for others.
SUBDIVISION — The division of any parcel of land into two or more
lots, plots or sites for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of
transfer of ownership or development. A lot line adjustment that does
not involve creation of a new lot shall be considered a resubdivision as
defined herein.
SUBDIVISION, MAJOR — Any subdivision not classified as a minor
subdivision.
SUBDIVISION, MINOR — A subdivision of land into not more than four
lots (including the remaining portion of the original parcel) following
the date of enactment of these regulations. In addition, a minor
subdivision shall not involve the creation of any new public streets; the
extension of any public street, water or sewer line; or, the installation of
drainage improvements through one or more lots to serve one or more
other lots.
SUBWAY — The area between the curb and sidewalk or, if no sidewalk
exists, the area between the curb and the public right-of-way.
SURVEYOR — A person licensed as a land surveyor by the State of New
York.
UNDEVELOPED PLAT — A plat existing at the time of the enactment
of these regulations that has been filed in the Office of the Cattaraugus
County Clerk, where 20% or more of the lots within said plat remain
to be developed, excluding therefrom those lots where existing natural
conditions (such as poor drainage) have prevented development.
Sec. 22-26 OLEAN CODE Sec. 22-27
C:504
ARTICLE III
SUBDIVISION APPROVAL PROCESS18
Sec. 22-41. Sketch plan approval requirements. [Res. No. 91-96,
9-24-1996]
(a) The purpose of the sketch plan phase is to provide the subdivider with
an opportunity to consult early and informally in the subdivision
process with the common council in order to save time and money and
to improve the opportunity for more desirable development.
(b) A sketch plan may be submitted to the common council for informal
review for all subdivisions. The sketch plan should show the location of
the subdivision, all existing structures, wooded areas, significant
physical features, existing utilities and community resources and the
proposed pattern of lots, streets, drainage, open space, and water and
sewer facilities.
(c) The subdivider may appear before the common council to present the
proposed sketch plan and to receive information that may be necessary
to process the request. The subdivider may meet with the common
council prior to preparing the sketch plan to discuss procedural matters
as well as pertinent development requirements and potential concerns
including, but not limited to, local development policies, the design of
streets, reservations of land, water retention facilities, drainage,
erosion control and slope stabilization measures, sewerage, water
supply and fire protection.
(d) Subdividers of land adjoining state or city highways are advised to
consult with the resident engineer of the New York State Department of
Transportation or the city department of public works at the sketch
plan stage in order to resolve problems of street openings and/or
stormwater drainage at the earliest possible stage in the design
process.
(e) Where public utilities are involved, the subdivider's engineer should
contact the appropriate agencies for connection specifications and
capacity requirements as well as other pertinent construction
standards.
(f) The common council shall determine whether the sketch plan meets the
purposes of these regulations and if the proposal is consistent with
existing or potential development of adjacent areas and the
Comprehensive Development Plan 1990-2010. The common council
shall inform the applicant of the actions to be taken to meet the
requirements of these regulations. The requirements for compliance
with SEQR may also be discussed at this stage. If it is deemed
appropriate, the common council may refer a copy of the sketch plan to
18.Editor's Note: Flow Charts Setting Forth Subdivision Review Procedures Are Included At
The End Of This Chapter.
Sec. 22-41 CHARTER Sec. 22-41
C:505
Sec. 22-42. Preliminary plat approval requirements. [Res. No.
91-96, 9-24-1996]
the planning board or to the director of public works or any other city
official for review and comment.
(g) Within 45 days following the receipt of a complete sketch plan, the
common council shall consider and transmit a written report to the
applicant containing its comments concerning the design of the
proposed project. Copies of minutes of relevant meetings of the
common council shall be considered a sufficient written report. The
timeframe within which the common council is required to act may be
extended by mutual consent of the common council and the applicant.
In the event the common council fails to transmit a written report
within the aforementioned 45 days or such additional time as may be
mutually agreed upon by the subdivider and the common council, the
subdivider shall consider the common council to be in concurrence with
the design of the proposed subdivision for the purpose of preparing a
preliminary plat.
(a) A preliminary plat shall be prepared and submitted to the common
council for all proposed major subdivisions and may be submitted for
minor subdivisions. The preliminary plat shall be clearly marked
"Preliminary Plat" and shall satisfy the requirements for preliminary
layouts as described in article IV of these regulations. Preliminary plats
should comply with the recommendations made by the common council
in its report on the sketch plan. A completed environmental assessment
form shall also be submitted at this time.
(b) Ten copies of the preliminary plat and supplementary materials
specified herein shall be submitted to the common council at least 14
days prior to the meeting at which it is to be considered.
(c) The preliminary plat shall be accompanied by a fee to cover
administrative and inspection costs in accordance with the fee schedule
adopted by the common council.
(d) One copy of the preliminary plat shall be returned to the applicant with
the notification of decision and one copy shall be retained by the
common council. The other copies shall be used for necessary
coordination with other agencies or consultants including the
Cattaraugus County Department of Economic Development, Planning
and Tourism pursuant to Section 239-n of the General Municipal Law.
(e) The common council shall study the preliminary plat taking into
consideration the topography of the area, the requirements of the
community and the best design of the land proposed to be subdivided.
Particular attention shall be given to the arrangement, location and
width of streets, their relation to the topography of the land, water and
sewer services, drainage, lot sizes and arrangements, the future
development of adjoining lands as yet unsubdivided and the
Sec. 22-41 OLEAN CODE Sec. 22-42
C:506
Sec. 22-43. Final plat approval requirements. [Res. No. 91-96,
9-24-1996]
requirements of the city's zoning regulations and Comprehensive
Development Plan 1990-2010. In the review of the preliminary plat,
the common council may consult with the city director of public works
if such consultation is needed, as well as with such other officials or
agencies as may be appropriate. The planning board, city director of
public works or other appropriate officials consulted with shall report
to the common council concerning the adequacy of the features shown
on the preliminary plat.
(f) Within 62 days following the receipt of a complete and satisfactory
preliminary plat and supporting documentation,* the common council
shall, pursuant to general city law, conduct a public hearing on the
proposed subdivision. The notice of hearing shall be published at least
once in a newspaper of general circulation in the city not less than five
days before such hearing.
*Supporting documentation shall include a completed environmental
assessment form or a draft environmental impact statement and
appropriate actions taken in accordance with the provisions of the
State Environmental Quality Review Act. (For guidance, see section
22-46 of these regulations.)
(g) Within 62 days following the closing of the public hearing, the common
council shall approve, with or without modification, or disapprove such
preliminary plat. The grounds for a modification or disapproval, if any,
shall be stated in the records of the common council. Notwithstanding
the foregoing provisions, the time within which the common council
must take action on such plat may be extended by mutual consent of the
subdivider and the common council. When approving a preliminary
plat, the common council shall state in writing any modification it
deems necessary prior to submission of the plat in final form.
(h) Within five days of the decision on, the preliminary plat, the common
council shall file its decision in the office of the city clerk. In addition,
the subdivider shall be provided with written notification of the action
by the common council within five days of the decision. In the event the
common council fails to take action on a preliminary plat within the
timeframe prescribed herein, such plat shall be deemed to have been
granted preliminary approval. The certificate of the city clerk as to the
date of submission and the failure to take action within such prescribed
time shall be issued on demand and shall be sufficient in lieu of written
endorsement or other evidence of approval.
(a) Within six months of receiving approval from the common council on a
preliminary plat, with or without modification, the applicant may
submit a final plat for approval by the common council. The final plat
shall be accompanied by the appropriate subdivision fees as specified in
the fee schedule adopted by the common council. Final plats may
Sec. 22-42 CHARTER Sec. 22-43
C:507
require further review under the State Environmental Quality Review
Act (SEQR).
(b) If more than six months have elapsed between the time of the common
council's decision on the preliminary plat and the submission of the
final plat, the common council may require resubmission of the
preliminary plat prior to accepting the proposed final plat, if it
determines that conditions affecting the plat have changed significantly
in the interim. If the common council determines that the preliminary
plat must be resubmitted, the common council shall conduct another
public hearing on the proposed subdivision.
(c) The subdivider may choose to develop the subdivision in sections. If
sections are proposed, the developer shall submit the final plat for a
portion of the area encompassed by the preliminary plat, provided that
the proposed development sections were indicated on the preliminary
plat approved by the common council. A section shall include at least
10% of the total number of lots contained in the approved preliminary
plat.
(d) Two reproducible mylar tracings of the final plat map plus 10 copies of
said tracing and other exhibits required for approval, as specified
herein and as otherwise required by the city, shall be submitted with
the application for final plat approval. When submitting a final plat for
common council approval, the subdivider shall also file formal offers of
dedication to the city or other appropriate public agencies of all streets,
parks and playgrounds and other permanent open spaces for
community use as well as all utilities and storm drainage facilities as
shown in the final plat. The approval of the plat does not constitute
acceptance by the city of the dedication of such facilities. Evidence of
all necessary easements or easement documents, if appropriate, as well
as any other legal documents requested by the common council shall be
submitted with the final plat.
(e) The final plat shall conform substantially to the preliminary plat
approved by the common council. It shall incorporate any modifications
or other features that may have been specified by the common council
at the preliminary plat stage.
(f) Within 62 days of the receipt of a complete and satisfactory final plat
which the common council deems to be in substantial agreement with
the approved preliminary plat, the common council shall by resolution
conditionally approve, with or without modification, disapprove, or
grant final approval and authorize the signing of such plat.
(g) When a final plat is submitted which the common council deems not to
be in substantial agreement with the approved preliminary plat, the
following shall apply:
(1) The common council shall hold a public hearing on such final plat
not later than 62 days after the receipt of the final plat. The hearing
Sec. 22-43 OLEAN CODE Sec. 22-43
C:508
shall be advertised at least once in a newspaper of a general
circulation in the city at least five days before such hearing.
(2) The common council shall by resolution conditionally approve, with
or without modification, disapprove, or grant final approval and
authorize the signing of such plat within 62 days after the date of
the public hearing. The grounds for a modification, if any, or the
grounds for disapproval shall be stated upon the records of the
common council.
(h) Written notice of the action by the common council shall be mailed to
the applicant and filed in the office of the city clerk within five days of
the date of the action by the common council. The action of the common
council shall be recorded in the council's minutes. In the case of the
disapproval of a proposed final plat, the common council minutes shall
specify the reasons for disapproval. Notwithstanding the foregoing
provisions of this chapter, the time within which the common council
must take action on such plat may be extended by mutual consent of the
subdivider and the common council. In the event the common council
fails to take action on a final plat within the time prescribed herein, the
plat shall be considered to be approved. A certificate of the city clerk as
to the date of submission and the failure to take action within such
prescribed time shall be issued on demand and shall be sufficient in lieu
of written endorsement or other evidence of approval.
(i) No development of any sort, site improvements or a building permit for
any structure within the proposed subdivision shall be issued by the
code enforcement office until the record sheet of the final plat has been
approved by the common council and the subdivision is filed by the
subdivider in the Office of the Cattaraugus County Clerk and the libre
and page numbers have been assigned by the county clerk. If a permit
is desired for the occupancy of a building in the subdivision prior to the
completion of all of the improvements shown on the approved
construction sheet of the subdivision plat, the city director of public
works shall determine that the streets and utilities serving the building
have been sufficiently completed to adequately serve the proposed
occupancy.
(j) Every final plat submitted to the common council for its approval shall
carry the following endorsement:
Approved by Resolution of the Common Council of the City of Olean,
New York, on the __________ day _____ of __________, subject to all
requirements and conditions of said Resolution.
Signed this day of _________, _____, by, _____ Mayor, _____ or __________,
Designee.
(k) If the common council conditionally approves the final plat, the mayor
or a designee may sign the plat upon the completion of the
requirements specified in the approval resolution. Within five days of
granting conditional approval, the final plat shall be certified by the
Sec. 22-43 CHARTER Sec. 22-43
C:509
Sec. 22-44. Minor subdivision approval requirements. [Res. No.
91-96, 9-24-1996)
mayor, or designee, as conditionally approved. A copy of such action
shall be filed in the office of the city clerk and a copy shall be mailed to
the subdivider, including a statement listing those requirements which,
upon completion, would constitute approval of the final plat. Upon
completion of the requirements, the plat shall be signed by the mayor or
a designee. Conditional approval of a final plat shall expire within 180
days following the date of the resolution granting conditional approval
unless all such requirements have been certified as completed.
Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this chapter, the common
council may extend the time within which a conditionally approved plat
must be submitted for final approval. If the common council determines
that such an extension is warranted, it may extend the date for no more
than two periods of 90 days each.
(l) No changes, ensures, modifications, or revisions shall be made to any
final plat following approval and endorsement of said plat by the
common council. In the event that a final plat, when recorded, contains
any such changes, the plat shall be considered null and void, and the
common council shall institute proceedings to have said plat stricken
from the records of the county clerk.
(m) An approved final plat shall be filed by the subdivider in the office of the
county clerk within 62 days following the date said final plat is signed
by the mayor or a designee, or the issuance of the certificate by the city
clerk as to the date of the submission of the final plat and failure of the
common council to take action thereon within the time prescribed. If
the final plat is not filed within this time period, the final plat approval
shall become null and void. In the event the owner shall file only a
section of an approved plat in the office of the county clerk, the entire
approved preliminary plat shall be filed with the city clerk within 30
days of the filing of such section. Any section of an approved final plat
which is filed in the office of the county clerk shall encompass at least
10% of the total number of lots contained in the approved preliminary
plat. The approval of the remaining sections of the approved
preliminary plat shall expire unless said sections are filed before the
expiration of the exemption period to which such plat is entitled under
the provisions of General City Law.
(a) The common council shall act on minor subdivision final plats in
accordance with the provisions of this section.
(b) Prior to submitting any request, applicants seeking approval of minor
subdivision plats are encouraged to meet with the common council to
determine whether the approval process authorized by this section can
and should be utilized. The common council may require the applicant
to submit whatever information is necessary to make this
determination, including, but not limited to, a copy of a tax map
Sec. 22-43 OLEAN CODE Sec. 22-44
C:510
showing the land proposed to be subdivided and all lots previously
subdivided from that tract of land.
(c) Applicants for approval of minor subdivisions are required to submit a
map that shows all of the detail required to be shown on a final plat
map. In order to expedite the process, applicants are not required to
submit a preliminary plat. However, submission of a sketch plan is
strongly encouraged. Except for adherence to the requirement that a
public hearing be held when two or more new lots are proposed to be
created, the common council may waive some or all of the other
provisions of these regulations as they pertain to a minor subdivision. In
order to waive the regulations that ordinarily apply, the common
council shall make the determinations that, if approved, the proposed
minor subidivision would not pose any danger to health and safety or
peril from fire, flood, erosion or other menace and that no substantial
public interest would be served by strict adherence to these
regulations.
(d) Unless otherwise waived by the common council (as provided in
subsection (c) above), final plats for minor subdivisions shall comply
with the recommendations made by the common council as a result of
its review and report on the sketch plan, if any.
(e) Applicants for minor subdivision approval shall submit two
reproducible mylar tracings plus 10 copies of a map conforming to the
requirements for a final plat.
(f) The final plat shall be accompanied by a fee to cover expenses
associated with administration and inspection, in accordance with the
fee schedule adopted by the common council.
(g) The common council shall conduct a public hearing on the proposed
minor subdivision as soon as it is deemed practical by the common
council but not later than 62 days after the receipt of a complete and
satisfactory application for approval (including a completed
Environmental Assessment Form). Said hearing shall be advertised in a
newspaper of general circulation within the city at least once not less
than five days prior to the hearing.
(h) The common council shall act on the minor subdivision proposal as soon
as it is deemed to be practical but not later than 62 days following the
public hearing. The time period within which the common council is
required to act may be extended by mutual agreement of the applicant
and the common council. In taking action, the common council shall
approve, deny or conditionally approve the proposed minor subdivision
final plat. All decisions of the common council shall be filed in the office
of the city clerk within five days of the decision. In addition, the
applicant shall be provided with notification of the action by the
common council within five days of the decision. If the common council
fails to act within the 62-day period provided for herein (or such
additional period as the city and the applicant may mutually agree
Sec. 22-44 CHARTER Sec. 22-44
C:511
Sec. 22-45. Resubdivision and lot line adjustments. [Res. No. 91-96,
9-24-1996]
Sec. 22-46. Coordination with the State Environmental Quality
Review Act (SEQR). [Res. No. 91-96, 9-24-1996]
upon), the subdivision shall be deemed to be approved and the city
clerk shall issue a certificate of approval on demand.
(i) If the subdivision is conditionally approved, the common council shall
authorize the mayor or a designee by resolution to sign the plat upon
the completion of the requirements specified in the resolution
approving the subdivision.
(j) If the subdivision is disapproved, the common council shall furnish the
applicant with a written statement specifying the reasons for
disapproval.
(k) Approval of any final plat is contingent upon the plat being recorded by
the subdivider in the Office of the Cattaraugus County Clerk within 62
days following the date said final plat is signed by the mayor or a
designee pursuant to the resolution of the common council. If the final
plat is not filed within this time period, the final plat approval by the
common council shall be null and void.
(l) Unless modified or waived, the construction of any improvements or the
provision of guarantees for such improvements for a minor subdivision
shall be in accordance with the procedures and requirements specified
herein for major subdivisions.
(a) Except for those instances which take precedence (as provided in (b)
below), the resubdivision of property affecting a change in street layout
or any area reserved for public use shall follow the same procedure as
specified elsewhere in this chapter for a subdivision. In such instance,
the number of lots affected by such resubdivision shall determine
whether it is processed as a major or minor subdivision.
(b) A resubdivision consisting solely of the simple alteration of lots lines
and where no additional lots are proposed to be created shall be subject
to the preparation of a map by an engineer or surveyor. Said map shall
be labeled "Resubdivision Map". Once a resubdivision map has been
received, the common council shall by resolution authorize the mayor
or a designee to review the proposed resubdivision map for the purpose
of determining compliance with local zoning requirements. Pursuant to
the resolution of the common council, the mayor or a designee shall
sign the resubdivision map which may thereafter be filed by the
subdivider in the county clerk's office. Tax map numbers shall be
reassigned as necessary.
(a) Preliminary plats and final plats, where no preliminary plat was
required, shall not be considered complete until the subdivider has
Sec. 22-44 OLEAN CODE Sec. 22-46
C:512
submitted all of the information required under SEQR and either a
negative declaration has been filed or a notice of completion of the draft
environmental impact statement has been filed. The time periods for
review of a preliminary plat shall begin upon filing of such negative
declaration or such notice of completion.
(b) If the common council is lead agency under the State Environmental
Quality Review Act (SEQR), any public hearing held by the common
council on a preliminary plat, on a final plat where no preliminary plat
was required, or on a final plat which does not substantially conform to
an approved preliminary plat, shall be coordinated with the
environmental review process as follows:
(1) If the common council determines that the preparation of an
environmental impact statement is not required, the common
council shall issue a negative declaration and conduct the public
hearing on the proposed plat within 62 days after the receipt of a
complete preliminary plat; or,
(2) If the common council determines that the preparation of an
environmental impact statement is required and a public hearing
on the draft environmental impact statement is held, the public
hearing on the proposed plat and the draft environmental impact
statement shall be held jointly within 62 days after the filing of the
notice of completion of such draft environmental impact statement.
If no public hearing is held on the draft environmental impact
statement, the public hearing on the proposed plat shall be held
within 62 days of filing the notice of completion.
(3) The hearing on the proposed plat shall be advertised at least once
in a newspaper of general circulation in the city at least five days
before such hearing if held independently of the hearing on the
draft environmental impact statement, or 14 days before a hearing
held jointly therewith. The hearing on the proposed plat shall be
completed within 120 days after it has begun.
(4) If the common council determines that an environmental impact
statement is required, and a public hearing is held on the draft
environmental impact statement, the final environmental impact
statement shall be filed within 45 days following the close of such
public hearing. If no public hearing is held on the draft
environmental impact statement, the final environmental impact
statement shall be filed within 62 days following the close of the
public hearing on the proposed plat. The common council shall
issue findings on the final environmental impact statement and
make its decision on the proposed plat within 30 days of the filing
of such final environmental impact statement.
(c) If the common council is not lead agency under the State
Environmental Quality Review Act, any public hearing held by the
common council on a preliminary plat, on a final plat where no
Sec. 22-46 CHARTER Sec. 22-46
C:513
Sec. 22-47. through Sec. 32-75. (Reserved)
preliminary plat was required, or on a final plat which does not
substantially conform to an approved preliminary plat, shall be
coordinated with the environmental review process as follows:
(1) The common council shall, with the agreement of the lead agency,
hold the public hearing on the proposed plat jointly with the lead
agency's hearing on the draft environmental impact statement.
Failing such agreement, the common council shall hold the public
hearing on the proposed plat within 62 days after the receipt of a
complete plat by the common council.
(2) The hearing on the proposed plat shall be advertised at least once
in a newspaper of general circulation in the city at least five days
before such hearing if held independently of the hearing on the
draft environmental impact statement, or 14 days before a hearing
held jointly therewith. The common council may provide that the
hearing be further advertised in such a manner as it deems most
appropriate for full public consideration of such plat. The hearing
on the final plat shall be completed within 120 days after it has
begun.
(3) The common council shall act on the proposed plat within 62 days
after the close of the public hearing on such plat.
Sec. 22-46 OLEAN CODE Sec. 22-47
C:514
ARTICLE IV
SPECIFICATIONS FOR LAYOUTS AND PLATS
Sec. 22-76. Specifications for sketch plans. [Res. No. 91-96,
9-24-1996]
A sketch plan shall be drawn on mylar or other suitable tracing material at
a scale of not more than 100 feet to one inch. Sketch plans shall include the
following information:
(1) The name of the proposal, including the name and address of the
subdivider(s).
(2) A north arrow, graphic scale, date, and general location map.
(3) Other land contiguous to the proposal which is controlled by the
owner(s) or subdivider(s) with the approximate acreage of such land.
(4) The names of the owners of adjacent lands and the names of adjacent
subdivisions.
(5) The boundaries of the tract in relation to adjoining streets (including
bearings and distances) and the locations of the nearest utility services.
(6) General topography and drainage patterns of the parcel to be
subdivided and parcels within 200 feet of the tract to be subdivided. All
pertinent topographic features within the site and adjoining tracts,
including existing buildings, watercourses, water bodies, wetlands and
wooded areas, shall be shown. Features proposed to be retained as well
as those proposed to be removed shall be indicated.
(7) A statement as to the proposed source of water supply and the method
of sewage disposal.
(8) The lines of proposed streets and lots (including bearings and
distances) as well as lands identified for recreation areas or other
permanent open spaces.
(9) If the subdivider intends to develop the tract in sections, the entire tract
shall be depicted on the sketch plan with the anticipated sections and
the timing of development indicated.
(10) A general statement as to how stormwater drainage is to be
accommodated.
(11) An indication of the existing zoning of the tract (both on and adjacent to
the site) and any other legal restrictions of use.
(12) The general soil conditions of the entire site proposed for subdivision
and its location with respect to a floodway or the boundaries of any
areas of special flood hazard (one-hundred-year floodplain).
(13) Locations of any natural gas or oil wells on the site.
Sec. 22-76 CHARTER Sec. 22-76
C:515
Sec. 22-77. Specifications for preliminary plats. [Res. No. 91-96,
9-24-1996]
The preliminary plat shall be drawn on one or more sheets of mylar or other
suitable tracing material and shall be clearly marked "Preliminary Plat". The
preliminary plat shall be drawn at a scale of not more than 100 feet to one
inch. If more than one sheet is required to show an entire tract, an index
map drawn to scale showing all sheets shall be provided. Proof of ownership
shall be submitted at this time. When the subdivider is someone other
than the owner, an affidavit from the owner of the land consenting to the
application shall be filed. The plat shall include the following information:
(14) A statement as to the consistency of the proposal with the
Comprehensive Development Plan 1990-2010.
(1) Items (1) through (5) of section 22-76.
(2) Existing streets immediately adjoining and within the tract to be
subdivided and the distance(s) to the nearest major street
intersection(s).
(3) A topographic map showing the entire site and all lands within 100 feet
of the property at not more than a five-foot interval. When additional
information is needed to review the subdivision, the common council
may require topographic data for land areas within 200 feet of the
property boundary.
(4) Existing drains, water lines, and sanitary sewers within the tract to be
subdivided and adjacent thereto. Such facilities shall be identified by
location, size, type and approximate elevations and gradients, using
datum based on mean sea level. Existing as well as proposed defs for
such facilities shall also be shown.
(5) The proposed source of water supply and method of sewage disposal. A
conceptual layout of each system shall be delineated, including the
location of hydrants and the sizing of lines to be installed. Where water
mains are not looped, hydrants shall be provided.
(6) An overlay showing all soils and their classification. Areas with
moderate to high susceptibility to erosion, if any, shall be highlighted.
The subdivider shall also include information about existing on-site
vegetation.
(7) A separate drainage report including calculations for runoff and pipe
and channel sizing, which clearly describes how runoff is to be handled
during grading and development. The use of erosion and sedimentation
prevention measures shall be described. The report shall provide
sufficient details to indicate how the subdivider will comply with the
requirements for stormwater management plans administered by the
New York State Department of Environmental Conservation and shall
include the preliminary design of bridges and culverts. The design of
stormwater retention facilities shall be in accordance with
Sec. 22-76 OLEAN CODE Sec. 22-77
C:516
specifications of the city director of public works. The design of bridges
and culverts shall conform to the requirements of the appropriate
jurisdiction (city department of public works or the state department of
transportation).
(8) The approximate lines and gradients of proposed streets and sidewalks
and the names of proposed streets.
(9) A preliminary grading plan of the site at a contour interval of two feet.
The grading plan shall identify the locations and approximate sizes of
cuts and fills and cross sections for any final grading steeper than three
foot horizontal to one foot vertical (3 to 1), or where the cut or fill will
be more than five feet.
(10) The approximate location of proposed lot lines, the acreage or square
footage contained in each lot and, for identification purposes, individual
lot numbers. If necessary, the setbacks of any proposed lot lines from
existing buildings shall be noted.
(11) The locations and dimensions of areas proposed as permanent open
space.
(12) The extent and sequence of the phases in a subdivision proposed to be
developed in sections.
(13) The location of any municipal boundary lines and zoning district lines
within the tract.
(14) The required and actual areas, yards and setbacks of any nonconforming
lots.
(15) Copies of any deed restrictions or covenants as they may apply to any or
all parts of the subdivision.
(16) The location, type and ownership of any natural gas or oil wells within
the proposed subdivision.
(17) The location and type of any known potentially hazardous materials,
either on or adjacent to the site.
(18) The location and quality of water bodies directly adjacent to the
proposed subdivision.
(19) An indication of any federal, state or county permits that may be
required.
(20) The locations of any buffers to be provided either during or after the
completion of construction.
(21) Facilities for fire protection.
(22) Facilities for vehicular and pedestrian traffic, circulation and parking.
Sec. 22-77 CHARTER Sec. 22-77
C:517
Sec. 22-78. Specifications for final plats. [Res. No. 91-96,
9-24-1996]
The final plat shall be drawn in ink on mylar, linen or other suitable material
for filing in the Catteraugus County Clerk's Office. Said plat shall contain
sufficient survey data to readily determine the location, bearing and length
of all lines shown thereon and to permit the reproduction of such lines upon
the ground. The final plat submission shall consist of three components the
construction sheet, the record map and the drainage and erosion control
plan, as described in the subsections that follow. Two mylar copies shall be
submitted to the common council. One approved copy shall be retained by
the city; the other shall be filed with the county clerk.
(23) The locations of major trees and whether such trees are proposed to be
saved or removed.
(1) Final plat construction sheet. The construction sheet shall not be larger
than 34 by 44 inches in side, nor smaller than 18 by 34 inches. It shall
be drawn at a scale of not more than 50 feet to one inch and shall
contain the information listed below. Where more than one sheet is
required to depict the entire subdivision, an index map drawn to scale
showing all sheets shall be provided. All data shown on the construction
sheet shall be in accordance with the requirements of the city director
of public works and the city's construction specifications and shall
include:
a. Items (1) through (3) of section 22-76.
b. The lines of existing and proposed streets and sidewalks both
within and immediately adjoining the subdivision.
c. The names of existing and proposed streets.
d. Plans and typical cross sections of proposed streets and sidewalks.
e. Profiles of proposed streets at a suitable vertical scale showing
finished grades in relation to the existing ground elevation.
f. The precise layout of proposed lots, including lot numbers.
g. Provisions for water supply and sewage disposal, and, if applicable,
evidence that such provisions have received the approval of the
Cattaraugus County Department of Health.
h. The location and size of existing and proposed stormwater pipes,
sanitary sewer lines and watermains on the property including,
also, those into which any connection is proposed.
i. The locations of survey monuments, Prior to the acceptance of the
dedication of new streets, a certificate by a surveyor or engineer
shall be filed certifying that the above monuments have been
placed as indicated on the final plat map, at the appropriate stage
of construction as determined by the city director of public works.
Sec. 22-77 OLEAN CODE Sec. 22-78
C:518
j. Plans for any proposed neighborhood park or playground within
the subdivision including landscaping.
k. A planting plan for street trees indicating the location, varieties,
and sizes of any trees to be planted and of existing trees to be
preserved.
l. Brief apecifications, or reference to city standards, for all facilities
to be constructed or installed within the subdivision.
m. Specifications for all bridges and culverts, and approvals from the
appropriate jurisdiction (e.g., the state department of
transportation or the city department of public works), if needed.
n. The locations of any natural gas or oil wells within the subdivision.
o. Certification by an engineer or surveyor as evidence of professional
responsibility for the preparation of the construction sheet.
(2) Final plat record map. Unless the Cattaraugus County Clerk specifies
otherwise, the record sheet shall be no larger than 24 by 36 inches in
size, shall be drawn on mylar or linen at a scale not greater than 50 feet
to one inch and shall show the information listed below. Where more
than one sheet is required to show the entire subdivision, an index map
drawn to scale showing all sheets shall be provided. The final plat
record map shall include:
a. Items (1) and (2) of section 22-76.
b. The boundaries of the subdivision and information showing the
location of the subdivision in relation to surrounding properties and
streets, including the names of the owners of adjacent lands and
the names of adjacent subdivisions. Whenever practicable, the
subdivision boundary shall be referenced from two directions to
established U.S. Coast and Geodetic Survey monuments or New
York State Plane Coordinate monuments. In the event that such
monuments have been obliterated or are otherwise unavailable, the
subdivision boundary shall be referenced to the nearest highway
intersections or to previously established monuments nearby in
other subdivisions or on public lands. Any combination of types of
reference points that fulfill the requirements for exact
measurements from the subdivision boundary to reference points
previously established for or by a public agency may be accepted.
(Note: If a city coordinate system should be established, then this
system shall become the only reference for establishing
monuments.)
c. The lines of existing and proposed streets and sidewalks within the
subdivision and their interconnection with existing or proposed
streets and sidewalks on adjoining properties.
Sec. 22-78 CHARTER Sec. 22-78
C:519
d. The lines and dimensions of proposed lots, which shall be
numbered. If a proposed lot contains one or more existing
buildings, the setbacks for such buildings shall be indicated.
e. The lines and purposes of existing and proposed easements both
within and immediately adjoining the subdivision.
f. The lines, dimensions, bearings and area in square feet of all
property proposed to be reserved by deed restriction or covenant
for the common use of property owners in the subdivision or for any
other reason.
g. The location of monuments to be placed within the subdivision.
h. The locations of existing and proposed water supply lines, storm
sewers, and sanitary sewers within the subdivision.
i. The locations of any municipal service boundaries and zoning lines
within the subdivision.
j. Written statements as to:
1. The zoning of the property within the subdivision.
2. Compliance of the proposed lots with zoning requirements. If
any lots do not comply but are covered by zoning variances, the
statement should include reference to such variances. If
variances are needed, the document shall specify the nature
and location of the variance(s) which are necessary.
3. If the subdivision is approved for cluster development,
pursuant to Section 37 of the General City Law, the statement
shall include supporting documents that illustrate that the
number of lots proposed is equal to or less than the number
that would be permitted with a conventional design.
k. The seal and certification by a surveyor or engineer as evidence of
professional responsibility for the preparation of the record map
and a place for the libre and page numbers when filed.
l. Offers of dedication to the city involving any open space,
recreation, street or other improvements and those facilities to be
retained by the subdivider, including the method of maintenance
and improvement thereof. Such offers shall be received and
approved by the city attorney as to their legal sufficiency.
(3) Subdivision drainage plan and erosion control plan. This plan shall be
on a separate sheet of the same size and scale as the record map and
shall contain the following information:
a. Plans, profiles and typical as well as special cross sections of
proposed stormwater drainage facilities including any stormwater
detention facilities.
Sec. 22-78 OLEAN CODE Sec. 22-78
C:520
Sec. 22-79. through Sec. 22-100. (Reserved)
b. Supporting final design data and copies of computations used as
the basis for determining design capacities and performance of the
proposed drainage facilities.
c. The subdivision grading plan developed to a suitable contour
interval, with details to indicate proposed street grades and
building site grades and elevations throughout the subdivision. The
contours shown on the grading plan shall be on a one-, two- or fivefoot
interval (when measured vertically). The interval selected shall
result in a horizontal distance between contour lines of not more
than 100 feet. All grades shall be referenced to United States Coast
and Geodetic Survey datum.
d. A stormwater management plan shall be prepared in conformance
with the publication "Reducing Impacts of Stormwater Runoff from
New Development," including all amendments to that document
and other provisions which may, from time to time, be established
by the NYS Department of Environmental Conservation. Such plan
shall be available on-site at all times during construction.
e. If the subdivision is within or adjacent to the boundary of a onehundred-
year floodplain, the subdivision drainage plan shall
contain a detailed analysis of the area with respect to floodplain
management and land use.
f. The location of all proposed buildings, if known.
g. The number of each lot.
h. The location and means of controlling erosion within the project
limits.
i. Slope stabilization details.
Sec. 22-78 CHARTER Sec. 22-79
C:521

ARTICLE V
IMPROVEMENTS AND/OR GUARANTEES
Sec. 22-101. Required improvements. [Res. No. 91-96, 9-24-1996]
(a) Prior to the approval of a final plat by the common council, the
applicant shall complete all of the improvements deemed necessary by
the common council to the satisfaction of the appropriate city
departments and the common council.
(b) All of the required improvements shall be made by the applicant
without reimbursement by the city. Unless alternatively provided for in
accordance with the provisions of General City Law, said improvements
shall include the following, as well as those other development
improvements set forth in criteria and specifications adopted by the
common council:
(1) Streets.
(2) Street signs.
(3) Curbing and gutters.
(4) Subways.
(5) Sidewalks.
(6) Street shade trees.
(7) Monuments.
(8) Storm drainage.
(9) Sanitary sewers.
(10)Water distribution lines and hydrants.
(11) Park and recreation facilities.
(12) Electrical, gas, telephone, television cable and utility lines.
(13) Plantings and ground cover.
(14) Driveways within rights-of-way (once the location and layout of the
development on the premises is known).
(c) The subdivider shall complete all of the required improvements to the
satisfaction of the city director of public works who, upon receipt of
written certification by the appropriate agency and/or authorized city
department head, shall file a letter with the common council signifying
the satisfactory completion of all improvements required by the
common council.
(d) The required improvements shall not be considered to be completed
until the installation of the improvements has been approved by the city
Sec. 22-101 CHARTER Sec. 22-101
C:523
Sec. 22-102. Letter of credit alternative. [Res. No. 91-96,
9-24-1996]
director of public works upon receipt of written certification by the
appropriate agency and/or authorized city department head and an
as-built map satisfactory to the common council has been submitted
indicating the exact location of all utilities as installed. Said map shall
be submitted prior to the signing of the plat by the mayor or a designee.
(e) After consultation with the city director of public works, the common
council may waive any required subdivision improvement. Such waiver
may be granted by the common council if an improvement is considered
to be inappropriate because of the inadequacy of or lack of connecting
facilities adjacent to or in close proximity to the subdivision or when
such an improvement is not judged to be requisite to the public health,
safety and general welfare.
(a) As an alternative to the completion of the required improvements, the
subdivider may, prior to the approval of the final plat by the common
council, file a certified check, irrevocable letter of credit or other
security with the city clerk. The amount of the certified check,
irrevocable letter of credit or other security shall be estimated by the
developer's engineer and approved by the city's director of public
works. Such security shall be sufficient to cover the full cost of the
required improvements deemed necessary by the common council. Any
such letter of credit shall comply with the requirements of Section 33 of
General City Law and shall be satisfactory to the common council and
the city attorney as to form, sufficiency, manner of execution and surety.
The common council shall determine an appropriate period of time to
be set forth within the security agreement (not to exceed three years)
within which the required improvements shall be completed. The term
of the security agreement may, however, be extended by mutual
agreement of the common council and the subdivider.
(b) If the subdivider elects to provide a certified check or letter of credit for
any or all of the required improvements, such guarantee shall not be
released until an as-built map satisfactory to the common council has
been submitted indicating the location of all underground utilities as
installed. The city director of public works shall provide written
certification that the improvements have been completed as required
by the common council.
(c) In the event the subdivider is authorized to file the approved plat in
sections, as provided herein, final plat approval may be granted and the
plat shall be filed by the subdivider in the Office of the Cattaraugus
County Clerk following the installation of the required improvements or
the furnishing of security to cover the costs of such improvements. The
subdivider shall not be permitted to begin construction in any one
section until all previously approved sections have been filed in the
office of the county clerk and the required improvements have been
Sec. 22-101 OLEAN CODE Sec. 22-102
C:524
Sec. 22-103. Construction of improvements. [Res. No. 91-96,
9-24-1996]
installed in such prior sections or security covering the costs of such
improvements has been provided therefor.
(d) The letter of credit shall continue in full force and effect until a request
is made to the mayor for a release from the latter of credit. Once
received, the mayor shall submit the request to the city director of
public works for a recommendation. The mayor shall also forward a
copy of the request to the common council for its review and
recommendation. Upon receipt of the city director of public works'
recommendation and the response from the common council, the mayor
may authorize the release of up to 90% of the total security. Prior to the
mayor approving the release of up to 90% of the security, the city
director of public works shall prepare and sign a statement to the effect
that: (a) the work has been completed according to plans and
specifications; (b) the work has been inspected by an engineer; and (c)
all improvements have been successfully tested. Prior to requesting the
release of the final 10% by the subdivider, a maintenance bond covering
two years and equal to 10% of the total cost of the improvements shall
be posted and all public streets within the subdivision shall be
dedicated to the city. The mayor may authorize the final release of said
security upon the city clerk's receipt of the required maintenance bond.
(e) In the event the subdivider is not in compliance with with conditions of
this chapter or any other applicable city laws, such certified check,
letter of credit or other security shall be forfeited to the city and used
for the compilation of the required improvements. The city shall return
any amount to the applicant that is not needed to cover any costs
incurred by the city as a result of the applicant's default.
(a) The city director of public works shall act as agent of the common
council for the purpose of assuring the satisfactory complation of all
improvements required by the common council. The costs of such
inspection shall be determined based on a fee schedule adopted by
resolution of the common council. The applicant shall pay the city for
the costs of inspection before the final plat is signed for filing. If the city
director of public works finds, upon inspection, that any of the required
improvements have not been constructed in accordance with common
council's recommendations or the final plat construction sheet, the
applicant shall be liable for the costs of completing said improvements
according to the approved specifications. No plat shall be approved by
the common council as long as the subdivider is in default on a
previously approved plat. No certificate of occupancy shall be issued by
the city code enforcement office for any lots for which the subdivider is
deemed to be in default.
(b) If at any time before or during the construction of the required
improvements it is demonstrated, to the satisfaction of the city director
of public works, that unforseen conditions make it necessary or
Sec. 22-102 CHARTER Sec. 22-103
C:525
Sec. 22-104. Reservation of parkland. [Res. No. 91-96, 9-24-1996]
preferable to modify the location or design of such required
improvements, the city director of public works may, by resolution of
the common council, authorize such modifications provided that such
modifications are within the spirit and intent of the common council's
approval and do not waive or substantially alter the function of any
improvements required by the common council. The city director of
public works shall issue any such authorization in writing and shall
transmit a copy of such authorization to the common council at their
next regularly scheduled meeting. The final plat construction sheets
shall be modified to reflect the changes which are authorized and said
final plat construction sheets, once modified, shall be made part of the
subdivision file.
(c) At least 30 days prior to commencing construction of the required
improvements, the subdivider shall notify the city director of public
works in writing of the time when the construction of such
improvements is scheduled to begin. This notice will enable the city
director of public works to have inspection services on-site to assure
that all city specifications and requirements are met during the
construction of required improvements and to assure that the
improvements required by the common council are satisfactorily
completed.
(a) Before the common council may approve a subdivision containing
residential units, the final plat shall also show, when required by the
common council, a park or parks suitably located for playground or
other recreational purposes.
(b) Land for park, playground or other recreational purposes may not be
required until the common council has made a finding that a proper
case exists for requiring that a park or parks be suitably located for
playgrounds or other recreational purposes within the city. Such
findings shall include an evaluation of the present and anticipated
future needs for park and recreational facilities in the city based on
projected population growth to which the particular final plat will
contribute.
(c) In the event the common council makes a finding that the proposed
subdivision presents a proper case for requiring a park or parks
suitably located for playgrounds or other recreational purposes, but
that a suitable park or parks of adequate size to meet the requirement
cannot be properly located within such subdivision, the common council
may require a sum of money in lieu thereof, in an amount to be
established by the common council. In making such determination of
suitability, the common council shall assess the size and suitability of
land shown on the subdivision plat which could be possible locations for
park or recreational facilities, as well as practical factors including
whether there is a need for additional faculties in the immediate
neighborhood. Any money required by the common council in lieu of
Sec. 22-103 OLEAN CODE Sec. 22-104
C:526
Sec. 22-105. through Sec. 22-125. (Reserved)
land for park, playground or other recreational purposes shall be
deposited into a trust fund to be used by the city exclusively for park,
playground or other recreational purposes, including the acquisition of
property.
Sec. 22-104 CHARTER Sec. 22-105
C:527

ARTICLE VI
DESIGN STANDARDS
Sec. 22-126. General. [Res. No. 91-96, 9-24-1996]
The common council, in reviewing an application for approval shall be
guided by the considerations and standards set forth in this article. The
common council shall take into account the prospective character of the
development and require that improvements be designed to insure the
reasonable protection of the public health, safety, morals and general
welfare. In addition, all improvements shall be in accordance with the city's
construction specifications.
(1) Land to be subdivided and developed shall be of such character that it
can be used safely for building purposes without danger to health, or
peril from fire, flood or other menace.
(2) Proper provisions shall be made for drainage, water supply, sewage and
other needed improvements.
(3) All proposed lots shall be so laid out and of such size as to be in
harmony with the development pattern of neighboring properties.
(4) A safe and convenient street system, consistent with the city's
Comprehensive Development Plan 1990-2010 and conforming to the
Official Map, shall be created. Streets shall be of such width, grade and
location so as to accommodate the type and volume of traffic that is
anticipated, to facilitate fire protection and to provide fire fighting
equipment with access to buildings.
(5) Provisions shall be made to reserve open spaces for parks and
playgrounds, or to require recreation fees in lieu thereof, in order to
achieve the goals and objectives of the city's Comprehensive
Development Plan 1990-2010 and the Official Map.
(6) Insofar as possible, existing features of the landscape such as large
trees, rock outcrops, water and flood courses, historic components and
other significant assets that would add to the value of the site should be
preserved in the design of the subdivision.
(7) The location and installation of sewer, water, gas, electricity, street
lighting and other public facilities shall be coordinated so that they may
be operated and maintained at minimum cost. Installation shall be
consistent with recognized standards including, but not limited to, the
Ten States Standards.
(8) Pursuant to Section 37 of the General City Law, the common council
may modify lot size and setback requirements of the zoning law in order
to approve cluster development. Such action may be taken if the
common council finds that cluster development would provide the most
appropriate use of land, would facilitate the adequate and economical
provisions of streets and utilities, would preserve the natural scenic
Sec. 22-126 CHARTER Sec. 22-126
C:529
Sec. 22-127. Lots and blocks. [Res. No. 91-96, 9-24-1996]
qualities of open lands, and/or would protect adjoining neighborhoods
from the potential impact of new development. A cluster development
shall not contain a greater number of dwelling units or building lots
than would, in the common council's judgement, be permitted if the site
were subdivided into lots containing the minimum lot size and density
requirements of the zoning law pertaining to the district or districts
in which such site is located, and conforming to all other applicable
requirements.
(a) Lot size and arrangement.
(1) The dimensions and arrangements of lots shall be designed in such
a manner that, for reasons related to topography, reservations,
dedications or other conditions, there will be no foreseeable
difficulties in providing access to buildings on such lots or in
securing building permits in compliance with existing zoning
regulations as well as other city requirements.
(2) The lot size, width, depth, shape, orientation and the minimum
building setback lines shall be appropriate for the subdivision and
for the type of development and use contemplated.
(3) Subdivision lots should be laid out as much as possible so that side
or rear lot lines follow the centerlines of streams or drainage ways
that may lie within the subdivision.
(4) Except as may be authorized by the common council under the
cluster development provisions of section 22-125, all lots shown on
the subdivision plat shall conform to the minimum lot size and
setback requirements specified for such lots in the city's zoning
laws.
(5) Notwithstanding any provision of law to the contrary, and except as
may be authorized by the common council under the cluster
development provisions, where a plat contains one or more lots
which do not comply with the city's zoning laws, application may be
made to the zoning board of appeals for an area variance pursuant
to Section 81 of the General City Law, without the necessity of a
decision or determination of an administrative official charged with
the enforcement of the zoning regulations. In reviewing such
application, the zoning board of appeals may request the common
council to provide a written recommendation concerning the
proposed variance.
(6) Corner lots shall have extra width sufficient to comply with
required building setback lines on both streets as required by the
city's zoning laws.
Sec. 22-126 OLEAN CODE Sec. 22-127
C:530
Sec. 22-128. Streets. [Res. No. 91-96, 9-24-1996]
(7) Where existing streets have been proposed for future widening, all
building setbacks shall be measured from the proposed right-ofway
line.
(8) Side lines of lots shall generally be at right angles to straight
streets and radial to curved streets.
(9) Block lengths and widths shall be appropriate to accommodate the
size of lots required by the city's zoning laws and to provide for
convenient access, circulation control and traffic safety.
(10) Blocks intended for commercial or industrial use shall be designed
specifically for such purposes, with adequate space set aside for
off-street parking and delivery facilities.
(b) Access.
(1) Each lot shall have access to a street built to the city's
specifications.
(2) Where lots abut an existing state highway, the number of driveways
and/or streets entering onto these state highways shall be
minimized. Where a marginal access road is established, a
nonaccess easement shall be required along that portion of the lot
next to and parallel with the highway right-of-way line.
(3) Where a watercourse separates the buildable area of a lot from the
street which provides access to the lot, provision shall be made for
the installation of a culvert or other drainage structure. Said
culvert or drainage structure shall be subject to the same design
criteria and review as all other stormwater drainage facilities in the
subdivision.
(a) Design and layout of streets.
(1) The design of the street pattern shall be based upon minor streets
connecting to collector streets.
(2) The arrangement of streets in a new subdivision shall provide for
the continuation of existing streets into adjoining areas, and shall
reserve space for future street extensions where the adjoining land
has not been developed.
(3) Local residential streets shall be designed so as to discourage
through traffic.
(4) Local (minor) streets shall have a right-of-way of at least 50 feet in
width and, unless otherwise provided hereinafter, a pavement
width of not less than 24 feet plus curbing.
Sec. 22-127 CHARTER Sec. 22-128
C:531
(5) Streets classified as collector streets by the common council shall
have a right-of-way of at least 66 feet in width and a pavement
width of not less than 36 feet plus curbing.
(6) The minimum radius of horizontal curves, minimum length of
vertical curves and minimum length of tangents between reverse
curves shall be in accordance with specifications reviewed and
approved by the city director of public works. Such design features
shall be reviewed by the city director of public works, who shall
report his recommendation to the common council prior to final
approval.
(7) Street grades, wherever feasible, shall not exceed 8%, with due
allowance for reasonable vertical curves and with not less than 200
feet between changes of grade.
(8) In order to facilitate drainage, no street grade shall be less than
1%.
(b) Construction of streets.
(1) All streets shall be of asphalt pavement and meet all requirements
specified in the construction specifications approved by the
common council.
(2) Concrete curbing shall be installed along all new streets.
(3) Due to the general soil conditions within the city and normal
construction sequences for development, it is deemed to be in the
best interests of the city that following procedures be followed:
a. Binder material shall not be placed prior to the completion and
approval of all underground utilities (including the private
utility lines) and a review of the road base by appropriate city
inspectors.
b. The weather and seasonal limitations as specified under the
Standard Specifications of the New York State Department of
Transportation shall apply for the placement of bituminous
mixtures.
Restrictions a. and b. imply completion of all underground
systems well in advance of the developer's schedule for
paving.
c. Certificates of occupancy shall not be issued unless a proper
road surface as herein specified has been constructed.
d. Prior to installing the top course of asphalt, the developer shall
substantially complete related construction in the vicinity of
the right-of-way. Appropriate steps shall be taken to limit the
accumulation of stormwater on the street. This will help to
insure that the top course of new pavement will be less
Sec. 22-128 OLEAN CODE Sec. 22-128
C:532
susceptible to marring or patching as a result of construction
activity.
Unless a specific waiver is obtained in writing from the city
director of public works, the final top course shall be installed
by the developer before the end of the construction season
during which the binder course was placed.
Before the expiration of the maintenance bond and before the
final top is applied, the city and the developer shall hold a
final site review to assess any damages or repairs that are
to be completed by the developer under the maintenance
agreement. Once the top course has been installed, the
developer shall obtain final acceptance of all roadway
improvements from the common council.
(4) Driveway culverts. The installation of driveway culverts requires
approval and a permit (as to location, size and material) from the
authority having jurisdiction over the road. New driveway culvert
installation shall be the responsibility of the subdivider or other
person following receipt of a permit therefor.
The city reserves the right to remove and/or install driveway or
roadway culverts along any existing road to properly transmit
surface drainage as determined by the city director of public
works.
(c) Street intersections.
(1) The minimum distance between centerline offsets at street jogs
shall be 125 feet.
(2) Minor streets and/or collector streets shall not intersect with
arterial streets less than 800 feet apart, measured from centerline
to centerline.
(3) Except for street jogs and the intersection of minor streets and/or
collector streets with arterial streets, streets shall not intersect
within 200 feet of another intersection.
(4) Streets shall not curve or turn significantly within 100 feet of an
intersection.
(5) Whenever possible, streets shall intersect at right angles. Streets
may not intersect at angles of less than 75°.
(6) Intersections involving the junction of more than two streets shall
not be permitted.
(7) Curb radii at intersections shall be not less than 25 feet.
(d) Access to adjacent parcels and subdivisions. All proposed subdivisions
shall be designed to provide access to adjacent properties. When a
Sec. 22-128 CHARTER Sec. 22-128
C:533
Sec. 22-129. Service drives. [Res. No. 91-96, 9-24-1996]
proposed subdivision abuts an existing subdivision, the subdivider shall
make every attempt to design the street system of the proposed
subdivision to connect with dead-end or stub streets of existing
subdivisions.
(e) Cul-de-sac and dead-end streets.
(1) If possible all cul-de-sac streets should drain toward their entrance.
(2) When a street extension is not possible, a cul-de-sac should be
designed so that the rear of the lots served by the cul-de-sac back
to the adjoining property.
(3) No cul-de-sac shall exceed 400 feet in length.
(4) All cul-de-sac streets shall have a turnaround at the end of the
street with a right-of-way diameter of not less than 120 feet; the
outer curb at the turn shall have a minimum diameter of 100 feet.
(5) If a dead-end street is of a temporary nature, a turnaround shall be
provided and provisions made for the reversion of the excess rightof-
way to the adjoining property when the dead-end street is
extended into adjacent property.
(f) Where a subdivision abuts or contains an existing street of inadequate
right-of-way width, additional right-of-way width may be required.
(g) No street shall have a name that will duplicate, or so nearly duplicate as
to be confused with, the names of existing streets. The continuation of
an existing street shall have the same name. Street names shall be
shown on the preliminary and final plat maps approved by the common
council.
(h) Where a subdivision abuts or contains an existing or proposed arterial
street, the common council may require special treatment of the land
areas bordering such street in order to protect residential properties
and to effectively separate through and local traffic.
(i) Where a subdivision borders on or contains a railroad right-of-way, the
common council may require a street or streets parallel to such right-ofway
in order to make appropriate use of the land adjacent to such rightof-
way.
(a) Although service drives may be permitted in commercial and industrial
districts, it is recommended that other provisions be made on private
property to insure that adequate off-street loading and unloading and
parking facilities are available to serve the proposed use.
(b) The width of any proposed service drive shall not be less than 20 feet.
Sec. 22-128 OLEAN CODE Sec. 22-129
C:534
Sec. 22-130. Sidewalks. [Res. No. 91-96, 9-24-1996]
Concrete sidewalks shall be installed along both sides of all new streets.
Sidewalks shall be at least four feet in width.
Sec. 22-131. Prevention of landlocked parcels. [Res. No. 91-96,
9-24-1996]
All subdivisions of land shall result in parcels having at least one access
point to at least one street that can be improved to meet city standards.
Sec. 22-132. Buffers and berms. [Res. No. 91-96, 9-24-1996]
Sec. 22-133. Provisions for future resubdivision. [Res. No. 91-96,
9-24-1996]
If a tract is subdivided into lots which are more than twice the size of the
minimum lot size required in the zoning district in which the subdivision is
located, the common council may require that streets and lots are laid out
(c) Dead-end service drives will not generally be approved. If dead-end
service drives are unavoidable, adequate turn-around facilities shall be
provided at the closed end, as required by the common council.
(a) If a residential subdivision abuts an arterial street and adjacent lots
front on a marginal access street, a landscaped buffer area shall be
provided between the arterial street and the marginal access street.
This buffer strip shall not be less than 25 feet in width and shall include
both trees and shrubs. The common council may require buffers in
other areas, along with berms, to reduce noise levels and undesirable
vistas.
(b) The arrangement of plantings in buffers shall provide maximum
protection to adjacent properties and avoid damage to existing plant
material. Possible arrangements include planting in parallel,
serpentine, or broken rows. If berms are used, the minimum top width
shall be four feet, and the maximum side slope shall be three feet of
horizontal distance for every one foot of vertical height.
(c) Plant materials shall be of sufficient size and planted in such a fashion
that a year-round screen of at least eight feet in height shall be
produced within three growing seasons. All plantings shall be installed
according to accepted horticultural practices.
(d) Plantings shall be watered regularly and in a manner appropriate for
the specific plant species through the first growing season. Dead and
dying plants shall be replaced by the subdivider during the first two
growing seasons. No buildings, structures, storage of materials, or
parking shall be permitted within the buffer area; buffer areas shall be
maintained and kept free of all debris, rubbish, weeds, and tall grass.
Sec. 22-129 CHARTER Sec. 22-133
C:535
so as to permit future resubdivision in accordance with the requirements
contained in these regulations and the city's zoning laws.
Sec. 22-134. Non-residential subdivisions. [Res. No. 91-96,
9-24-1996]
Standards for the design and construction of non-residential subdivisions
shall be governed by sound engineering and planning practice. Utilities
shall be sized commonsurate with the anticipated demand based upon the
full development of the subdivision.
Sec. 22-135. Self-imposed restrictions. [Res. No. 91-96, 9-24-1996]
The subdivider of any property may impose greater restrictions on any
development than those required by the city's subdivision and zoning
regulations. Such restrictions, if any, shall be indicated on the preliminary
and final subdivision plats.
Sec. 22-136. Easements. [Res. No. 91-96, 9-24-1996]
Sec. 22-137. Erosion and sediment control. [Res. No. 91-96,
9-24-1996]
(a) Easements shall be provided in those instances where natural
drainageways and utility lines do not fall within dedicated rights-of-way.
All easements shall be plotted on the preliminary and final subdivision
plats. A clause shall be inserted in the deed of each lot affected by an
easement indicating the existence and purpose of the easement.
(b) A drainageway easement shall be provided where a subdivision is
traversed by a swale, channel or stream. The easement shall be of such
width as will be adequate to preserve natural drainage and provide
sufficient width for maintenance.
(c) To the fullest extent possible, easements shall be centered on or
adjacent to rear or side lot lines.
(a) General. It is the city's intent to control the movement of soil by
employing effective erosion and sediment control measures before,
during and after site disturbance.
Erosion and sediment control measures, both temporary and
permanent, shall be designed and presented for approval to the
common council prior to any site development or soil disturbance.
The common council and its designated representatives will evaluate
submitted erosion and sediment control design plans against the most
current edition of the "New York Guidelines for Urban Erosion and
Sediment Control" manual, prepared by the USDA Soil Conservation
Service.
Sec. 22-133 OLEAN CODE Sec. 22-137
C:536
(b) Vegetative controls. Site design techniques should include vegetative
measures in order to control surface water runoff, stabilize soil, and
entrap soil sediments generated from erosion.
(1) Site slopes shall be graded to be stable and provide control of any
surface or subsurface water prior to vegetative plantings.
(2) Site disturbance, especially in sensitive areas, shall be kept at a
minimum. Subdivision design shall minimize the removal of
existing trees, hedge rows and indigenous plant cover.
(3) The developer shall take whatever action is necessary to establish a
stabilised vigorous stand of vegetative cover on all disturbed soils
as soon as possible following initial soil movement.
If phasing is necessary to meet these conditions, the developer
shall present this information to the common council for its review.
(c) Structural controls. Some projects may require permanent erosion and
sediment controls. If these measures are determined to be necessary,
the city may require them to be fully functional before upland site
disturbance begins. Such structures may include, but are not limited to,
such features as siltation traps, ponds, diversion swales or dikes.
(d) Maintenance measures. It is imperative that both the vegetative and
structural components are inspected periodically and maintained for
optimum erosion and sediment control.
Temporary facilities shall be cleaned, repaired and/or replaced by
the subdivider as necessary in order to protect and maintain the
subdivision's original design criteria. Permanent facilities shall be
cleaned, repaired and/or replaced by the subdivider until such time as
said facilities have been accepted by resolution of the common council,
after which all cleaning, repair and replacement activities shall the the
responsibility of the city department of public works.
(1) Dedicated projects. If the subdivision involves the construction and
dedication of facilities to the city, the developer shall include
sufficient funds in the maintenance bond to cover the projected
cost of maintaining such facilities for a two year period following
dedication.
(2) Private projects. If a project includes facilities which are not to be
dedicated to the city, the developer shall be responsible for the
construction and proper maintenance of all erosion control
facilities. The continued acceptability of erosion control facilities by
the developer shall be determined by the code enforcement office
prior to the issuance of certificates of occupancy for buildings
which are constructed on lots in an approved final plat.
(e) Penalty. The city is empowered to assess reasonable penalties to a
developer/site owner for failure to properly construct, operate and
Sec. 22-137 CHARTER Sec. 22-137
C:537
Sec. 22-138. Storm and surface drainage. [Res. No. 91-96,
9-24-1996]
All storm sewers and drainage facilities such as gutters, catch basins,
bridges, culverts and swales shall be designed for the development and
subject to the approval of the city. Such facilities shall be designed to
accommodate upland flows that may be generated from future land
development.
The following shall be observed as storm drainage facilities are designed:
Sec. 22-139. Sewage disposal. [Res. No. 91-96, 9-24-1996]
Lots in approved subdivisions shall connect to the city's sanitary sewage
system. The design and installation of sewers, and all appurtenances
thereto, shall be subject to the approval of the common council and other
appropriate agencies.
maintain an approved soil erosion and sedimentation control plan. The
penalties may include, but shall not be limited to, the city's costs
for cleaning ditches, swales, drains or streams required due to the
failure of the developer to properly construct, operate and maintain site
erosion and sedimentation control devices.
No further reviews of such projects shall be conducted by the city until
payments stemming from the city's charges have been satisfied and/or
satisfactory completion of the required erosion and sediment control
measures has occurred by the developer/site owner.
(1) Lots shall be laid out and graded to provide positive drainage away
from buildings.
(2) The stormwater management system shall be designed to prevent
increased runoff over adjacent properties.
(3) Storm sewers, culverts and related installations shall be provided to:
a. Permit unimpeded flow of natural watercourses;
b. Insure adequate drainage of all low points; and
c. Intercept stormwater runoff along streets at intervals reasonably
related to the extent and grade of the area drained.
(4) Sump pumps or roof leaders shall not be permitted to discharge directly
to roadside gutters or channels.
(5) The city shall require the completion of construction and the design
engineer's certification of all surface drainage improvements and
erosion control measures before any building permits are issued within
proposed subdivisions.
Sec. 22-137 OLEAN CODE Sec. 22-139
C:538
Prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy for new construction, said
new construction shall be inspected by a licensed professional who shall
certify to the city code enforcement office that proper connections have
been made to the public sanitary sewer system.
Sec. 22-140. Water supply. [Res. No. 91-96, 9-24-1996]
Connection to the city's public water supply shall be required for all new
development. The developer shall provide and dedicate to the city a
complete water distribution system. The design and installation of said
system shall be subject to the approval of the common council and
jurisdictional agencies.
If a private on-site system is to be used as a supplemental water supply, the
following provisions shall apply:
Sec. 22-141. Landscaping. [Res. No. 91-96, 9-24-1996]
(1) The supplemental water supply shall serve a limited purpose which
shall be specified for and approved by the common council and the city
director of public works.
(2) The individual source must have a minimum sustained flow of five
gallons per minute of potable water.
(3) There must be a minimum flow pressure of 20 pounds at all fixtures
which are to be linked to the supplemental water supply.
(4) A certificate of water quality and quantity from a New York State
approved testing laboratory shall be submitted to the code enforcement
office prior to the issuance of a building permit.
(5) A backflow preventer shall be installed in accordance with NYS Public
Health Laws and there shall be no interconnections between the
municipal supply and an individual water supply system.
(a) Adequate site landscaping may be required of the subdivider on any
lands developed in the city. The common council shall notify the
subdivider after the sketch plan has been reviewed if a specific
landscaping plan is required. When required, the landscaping plan shall
designate plant species and locations.
(b) Street shade trees shall be provided along all new streets. Trees shall
be planted so as not to interfere with utilities, roadways, sidewalks,
sight distances, or street lights. Location, spacing and species shall be
approved by the common council and the city forester. The minimum
caliper of all trees which are planted shall be two inches when
measured 12 inches above grade.
(c) At least one tree shall be planted within each lot in a subdivision. Trees
planted within private lots shall be outside the road or utility rights-ofway
and easements, in accordance with the following provisions:
Sec. 22-139 CHARTER Sec. 22-141
C:539
Sec. 22-142. Monuments. [Res. No. 91-96, 9-24-1996]
Permanent reference monuments shall be set at final grade at all corners
and angle points along the boundaries of any major subdivision plat and
at all street intersections and at such other intermediate points as may
be required by appropriate agencies having jurisdiction in the review and
approval process of subdivision plats. These markers shall be set by a land
surveyor or engineer and certified to the city as true and accurate before a
certificate of occupancy may be issued.
Sec. 22-143. Street signs. [Res. No. 91-96, 9-24-1996]
Permanent street signs shall be installed in accordance with city
specifications. The subdivider shall erect and pay for all signs erected at
each intersection.
Sec. 22-144. Street lighting. [Res. No. 91-96, 9-24-1996]
Lighting fixtures which are installed within a subdivision shall be the
responsibility of the subdivider. The light system which is established shall
result primarily in the illumination of the streets and sidewalks within
the subdivision. The design of the system shall be coordinated with and
approved by the Niagara Mohawk Power Corporation.
Sec. 22-145. Electric, telephone, cable tv or other buried cable
utility. [Res. No. 91-96, 9-24-1996]
In every development, provisions shall be made for service from the private
utility supply systems. The wires of all utilities which serve a major
subdivision, including those which are part of the street lighting system,
shall be underground rather than aboveground on poles, standards or
towers. Underground conduit and cables shall be installed per the
regulations of the public service commission. Underground conduit and
cable shall not be less than two feet below any drainage way. Private
underground utilities may be installed within a ten-foot wide easement
outside of the road right-of-way.
Utility services for any proposed minor subdivision shall be consistent with
the service methods that exist within 500 feet of the proposed development
area. Applicants shall discuss the service method to be used with the city's
director of public works.
(1) Impacts shall be considered on sight distances.
(2) The trees shall be a minimum of 10 feet from a property line.
(3) There shall be no underground utilities within five feet of any
proposed tree.
Sec. 22-141 OLEAN CODE Sec. 22-145
C:540
Chapter 23
TAXATION AND ASSESSMENTS
CROSS REFERENCES
Finance, § 2-161 et seq. Licenses, permits and miscellaneous business
regulations, ch. 13.
LOCAL LAW REFERENCES
Taxation and assessments, ch. LL6.
STATE LAW REFERENCES
Authority for above exemption, Real Property
Tax Law § 467.
Sec. 22-145 CHARTER Sec. 22-145
C:541

ARTICLE I
IN GENERAL
Sec. 23-1. Presentation to assessor of instruments transferring
property. [Code 1971, § 2-4]
Every deed, will, and every judicial decree establishing a right of
inheritance to real property in the city shall be presented to the assessor's
office together with a carbon copy of the substance thereof setting forth the
date, consideration, the names of the grantors or grantees, the mail address
of the grantors or grantees, and a description of the property conveyed, as
set forth in the instrument of conveyance.
Sec. 23-2. Stamping and signing of deeds, wills, decrees, and maps
by assessor required. [1971 Charter Laws, § 118; Laws of N.Y.
(1915), ch. 535, § 31]
The county clerk or any subordinate in the office of such clerk who shall
record any such deed, will, or decree, or file any such map, unless such
documents have been duly stamped and signed by the assessor, shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor. The county clerk shall send to the city assessor
each month a list of the numbers of the deeds, wills, decrees, and maps
relating to real property which have in that month been filed from the city.
Sec. 23-3. Collection of assessments. [Code 1971, § 27-8]
All assessments levied by the city to cover the cost of local improvements
shall, upon becoming delinquent, be collected in the same manner as
provided for the collection of other taxes in the city.
Sec. 23-4. Lien docket. [1971 Charter Laws § 394; N.Y. Laws (1915)
ch. 535, § 125]
The city clerk shall keep in his office a book to be called a lien docket,
in which he shall enter from time to time the names of all persons, if
known, upon whose real estate there shall be any lien of unpaid taxes or
assessments; a brief description of the property affected thereby, together
with the nature and amount of such lien; and the date when the unpaid
taxes or assessments became a lien. Taxes and assessments need not be
entered until such unpaid taxes and assessments become delinquent, except
such as are for local improvements.
Sec. 23-5. through Sec. 23-25. (Reserved)
Sec. 23-1 CHARTER Sec. 23-5
C:543

ARTICLE II
PROPERTY TAXES
Sec. 23-26. Compensation for services of board of assessment
review members. [Code 1971, § 27-7.1]
Sec. 23-27. Exemptions for elderly persons. [L.L. No. 1-1968, §§ 1,
3; L.L. No. 4-1972, § 1; L.L. No. 2-1974, § 1; L.L. No. 1-1976, § 1; L.L.
No. 1-1978, § 1; L.L. No. 1-1980, § 1; L.L. No. 1-1982, § 1; Res. No.
109-01, 10-9-2001; Res. No. 61-03; 8-12-2003; Res. No. 72-07,
10-23-2007; Res. No. 75-08, 9-96-2008]
(a) The members of the board of assessment review shall be paid for their
respective services at the annual meeting to hear complaints and at
subsequent adjourned hearings at the rate of $50 per diem.
(b) The members of such board of assessment review shall present to the
city auditor vouchers for payment based upon their services on a per
diem basis for each year that the board of assessment review meets.
(a) Real property owned by one or more persons, each of whom is 65 years
of age or over, or real property owned by husband and wife, one of
whom is 65 years of age or over, shall be exempt from taxation to the
extent determined by the council.
(b) No exemptions shall be granted if the income of the owner(s) or the
combined income of all the owner(s) and spouse of the property
exceeds $18,500 for the income tax year immediately preceding the
date of the making application for exemption, except as otherwise
provided for in subdivision (c).
(c) Pursuant to the Real Property Tax Law Section 467, the sliding scale
option is as follows:
$-0- to $18,500 50%
$18,500.01 to $19,500 45%
$19,500.01 to $20,500 40%
$20,500.01 to $21,500 35%
$21,500.01 to $22,400 30%
$22,400.01 to $23,300 25%
$23,300.01 to $24,200 20%
$24,200.01 to $25,100 15%
$25,100.01 to $26,000 10%
(d) Unreimbursed medical expenses are excluded from the total income
when qualifying for Senior Citizens exemption for city purposes
pursuant to New York State Real Property Tax Law Section 467.
Sec. 23-26 CHARTER Sec. 23-27
C:545
Chapter 24
TRAFFIC
CROSS REFERENCES
Definitions and rules of construction
generally, § 1-2.
Moving buildings, § 6-266 et seq.
Miscellaneous offenses and provisions, ch. 14.
Park rules, § 17-21 et seq.
Sec. 23-27 OLEAN CODE Sec. 23-27
C:546
STATE LAW REFERENCES
Definitions generally, Vehicle and Traffic Law
§ 100 et seq.
Traffic infraction, Vehicle and Traffic Law
§ 155.
Traffic regulations generally, Vehicle and
Traffic Law § 1100 et seq.
Vehicle and Traffic Law § 1104.
Traffic signs, signals and markings, Vehicle
and Traffic Law § 1110 et seq.
Authority to prohibit turns on red, Vehicle and
Traffic Law § 1111(d)(2).
Driving on one-way roadways, Vehicle and
Traffic Law § 1127(a).
Entering stop or yield intersections, Vehicle
and Traffic Law § 1142
Vehicle entering stop intersection, Vehicle
and Traffic Law § 1142(a).
Vehicle entering yield intersection, Vehicle
and Traffic Law § 1142(b).
Stop and yield signs, Vehicle and Traffic Law
§ 1172
Stop signs, Vehicle and Traffic Law § 1172(a)
Yield signs, Vehicle and Traffic Law § 1172(b).
Speed restrictions, Vehicle and Traffic Law
§ 1180 et seq.
Stopping, standing and parking generally,
Vehicle and Traffic Law § 1200 et seq.
Handicapped parking, Vehicle and Traffic Law
§ 1203-a et seq.
Powers of cities relative to traffic, Vehicle and
Traffic Law §§ 1600, 1640 et seq.
Direction of traffic by police, Vehicle and
Traffic Law § 1602.
Power of city to designate intersections as
yield intersections, Vehicle and Traffic Law
§ 1640(a)(1).
Authority to designate one-way streets,
Vehicle and Traffic Law § 1640(a)(4)
Authority to regulate stopping, standing and
parking, Vehicle and Traffic Law § 1640(a)(6)
Power of city to establish a system of truck
routes, Vehicle and Traffic Law § 1640(a)(10).
Power of city to regulate traffic by means of
traffic control signals. Vehicle and Traffic Law
§ 1640(a)(11).
Power of city to license, regulate or prohibit
processions, assemblages or parades, Vehicle
and Traffic Law § 1640(a)(12).
Power of city to prohibit or regulate the
operations, etc., of vehicles in public parks,
Vehicle and Traffic Law § 1640(a)(13).
Power of city to authorize angle parking on
any roadway, Vehicle and Traffic Law
§ 1641(2).
Speed limits on highways in cities, Vehicle
and Traffic Law § 1643
Special speed limits on bridges and other
elevated structures in cities, Vehicle and
Traffic Law § 1644.
Traffic control devices, Vehicle and Traffic Law
§ 1680 et seq.
When signs, etc., required, Vehicle and Traffic
Law § 1683.
Signs required, Vehicle and Traffic Law
§ 1683(a)(6).
Signs required, Vehicle and Traffic Law
§ 1683(a)(8).
Sec. 23-27 CHARTER Sec. 23-27
C:547

ARTICLE I
IN GENERAL
Sec. 24-1. Short title of chapter. [Code 1971, § 28-1]
This chapter may be known and cited as "The Traffic Ordinance."
Sec. 24-2. Definitions. [Code 1971, § 28-2]
The definitions in the Vehicle and Traffic Law apply to this chapter. The
following words and phrases when used in this chapter shall, for the
purpose of this chapter, have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in
this section except where another definition is specifically provided in this
chapter:
ALLEY — A narrow thoroughfare not more than 20 feet in width.
BUSINESS DISTRICT — The territory contiguous to and including a
highway when, within any 600 feet along such highway, there are buildings
in use for business or industrial purposes, including but not limited to
hotels, banks, or office buildings, railroad stations, and public buildings,
which occupy at least 300 feet of frontage on one side or 300 feet
collectively on both sides of the highway.
CROSSWALK —
FREIGHT CURB LOADING ZONE — A space adjacent to a curb for the
exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of freight.
PASSENGER CURB LOADING ZONE — A place adjacent to a curb reserved
for the exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of
passengers.
TRAFFIC DIVISION — The traffic division of the police department of this
city, or if a traffic division is not established, then such term whenever used
in this chapter shall be deemed to refer to the police department of this city.
Sec. 24-3. Violation of chapter. [Code 1971, § 28-15]
Any violation of the provisions of this chapter for which no other penalty is
provided in this chapter is hereby declared to be a traffic infraction.
Sec. 24-4. Authorized emergency vehicles. [Code 1971, § 28-14]
That part of a roadway at an intersection included within the
connections of the lateral lines of the sidewalks on opposite sides of the
highway between the curbs or, in the absence of curbs, between the
edges of the traversable roadway; or
(a)
Any portion of a roadway at an intersection or elsewhere distinctly
indicated for pedestrian crossing by lines or other markings on the
surface.
(b)
Sec. 24-1 CHARTER Sec. 24-4
C:549
Sec. 24-5. Regulation of traffic at parking areas and driveways of
designated hospitals, malls, plazas. [Code 1971, § 28-16]
(a) The driver of an authorized emergency vehicle, when involved in an
emergency operation, may exercise the privileges set forth in this
section, but subject to the conditions stated in this section.
(b) The driver of an authorized emergency vehicle may:
(1) Stop, stand, or park irrespective of the provisions of this chapter;
(2) Proceed past a steady red signal, a flashing red signal, or a stop
sign, but only after slowing down as may be necessary for safe
operation;
(3) Exceed the maximum speed limits so long as he does not endanger
life or property;
(4) Disregard regulations governing directions of movement or turning
in specified directions.
(c) Except for an authorized emergency vehicle operated as a police
vehicle, the exemptions granted in this section to an authorized
emergency vehicle shall apply only when audible signals are sounded
from any such vehicle while in motion by bell, horn, siren, electronic
device, or exhaust whistle as may be reasonably necessary, and when
the vehicle is equipped with at least one lighted lamp so that from any
direction, under normal atmospheric conditions, from a distance of 500
feet from such vehicle, at least one red light will be displayed and
visible.
(d) An authorized emergency vehicle operated as a police, sheriff, or
deputy sheriff vehicle may exceed the maximum speed limits for the
purpose of calibrating such vehicles' speedometer.
(e) The foregoing provisions shall not relieve the driver of an authorized
emergency vehicle from the duty to drive with due regard for the safety
of all persons, nor shall such provisions protect the driver from the
consequences of his reckless disregard for the safety of others.
(f) Notwithstanding any other law, ordinance, rule, or regulation to the
contrary, an ambulance operated in the course of an emergency shall
not be prohibited from using any highway, street, or roadway, unless
specifically provided otherwise.
(a) Purpose. Pursuant to written requests of the owners and the persons in
general charge and control of the area and pursuant to Vehicle and
Traffic Law § 1640-a, the common council does hereby enact under this
section regulations at parking areas and driveways. Such parking
regulations are hereby enacted to regulate traffic and parking areas at
the Olean Center Mall, 400 North Union Street; Delaware Park Centre
Shopping Plaza, 502 North Union Street; Olean General Hospital,
Sec. 24-4 OLEAN CODE Sec. 24-5
C:550
515-519 Main Street, and Street Francis Hospital, 2221 West State
Street.
(b) Stop, yield signs. Stop signs, flashing signals, and yield signs erected at
entrance and exit locations and in place and meeting the requirements
of the Vehicle and Traffic Law and which are erected in any area to
designate intersections within parking areas and entrances and exits to
driveways, shall be enforced pursuant to this chapter and the Vehicle
and Traffic Law.
(c) Traffic control signals. Traffic in parking areas and public driveways
may be regulated by means of traffic control signals approved by the
city, and violations may be prosecuted pursuant to this chapter and the
Vehicle and Traffic Law.
(d) Speed limits. Maximum speed limits at parking areas and public
driveways are hereby set at 15 miles per hour. This provision may be
prosecuted and enforced pursuant to this chapter and the Vehicle and
Traffic Law.
(e) Turning of vehicles. Turning of vehicles may be prohibited or regulated
at intersections or other designated locations and any areas within the
real properties covered by this section. Violations may be prosecuted
under this chapter and the Vehicle and Traffic Law.
(f) Pedestrian crossings. Pedestrian crossings marked as approved by the
city may be established to regulate the crossing of any parking area or
driveway when in the area defined in this section. Violations of this
subsection may be prosecuted under this chapter and the Vehicle and
Traffic Law.
(g) One-way traffic. One-way traffic may be designated along roads and
roadways. Appropriate signs shall be erected and maintained as
approved by the city designating such traffic. Violations of this
subsection may be prosecuted under this chapter and the Vehicle and
Traffic Law.
(h) Stopping, standing, parking. The stopping, standing, or parking of
vehicles in specified areas when in the parking areas and on the
driveways may be prohibited, regulated, restricted, or limited.
Approved signs shall be erected and maintained in these areas. All
signs shall be approved by the city.
(i) Parking spaces for handicapped. Parking spaces for the handicapped
shall be extended to motor vehicles which are registered in accordance
with Vehicle and Traffic Law § 404-a. Parking spaces for the
handicapped may be provided in the areas covered under this section,
and appropriate signs shall be erected and maintained designating
these spaces. A handicapped permit issued in accordance with the
provisions under Vehicle and Traffic Law § 1203-a shall enable the
driver to park in such parking spaces. It shall be a violation of this
chapter for any person to stop or park a vehicle in any area designated
Sec. 24-5 CHARTER Sec. 24-5
C:551
Sec. 24-6. School crossing streets. [Code 1971, § 28-53]
Appropriate signs shall be erected on the following streets, alerting
vehicular traffic of school children crossing the indicated streets: Wayne
Street, in the area of the Olean Junior High School.
Sec. 24-7. Oversized and overweight vehicles. [Added 11-29-2011 by
Res. No. 82-11]
Any vehicles that exceed the allowable New York State Vehicle and Traffic
Law size or weight shall be required to obtain and possess a permit from
the City of Olean Department of Public Works prior to operating said vehicle
on any street, road or right-of-way owned and/or maintained by the City of
Olean.
Sec. 24-8. through Sec. 24-25. (Reserved)
as a place for handicapped parking unless they have a parking permit
issued under Vehicle and Traffic Law § 1203-a or a registration issued
under Vehicle and Traffic Law § 404-a, and such vehicle is being used
for the transportation of a severely disabled or handicapped person.
(j) Erection, maintenance of signs. All signs required to comply with this
section shall be erected and maintained by the owners of the parking
areas and driveways described in this section. All signs shall be
approved by the city before being set in place and shall comply with the
requirements of the Vehicle and Traffic Law.
Sec. 24-5 OLEAN CODE Sec. 24-8
C:552
ARTICLE II
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
DIVISION 1
GENERALLY
Sec. 24-26. Duty of police officers to enforce street traffic laws.
[Code 1971, § 28-3]
It shall be the duty of the officers of the police department, or such officers
as are assigned by the chief of police, to enforce all street traffic laws of this
city and all state vehicle laws applicable to street traffic in this city.
Sec. 24-27. Authority of police officers to direct traffic. [Code 1971,
§ 28-4]
Officers of the police department, or such officers as are assigned by the
chief of police, are hereby authorized to direct all traffic by voice, hand,
or signal in conformance with this chapter and other traffic laws, provided
that in the event of a fire or other emergency, to expedite traffic, or to
safeguard pedestrians, officers of the police department may direct traffic
as conditions may require, notwithstanding the provisions of this chapter
and other traffic laws.
Sec. 24-28. Authority of members of department of fire, building,
and emergency services to direct traffic. [Code 1971, § 28-5; Res.
No. 49-98, 6-9-1998]
Members of the department of fire, building, and emergency services may
direct or assist the police in directing traffic at the scene or in the
immediate vicinity of any event to which they are called to respond.
Sec. 24-29. Records retention and disposition. [Code 1971, § 28-17]
Sec. 24-30. Authority of city to install devices. [Code 1971, § 28-47]
The city shall place and maintain traffic control signs, signals, and devices
when and as required under this chapter and other traffic ordinances of the
city to make effective the provisions of this chapter and such ordinances.
Sec. 24-31. When signs required; presumptions as to previously
placed traffic control devices. [Code 1971, § 28-48(b)—(d)]
(a) Records Retention and Disposition Schedule No. 4-P-1, containing
records retention periods for city police records established pursuant to
part 185, title 8 of the NYCRR, is hereby adopted for use by the police
department/traffic violations bureau.
(b) This council authorizes the disposition of records in accordance with
retention periods set forth in the adopted records retention and
disposition schedule.
Sec. 24-26 CHARTER Sec. 24-31
C:553
Sec. 24-32. Ratification and confirmation of signs, signals, devices
upon adoption of Code.
All traffic control signs, signals, devices, and markings in place on the
adoption date of this Code are ratified and confirmed.
Sec. 24-33. through Sec. 24-50. (Reserved)
(a) No provision of this chapter for which signs are required shall be
enforced against an alleged violator if at the time and place of the
alleged violation an official sign is not in proper position and sufficiently
legible to be seen by an ordinarily observant person. Whenever a
particular section does not state that signs are required, such section
shall be effective even though no signs are erected or in place.
(b) Whenever official traffic control devices are placed in position
approximately conforming to the requirements of this chapter, such
devices shall be presumed to have been so placed by the official act or
direction of lawful authority, unless the contrary shall be established by
competent evidence.
(c) Any official traffic control device placed pursuant to the provisions of
this chapter and purporting to conform to the lawful requirements
pertaining to such devices shall be presumed to comply with the
requirements of this chapter, unless the contrary shall be established by
competent evidence.
Sec. 24-31 OLEAN CODE Sec. 24-33
C:554
DIVISION 2
NON-MOVING OFFENSES, PROCEDURES, FINES, ETC.19
Sec. 24-51. Notice of violation (summons). [Res. No. 50-93,
5-25-1993]
The notice of violation (summons) shall contain information advising the
person charged the manner and time in which he may plead either guilty
or not guilty to the violation alleged in the notice. Such notice of violation
(summons) shall also contain a warning to advise the person charged that
failure to plead in the manner and time provided shall be deemed an
admission of liability and that a default judgement may be entered thereon.
A notice of violation (summons) shall be served personally upon the
operator of the motor vehicle who is present at the time of service and his
name and address, together with the plate designation and the plate type
shown by the registration plates of said vehicle, and the expiration date,
the make or model, and body type of said vehicle, shall be inserted thereon.
The notice of violation (summons) shall be served upon the owner of the
motor vehicle if the operator is not present by affixing such notice to such
vehicle in a conspicuous place. Whenever so affixed, in lieu of inserting
the name of the person charged with the violation in the space provided
for identification of such person, the words "owner of the vehicle bearing
license" may be inserted be to followed by the plate designation and plate
type as shown by the registration plates of said vehicle together with the
expiration date, the make of model, and body type of said vehicle. Service
of the notice of violation (summons), or a duplicate thereof by affixation as
therein provided shall have the same force and effect and shall be subject
to the same penalties for the disregard thereof as though the same were
personally served with the name of the person charged with the violation
inserted therein.
For the purposes of this division, an owner who is not the owner thereof, but
who uses or operates such vehicle with the permission of the owner, express
or implied, shall be deemed to be the agent of such owner to receive such
notice for violation (summons), whether personally served on such operator
or served by affixation in the manner aforesaid, and the service made in
either manner as herein shall also be deemed to be lawful service upon such
owner.
Sec. 24-52. Responsibility of owner and operator. [Res. No. 50-93,
5-25-1993]
The operator of a vehicle shall be primarily liable for the penalties imposed
pursuant to this division. The owner of the vehicle, even if not the operator
thereof, shall also be liable therefor if such vehicle was used or operated
19.Editor's note—Res. No. 50-93, adopted May 25, 1993, repealed Div. 2, §§ 24-51—24-59,
which pertained to the traffic violations bureau, and enacted new provisions designated as
Div. 2, §§ 24-51—24-54, to read as herein set out. See the Code Comparative Table.
Sec. 24-51 CHARTER Sec. 24-52
C:555
with his permission, expressed or implied, but in such case, the owner may
recover any penalties paid by him from the operator.
Sec. 24-53. Methods of pleading and payment of fines. [Res. No.
50-93, 5-25-1993]
Sec. 24-54. Schedule of fines and penalties. [Res. No. 50-93,
5-25-1993; Res. No. 113-00, 12-12-2000; Res. No. 64-08, 7-22-2008;
amended by 11-29-2011 by Res. No. 83-11]
(a) A plea shall be entered within 10 days after service of the notice of
violation (summons). A plea may be entered in person or by
representative or by ordinary mail at such location as the city shall from
time to time fix. Any plea entered by mail, if mailed in proper form
within 10 days after service of the notice of violation (summons), shall
be accepted.
(b) Pleas by mail shall be made by:
(1) Entering the desired plea on the notice of violation (summons);
(2) Entering the name and address in the space provided;
(3) Signing the plea form; and
(4) Mailing the notice of violation (summons) with the plea form
completed to the mailing address stated in the violation.
(c) A plea of guilty shall be accompanied by a check of money order for the
payment in full of the scheduled fine as hereinafter provided.
(d) A respondent pleading not guilty, or guilty with an explanation, may
request a hearing. This shall be done at the time of pleading by
completing the notice of violation (summons) in accordance wit the
instructions thereon.
If a plea of not guilty, or guilty with an explanation, is made in person
at the time provided, an immediate hearing may be held by the
respondent on his request if convenient.
Upon receipt of a notice of violation (summons) with a plea of guilty, or
not guilty with an explanation, the city shall advise the respondent of
the date, time and place when be must appear for a hearing.
(a) [The following is a schedule of fines and penalties:]
Violation Fine
Failure to deposit required coins in a parking meter,
overtime parking in a metered space, or other meter
violation
$10
Double-parked $20
Parked on a sidewalk $20
Sec. 24-52 OLEAN CODE Sec. 24-54
C:556
Violation Fine
Parked within intersection $20
Parked on crosswalk $20
Stopped, standing or parked on any bridge or tunnel or
underpass
$20
Stopped, standing or parked on railroad tracks $20
Stopped, standing or parked on highway median $20
Stopped, standing or parked on expressway $20
Blocking public or private drive $20
Parked within 20 feet of crosswalk $20
Parked within 30 feet of stop sign or yield sign $20
Parked too close to fire station $20
Parked within 50 feet of railroad crossing $20
Parked within 15 feet of fire hydrant $20
Parked with less than 10 feet of roadway $20
Stopped, standing or parked more than 12 inches from
curb (two-way street)
$20
Stopped, standing or parked more than 12 inches from
curb (one-way street)
$20
Stopped, standing or parked facing wrong direction $20
Parking prohibited in bus stop $20
Parking prohibited in taxi-stand $20
Parking prohibited in a load zone $20
Parking prohibited on publicly or privately owned
premises without permission
$20
Parking in municipal lot without permission $20
Parking on subway $20
Double parking $20
Parking prohibited during certain hours $20
Parking prohibited at any time $20
Parking prohibited here to corner $20
Stopping, standing or parking prohibited police
emergency
$20
Other stopping, standing or parking violations $20
Handicap parking (on street), first offense; or as
otherwise provided by state law
$150 — $175
Handicap parking (on street), second offense within a
period of two years; or as otherwise provided by state
law
$175 — $250
Sec. 24-54 CHARTER Sec. 24-54
C:557
Violation Fine
Handicap parking (off street), first offense; or as
otherwise provided by state law
$150 — $175
Handicap parking (off street), second offense within a
period of two years; or as otherwise provided by state
law
$175 — $250
Expired inspection (less than 60 days) $25
Expired inspection (more than 60 days) $50
Pedestrian violations $20
Sweeper ordinance violation $20
Snowplow ordinance violation $20
Failure to obtain oversize/overweight vehicle permit $250
(b) Additional penalties. Provided further that all of the above penalties
shall double unless paid within 10 days of issuance of the notice of
violation (summons), except handicapped parking violations unless
otherwise provided by law. In addition, there shall be imposed an
administrative service fee penalty of $25 after the passage of 60 days.
Sec. 24-54 OLEAN CODE Sec. 24-54
C:558
DIVISION 3
TRAFFIC VIOLATIONS BUREAU
Sec. 24-55. Establishment. [Res. No. 111-03, 12-23-2003]
The City Court of the City of Olean, New York, is hereby authorized to
establish a Traffic Violations Bureau to assist the Court in the disposition
of charges in relation to traffic violations, pursuant to Article 14-B of the
General Municipal Law.
Sec. 24-56. Person in charge; hours of operation. [Res. No. 111-03,
12-23-2003]
The City Court shall designate the person or persons who shall be in charge
of the Traffic Violations Bureau and the days and hours that the Bureau shall
be open for the transaction of its official business.
Sec. 24-57. Jurisdiction. [Res. No. 111-03, 12-23-2003]
The Traffic Violations Bureau is hereby authorized to dispose of violations
of traffic laws, ordinances, rules and regulations when such offenses shall
not constitute the traffic infraction known as speeding, or a misdemeanor
or felony, within 10 days after a person has been notified of a violation by
the affixing of a notice of violation on a vehicle parked in violation of this
chapter, traffic law, rule or regulation, or within three days after personal
service of a Uniform Traffic Summons. Days that the Bureau shall not be
open for official business shall not be computed for the three-day period.
Sec. 24-58. Procedure for payment of fines. [Res. No. 111-03,
12-23-2003]
(a) A person may appear in person or by a written power of attorney in
such form as shall be prescribed by the City Court by paying a fine
established by the City Court and, in writing, waiving a hearing in
court, pleading guilty to the charge and authorizing the person in
charge of the Bureau to make such a plea and accept payment of the
said fine.
(b) The Bureau shall accept such designated fines and issue receipts
therefor.
(c) If a person charged with a traffic violation does not answer within the
designated time, the Bureau shall cause a complaint to be entered
against such person who does not answer within the designated time
and warrant to be issued for his arrest and appearance before the
Court.
(d) Any person who shall have been, within the preceding 12 months, guilty
of a number of perking violations in excess of three or more parking
violations, shall not be permitted to appear and answer to a subsequent
Sec. 24-55 CHARTER Sec. 24-58
C:559
Sec. 24-59. Waiver and power of attorney; form provided.
The waiver and power of attorney referred to in § 371 of the General
Municipal Law shall be in substantially the following form:
Date _____, I, the undersigned, hereby waive a hearing in court and plead
guilty to the traffic violation as charged on the reverse side hereof, and duly
constitute the Clerk of the City Court or _____, my attorney, and authorize
him/her to appear in Court, enter a plea and pay my fine which is enclosed
herewith.
This is my _____ offense for this violation within the current calendar year.
Name ___________________________ Motor Vehicle License No. _____________
Address ________________________________________________ Operator's
License No. _____
Sec. 24-60. Records and reports. [Res. No. 111-03, 12-23-2003]
The Bureau shall keep records and submit detailed monthly reports to the
City Court of all notices or summons issued and disposed of by said Bureau
and such other information as may be prescribed by the City Court of Olean
by law and transmit with said reports all sums collected to the City Court.
violation at the Traffic Violations Bureau, but must appear in Court at a
time specified by the Bureau.
(e) Nothing contained in this article shall authorize the Traffic Violations
Bureau to deprive a person of his right to counsel or to prevent him
from exercising his right to appear in Court to answer to, explain, or
defend any charge of violation of any traffic law, ordinance, rule or
regulations.
Sec. 24-58 OLEAN CODE Sec. 24-60
C:560
DIVISION 4
REMOVAL OF VEHICLES
[Res. No. 20-09, 3-24-2009; amended 3-9-2016 by Res. No. 15-16]
Sec. 24-61. Authorization.
(a) The Olean Chief of Police shall have the power and authority to provide
for the removal, immobilization and storage of vehicles parked in
violation of any statute, ordinance, rule or regulation for vehicles on
which there are any number of outstanding traffic warrants or fines for
parking violations.
(b) When a vehicle is parked or abandoned on a public street or public
parking lot in the City of Olean during a snowstorm, flood, fire or other
public emergency which affects that portion of the public street or
parking lot upon which said vehicle is parked or abandoned, said
vehicle may be removed by or under the direction of the Chief of Police.
(c) When a vehicle is found unattended on a public street or public parking
lot within the City of Olean where said vehicle constitutes an
obstruction to traffic, said vehicle may be removed by or under the
direction of the Chief of Police.
(d) When a vehicle is parked or stopped upon a public street or public
highway within the City of Olean in excess of 36 hours, said vehicle may
be removed by or under the direction of the Police Chief, Fire Chief or
Director of Public Works when conditions, in his/her sole discretion,
shall require such removal.
(e) Any unattended vehicle found parked upon a street or on any Cityowned
property or property under the jurisdiction or control of the City
against which there are three or more outstanding or otherwise
unsettled parking violation summonses for which judgments have been
issued may, by or under the direction of a police officer or parking
enforcement officer, either by towing or otherwise, be removed or
conveyed to and impounded in any place designated by the Chief of
Police or immobilized in such a manner as to prevent its operation,
except that no such vehicle shall be immobilized by any means other
than by use of a device or other mechanism which will cause no damage
to such vehicle unless it is moved while such device or mechanism is in
place.
(f) Such vehicles towed and removed as aforesaid may be stored at a
private impound lot as designated by the Olean Chief of Police.
(g) Such towing, removal and storage shall be at the sole expense and risk
of the owner of the vehicle.
Sec. 24-61 CHARTER Sec. 24-62
C:561
Sec. 24-62. Notice of warning to owner.
It shall be the duty of the police officer, parking enforcement officer
removing or immobilizing such motor vehicle or under whose direction such
motor vehicle is removed or immobilized to inform as soon as practicable
the Chief of Police or his designee, who shall in turn inform by telephone (if
possible) and by first class mail the owner of the impounded or immobilized
vehicle of the nature and circumstances of the prior unsettled parking
violations summonses, for which or on account of which such vehicle was
impounded or immobilized. In any case involving immobilization of a vehicle
pursuant to this subsection, such police officer or parking enforcement
officer shall cause to be placed on such vehicle, in a conspicuous manner,
a notice sufficient to warn any individual to the effect that such vehicle has
been immobilized and that any attempt to move such vehicle might result in
damage to such vehicle.
Sec. 24-63. Tampering with or attempted removal of immobilized
vehicle.
Any attempt by any person to tamper with, deface, remove or destroy an
immobilization device or to move by any means a vehicle towed or secured
as herein provided may result in the prosecution of such person for any
offense separate from and in addition to the parking violations; in addition,
such person shall be liable for any loss suffered by the City of Olean due to
any such attempt.
Sec. 24-64. Release of vehicle to owner; suspension of restrictions.
Sec. 24-65. Severability.
If any provision of this Division 4 or the application thereof to any person or
circumstance is held invalid, the validity of the remainder of the division and
the application of such division to other persons and circumstances shall
not be affected thereby.
(a) The owner or person entitled to possession of such vehicle may secure
the release of the vehicle by complying with the rules and regulations of
the Parking Enforcement Division concerning all outstanding
summonses and judgments against said vehicle and by payment of the
total sum due as outlined in Section 24-54, Schedule of Fines and
Penalties. Additional fees may be owed to the contractor hired to
immobilize or tow said vehicle prior to removal of immobilization device
or release from storage.
(b) While a vehicle is immobilized as herein provided, parking restrictions
to which the vehicle may be subject shall be suspended during such
immobilization period.
Sec. 24-62 OLEAN CODE Sec. 24-66
C:562
Sec. 24-66. Repealer.
This Division 4 shall supersede any and all the provisions of ordinances,
rules or regulations previously enacted or promulgated which are
inconsistent with the provisions of this division.
Sec. 24-66 CHARTER Sec. 24-66
C:563

DIVISION 5
IMMOBILIZATION (BOOTING), STORAGE AND FINES
[Res. No. 20-09, 3-24-2009; amended 3-9-2016 by Res. No. 15-16]
Sec. 24-67. Definitions.
The following terms, when used in this Division 5, shall have the meanings
indicated:
APPLICANT — The entity or individual that is applying for a license to
tow and/or store vehicles on behalf of the City of Olean and/or to attach
immobilization devices as prescribed by this chapter.
CITY — The City of Olean.
IMMOBILIZATION DEVICE — A device which when locked to one of the
wheels or axles of a parked motor vehicle immobilizes the motor vehicle,
and which cannot be removed by the owner of the motor vehicle.
LICENSE — The license, issued by the City of Olean, authorizing the
licensee to attach immobilization devices to motor vehicles within the City
of Olean, or to conduct a business that does so and/or to impound and store
vehicles pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.
LICENSEE — An entity or individual holding a valid license issued under
this chapter.
MOTOR VEHICLE — Includes automobiles, trucks and vans.
PERSON — An individual, partnership, unincorporated association,
corporation, limited-liability company or other entity.
PROPERTY — A parcel of land located within the City of Olean, regardless
of the form of legal ownership.
Sec. 24-68. Licenses.
It shall be unlawful for any person or entity to operate a business which
attaches immobilization devices to motor vehicles within the City, without
first having obtained a license.
Sec. 24-69. Application for license.
(a) An application for a license under this chapter shall be filed with the
Clerk of the City upon forms which shall be provided by the City and
which shall be verified under oath.
(b) A verified application for a license shall contain the following
information:
(1) The name and address of the applicant, the names and addresses of
all corporate shareholders having more than 25% ownership share,
the names and addresses of all officers and directors, if the
applicant is a corporation, and of all members of an unincorporated
Sec. 24-67 CHARTER Sec. 24-69
C:565
Sec. 24-70. Fees for license.
There shall be no fee associated with this license.
Sec. 24-71. Suspension or revocation of license.
association, partnership or limited-liability company, as the case
may be.
(2) A disclosure of misdemeanor or felony convictions against the
applicant or any person described in subsection (b)(1), where the
convictions were entered and the date thereof.
(3) Any other relevant information which the City may require.
(c) Any license issued hereunder shall be valid for a period of two years
from the date of its issuance. Any such license may be renewed in the
thirty-day period prior to its expiration date upon submission to the City
Clerk of the same information that would be required under an initial
application.
(d) Insurance. No license hereunder shall be issued before the applicant
provides a certificate of insurance or other proof satisfactory to the City
Clerk to demonstrate that the licensee is insured against liability for
personal injury and property damage in an amount of at least $100,000.
Said certificate of insurance shall require that the City Clerk receive 10
days' prior written notice of cancellation or amendment of said policy.
(a) The license of any person to attach immobilization devices within the
City or to operate a business which engages in attachment of
immobilization devices to motor vehicles within the City may be
suspended or revoked for a period to be determined by the City Clerk if
such person shall violate any provisions of this chapter or any rule or
regulation adopted hereunder or if the licensee shall be guilty of
making a false statement or misrepresentation in its application for a
license. No suspension or revocation shall be made by the City Clerk
without a hearing having been held thereupon not less than five
business days after written notice thereof shall have been given to the
licensee, either in person or by registered or certified mail.
(b) The City Clerk, upon receiving information giving him/her reasonable
cause to believe that any licensee has violated any provision of this
chapter or has been convicted of any violation referred to in this section
or is guilty of having made a false statement or misrepresentation in its
application, and upon finding that the public safety and welfare
requires immediate action, may temporarily suspend forthwith such
person's license and permission to attach immobilization devices within
the City until such time as a hearing is held by the City Clerk as
provided hereinabove and the City Clerk shall have rendered his or her
determination thereon.
Sec. 24-69 OLEAN CODE Sec. 24-71
C:566
Sec. 24-72. Penalties for offenses.
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be punishable
for each violation by a fine not to exceed $250 or by imprisonment for a
period not to exceed 15 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment.
Sec. 24-73. Applicability.
In addition to any other penalties or fines imposed for the violation of any
parking law, rule or regulation, the provisions of this chapter shall apply to
the following categories of vehicles:
Sec. 24-74. Removal of vehicles.
Within 48 hours or by the first business day after towing, the Police
Department shall send a certified letter to the registered owner of such
vehicle at the address described in § 24-61(e) above of the fact of its towing,
the place where it may be recovered and the conditions under which it will
be released.
Sec. 24-75. Costs to be paid.
Before the owner of any vehicle taken into custody, as above provided, shall
be allowed to repossess or to secure the release of said vehicle, the owner
or his agent shall pay the following:
(c) Effect of suspension or revocation. It shall be unlawful for any person to
attach an immobilization device to any motor vehicle within the City or
to cause such a device to be attached if it has been determined, in
accordance with this section that said person's license to operate within
the City has been suspended or revoked.
(1) Vehicles which have three or more outstanding and unpaid parking
violations issued against them and which, after mailing a notice to the
registered owner at the last address shown for him or her in the
Department of Motor Vehicles' registration records for the automobile
in question, are found operated or parked on any public street, public
highway or private road open to public travel, including any portion of
the entire width between the boundary lines of said roads, streets or
highways, paved or unpaved, or on any property leased by or in the
possession and control of the City of Olean.
(1) All sums due the City of Olean for any parking violations issued and
outstanding against such vehicle and/or any other vehicle owned by
such person.
(2) Additional fees may be owed to the contractor hired to immobilize or
tow said vehicle prior to removal of immobilization device or release
from storage for the costs of booting, towing, and storage for each day
that such vehicle is so stored.
Sec. 24-71 CHARTER Sec. 24-76
C:567
Sec. 24-76. Identification required for release.
No such vehicle shall be released until the owner or his agent has
established his identity and right to possession and has a proper receipt
therefore signed by the Olean City Clerk.
Sec. 24-77. (Reserved)
Sec. 24-78. Severability.
If any provision of this Division 5 or the application thereof to any person or
circumstances is held invalid, the validity of the remainder of the division
and the application of such division to other persons and circumstances
shall not be affected thereby.
Sec. 24-79. Repealer.
This Division 5 shall supersede any and all the provisions of ordinances,
rules or regulations previously enacted or promulgated which are
inconsistent with the provisions of this division.
Sec. 24-80. (Reserved)
Sec. 24-76 OLEAN CODE Sec. 24-80
C:568
ARTICLE III
OPERATION OF VEHICLES GENERALLY
Sec. 24-81. Speed limits. [Code 1971, § 28-64; Res. No. 187-90,
11-27-1990; Res. No. 38-00, 5-23-2000; Res. No. 2-03, 1-28-2003;
Res. No. 40-04, 5-25-2004; Res. No. 59-07, 8-14-2007; Res. No.
84-08, 10-14-2008; Res. No. 60-10, 8-24-2010]
Sec. 24-82. Right turn on red prohibited at designated
intersections. [Code 1971, § 28-27.1(c); Res. No. 54-91, 5-28-1991;
Res. No. 117-02, 10-22-2002; Res. No. 24-03, 4-22-2003]
Right turns on red shall be prohibited as follows:
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to ride, drive, or cause to be
propelled any automobile, motorcycle, or any other vehicle on any
public street, highway, or thoroughfare of the city at a rate of speed
greater than 30 miles per hour.
(b) The speed limit on the following streets is 15 miles per hour, and signs
to this effect shall be installed:
(1) North 15th Street, north half of 100 block of North 15th Street to
West Sullivan Street.
(2) West Sullivan Street between North 14th Street and North 15th
Street.
(3) West Forest Avenue from North Union Street to Maple Street.
(4) South 4th Street between West State Street and Green Street.
(5) Irving Street between South 3rd Street and South 5th Street.
(6) East Spring Street at the eastern property line of 500 East Spring
Street.
(c) The speed limit on the following streets is 25 miles per hours, and signs
to that effect are to be installed:
(1) Rowland Avenue, for the full length of the street.
(1) A "no right turn on red" sign shall be installed and maintained at the
intersection of Laurens and North Union Streets for traffic exiting
Laurens Street onto North Union Street.
(2) A "no right turn on red" sign shall be installed and maintained at the
intersection of Front and Main Streets for traffic exiting Front Street
onto Main Street.
(3) A "no right turn on red" sign shall be installed and maintained at the
intersection of North 24th and West State Streets for traffic exiting
North 24th Street onto West State Street.
Sec. 24-81 CHARTER Sec. 24-82
C:569
Sec. 24-83. Posting of certain signs. [Res. No. 77-91, 8-13-1991;
Res. No. 137-91, 12-10-1991]
Sec. 24-84. One-way streets and alleys. [Code 1971, § 28-31; Res.
No. 107-02, 9-24-2002; Res. No. 42-06, 4-25-2006]
(4) A "no right turn on red" sign shall be installed and maintained at the
intersection of Wayne and North Union Streets for the traffic exiting
Wayne Street onto North Union Street.
(a) Signs necessary to prohibit traffic movements other than right turns
during the period from 6:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. on weekdays shall be
posted. Necessary expenses shall be charged to the traffic signs
account.
(b) Appropriate signs and pavement markings shall be installed at South
1st Street by West State Street for the purpose of requiring all
northbound traffic on South 1st Street to turn right in an easterly
direction onto West State Street.
(a) Whenever any ordinance of this city designates any one-way street or
alley, the director of public works shall place and maintain signs giving
notice thereof, and no such regulations shall be effective until such
signs are in place. Signs indicating the direction of lawful traffic
movement shall be placed at every intersection where movement of
traffic in the opposite direction is prohibited.
(b) Upon those streets and parts of streets and in those alleys described in
this section regulating traffic upon the public streets of the city,
vehicular traffic shall move only in the indicated direction when signs
indicating the direction of traffic are erected and maintained at every
intersection where movement in the opposite direction is prohibited.
Anderson Avenue. Anderson Avenue from North 11th Street to West
Sullivan Street.
1st Street, South. South 1st Street from West Henley Street to Irving
Street.
2nd Street, North. North 2nd Street from Laurens Street to West
State Street.
Brickell Avenue. Brickell Avenue from Wayne Street to Coleman
Street.
Carolina Street. In the vicinity of the small island just in front of the
east property boundary of 201 Carolina Street.
Clinton Street, South. South Clinton Street from East State Street to
East Henley Street.
Fulton Street. Fulton Street from East State Street to East Henley
Street.
Sec. 24-82 OLEAN CODE Sec. 24-84
C:570
Sec. 24-85. Truck route system. [Code 1971, §§ 28-8, 28-9; Res. No.
44-07, 6-26-2007]
Garden Avenue. Garden Avenue between Front Street and King
Street, one way going east.
Putnam Street, West. Putnam Street between North Fifth Street and
North Sixth Street.
Second Street, South. South Second Street from West State Street to
West Henley Street.
South Street. South Street from South Union Street to South Barry
Street.
Sullivan Street, West. West Sullivan Street from North Sixth Street to
North Eighth Street.
Times Square. Times Square from North Barry Street to North Union
Street.
Vermont Street. Vermont Street from York Street to Virginia Street.
Virginia Street. Virginia Street from Vermont Street to Carolina
Street.
(a) There is hereby established and enacted a truck route system for the
city upon which all trucks, tractors, and tractor-trailer combinations
having a total gross weight in excess of five tons are permitted to travel
and operate.
(b) The truck route system of the city shall consist of the following streets
and highways within the limits of the city:
Buffalo Street from the west city line to its intersection with North
12th Street.
State Street from the west city line to the east city line.
Union Street from the south city line to its intersection with Main
Street.
Wayne Street from its intersection with North 12th Street to its
intersection with North Union Street.
(c) All trucks, tractors, and tractor-trailer combinations having a total
gross weight in excess of five tons are hereby excluded from all streets
and highways within the city excepting those streets and highways set
forth in this section. This exclusion, however, shall not be construed to
prevent the delivery or pickup of merchandise or other property along
the streets and highways of this city from which such vehicles and
combinations are otherwise excluded.
(d) The director of public works of the city shall erect official signs in
proper positions sufficiently legible to be seen by an ordinarily
observant person delineating and marking the truck route system upon
the streets and highways enumerated in this section.
Sec. 24-84 CHARTER Sec. 24-85.1
C:571
Sec. 24-85.1. Vehicles exceeding five tons prohibited on South First
Street between State Street and Henley Street. [Res. No. 97-92,
11-23-1993]
Sec. 24-85.2. Vehicles exceeding five tons prohibited on Henley
Street Extension from its intersection with North 20th Street to its
terminus at the lands of the Cattaraugus County Nursing Home.
[Res. No. 20-97, 3-11-1997]
Sec. 24-86. Designation of through streets. [Code 1971, § 28-30]
Those streets and parts of streets described in this section are hereby
declared to be through streets for the purposes of this article.
Bishop Street. Bishop Street from King Street to Davis Avenue.
Buffalo Street. Buffalo Street from Reed Street to the Buffalo Street city
line.
Center Street. Center Street from Main Street to Fourth Avenue.
Fourth Street, North. North Fourth Street from Wayne Street to Pine
Street.
Front Street. Front Street from Main Street to East State Street.
Garden Avenue. Garden Avenue from Front Street to King Street.
Genesee Street. Genesee Street from Main Street to the city line on
Genesee Street.
Green Street, East. East Green Street from its intersection with South
Union Street to Adams Street.
Green Street, West. West Green Street from its intersection with South
Union Street to South Seventh Street.
(a) No vehicular traffic shall be permitted on South First Street from West
State Street to Henley Street wherein the total gross weight of such
vehicle plus the load exceeds five tons. Nothing contained in this
section shall be construed as prohibiting vehicles of the aforementioned
size or weight from using such street for the transaction of any business
at any premises located on such street.
(b) Conspicuous signs shall be placed at the intersection of Henley Street
and South First Street and at West State and South First Streets
indicating the prohibition as stated in this section.
(a) No vehicular traffic shall be permitted on Henley Street Extension from
20 feet west of the intersection of North 20th Street to its terminus at
the lands of the Cattaraugus County Nursing Home wherein the gross
weight of such vehicle plus load exceeds five tons.
(b) Conspicuous signs shall be placed indicating the prohibition stated in
this section.
Sec. 24-85.1 OLEAN CODE Sec. 24-86
C:572
Henley Street, East. East Henley Street from its intersection with South
Union Street to Fulton Street.
Henley Street, West. West Henley Street from its intersection with South
Union Street to South Nineteenth Street.
Irving Street. Irving Street from South Union Street to South Eleventh
Street.
King Street. King Street from East State Street to Johnson Avenue.
Laurens Street. Laurens Street from North Union Street to North Fourth
Street.
Main Street. Main Street from North Union Street to the Main Street city
line.
Maple Street. Maple Street from Root Street to Oak Street.
North Sixth Street. North Sixth Street at its intersection with Putnam
Street.
Pine Street. Pine Street from North Union Street to the Olean Creek.
Seneca Avenue. Seneca Avenue from Front Street to the Seneca Avenue
city line.
Spruce Street. Spruce Street from Wayne Street to Pine Street.
State Street, East. East State Street from Union Street to the east city
line.
State Street, West. West State Street from Union Street to the west city
line.
Sullivan Street, West. West Sullivan Street from North Union Street to
North Fifteenth Street.
Union Street, North. North Union Street from State Street to Franklin
Street.
Union Street, South. South Union Street from State Street to the South
Union Street city line.
Washington Street. Washington Street from North Fourth Street to North
Twenty-First Street.
Wayne Street. Wayne Street from North Union Street to North Ninth
Street.
Sec. 24-86.3. Thru trucks prohibited in excess of 10,000 pounds.
[Res. No. 78-99, 10-12-1999]
A "Thru Trucks Prohibited in Excess of 10,000 pounds" sign shall be
installed at:
The corner of North Union Street and Main Street (near Pizza Hut).
Sec. 24-86 CHARTER Sec. 24-86.3
C:573
Editor's note: Res. No. 78-99, adopted Oct. 12, 1999, which set out
provisions pertaining to the prohibition of thru trucks in excess of 10,000
pounds did not specifically amend this Code. Hence, said resolution was
included as § 24-86.3 at the discretion of the editor to read as herein set
out. See the Code Comparative Table.
Sec. 24-86.4. Thru trucks prohibited. [Res. No. 56-99, 7-27-1999;
Res. No. 48-11, 6-28-2011]
"Thru Trucks Prohibited" signs be installed at:
West Henley Street at the corners of S. Union Street, S. 12th Street, S. 18th
Street and S. 19th Street.
West State Street at the corner of S. 19th Street
Editor's note: Res. No. 56-99, adopted July 27, 1999, which set out
provisions pertaining to the prohibition of thru trucks did not specifically
amend this Code. Hence, said resolution was included as § 24-86.4 at the
discretion of the editor to read as herein set out. See the Code Comparative
Table.
Sec. 24-87. Stop intersection ordinances unaffected by Code. [Code
1971, § 28-81(d)]
Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall be deemed
to affect the validity of any ordinance designating stop intersections, and
all such ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and
effect.
Sec. 24-88. Yield streets designated. [Code 1971, § 28-28; Res. No.
89-04, 9-28-2004; Res. No. 19-10, 3-23-2010; amended 10-11-2011
by Res. No. 78-11]
Those streets and parts of streets described below are hereby declared to
be yield streets, and yield signs shall be erected at the locations described
in this section:
Intersection of Adams Street and Fulton Street on the northeast side of
Adams Street.
Easterly intersection of Franchot Boulevard and South Union Street.
Westerly intersection of Franchot Boulevard and South Union Street.
Easterly intersection of York Street and South Union Street.
Easterly intersection of Reservoir Road and South Union Street.
Northerly intersection of Higgins Avenue and Delaware Avenue.
Easterly intersection of Clark Bros plant access road and Buffalo Street.
Southerly intersection of North Barry Street and Main Street.
Easterly intersection of the access road from Avenue B to Buffalo Street.
Sec. 24-86.3 OLEAN CODE Sec. 24-88
C:574
Northerly and southerly intersections of Pine Street and River Street.
Southerly intersection of Oregon Road and River Street.
Northeasterly intersection of North Clark Street and Goodrich Avenue.
West property boundary of 201 Carolina Street.
Intersection of River Street and Oregon Road for the purpose of
regulating traffic on Oregon Road.
Southerly intersection of Brickell Avenue and Coleman Street.
Sec. 24-89. Parking or operating uninspected vehicles. [Res. No.
58-93, §§ 1, 2, 5-25-1993]
Sec. 24-90. through Sec. 24-105. (Reserved)
(a) It shall be unlawful to operate or park on the public streets of this city
unless a certificate of inspection as required by Article 5 of the Vehicle
and Traffic Law of the State of New York is displayed upon the vehicle
or affixed to the registration certificate of the vehicle as may be
required by the laws of the State of New York. Any violation of this
section that occurs while a motor vehicle is parked in the public streets
of this city shall constitute a parking violation.
(b) A violation of this provision shall be subject to such penalty as may from
time to time be established by the common council.
Sec. 24-88 CHARTER Sec. 24-90
C:575

ARTICLE IV
STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING
DIVISION 1
GENERALLY
Sec. 24-106. Application of article. [Code 1971, § 28-76]
Sec. 24-107. Necessity of signs. [Code 1971, § 28-80]
Whenever by this article or any other ordinance of this city any parking time
limit is imposed or parking is prohibited on designated streets, it shall be
the duty of the director of public works to erect appropriate signs giving
notice thereof. No such regulations shall be effective unless such signs are
erected and in place at the time of any alleged offense.
Sec. 24-108. City clerk to supervise and administer municipal laws
regarding parking. [Code 1971, § 2-79]
Except as otherwise specifically provided by law, ordinance, rule or
regulation, or except as otherwise provided in this article, the city clerk
shall be responsible for the supervision and administration of the municipal
laws, rules, and regulations applicable to the downtown offstreet and
onstreet parking. The chief of the police department shall continue to be
responsible for enforcement and shall coordinate with the city clerk in
the implementation of the enforcement policies and procedures. All city
employees from time to time appointed by the city, other than police officers
and peace officers, shall be under the direction and supervision of the city
clerk.
Sec. 24-109. Ratification and confirmation of rates and charges for
parking.
All rates and charges for parking spaces or for the use of parking lots or
parking facilities operated by the city are ratified and confirmed.
(a) The provisions of this article prohibiting the standing or parking of a
vehicle shall apply at all times, at those times specified in this article, or
as indicated on official traffic control devices, except when it is
necessary to stop a vehicle to avoid conflict with other traffic or in
compliance with the directions of a police officer or official traffic
control device.
(b) The provisions of this article imposing a time limit on parking shall not
relieve any person from the duty to observe other and more restrictive
provisions prohibiting or limiting the stopping, standing, or parking of
vehicles in specified places or for a specified time.
Sec. 24-106 CHARTER Sec. 24-110
C:577
Sec. 24-110. Ten feet of roadway to be left available for traffic.
[Code 1971, § 28-79]
It shall be unlawful for any person to park any vehicle upon a street in such
a manner or under such conditions as to leave available less than 10 feet of
width of the roadway for free movement of vehicular traffic.
Sec. 24-111. Angle parking. [Code 1971, § 28-84; Res. No. 58-07;
8-14-2007]
Those streets or parts of streets described in this section are hereby
declared to be streets where angle parking, that is, parking in a position
other than parallel to the curb, is permitted.
From To
Both sides of North Union
Street
State Street Main Street
Both sides of South Union
Street
State Street Henley Street
North side of Times Square Union Street 95 feet east
South side of Times Square Barry Street 293 feet west
North side of South Street Union Street Barry Street
Sec. 24-112. Free use of parking lots, metered spaces. [Code 1971,
§ 28-92]
The city hereby grants free use of municipal parking lots and all metered
spaces each Friday after 5:00 p.m.
Sec. 24-113. Handicap parking. [Code 1971, § 28-93; Res. No.
59-93, §§ 1—5, 5-25-1993; Res. No. 33-98, 4-21-1998; Res. No.
86-99, 11-9-1999; Res. No. 87-00, 9-26-2000; Res. No. 29-06,
3-28-2006; Res. No. 45-06, 4-25-2006; Res. No. 52-06, 5-9-2006;
Res. No. 43-08, 5-27-2008; Res. No. 106-08, 11-25-2008]
(a) It shall be a violation for any person to stop, stand or park a vehicle in
any area designated as a place for handicapped parking as defined by
this section or the Vehicle and Traffic Laws of the State of New York,
unless the vehicle bears a permit issued by the city authorizing parking
in areas designated within the city as a place for parking for
handicapped persons or a registration issued by the State of New York
under Section 404-a of Vehicle and Traffic Law and such vehicle is
being used for the transportation of a severely disabled or handicapped
person.
(b) Permits for parking in handicapped spaces shall be issued by the city
clerk of the City of Olean or such other agent as may be designated by
the common council of the city to make such certification and shall be
issued to:
Sec. 24-110 OLEAN CODE Sec. 24-113
C:578
(1) Any resident of New York State who is a severely disabled person
as hereinafter defined upon application of such person or such
person's parent or guardian; or
(2) Any facility or agency licensed by the State of New York that
operates a motor vehicle for the purpose of transporting
handicapped persons upon the application of such facility or
agency.
For the purposes of paragraph (a) of this section, such permit
shall be for the use exclusively of a vehicle in which the person
to whom it has been issued is being transported and such permit
shall not be transferable and shall be forfeited if utilized by any
other person. Any abuse by any person, facility or agency to whom
such permit has been issued of any privilege, benefit, precedence
or consideration granted pursuant to the issuance of such permit
shall be sufficient cause for revocation of said permit.
(c) Parking in violation of this law shall be subject to a penalty of $25 for
the first offense, and $50 to $100 for the second offense occurring
within a two-year period within the city.
(d) For the purposes of this section, a severely disabled person shall mean
any person having one or more of the following impairments,
disabilities or conditions which are permanent in nature:
(1) Has limited or no use of one or both limbs;
(2) Has a neuromuscular dysfunction which severely limits mobility;
(3) Has a physical impairment or condition which is other than those
specified above, but is of such nature as to impose unusual
hardship in utilization of public transportation facilities and such
condition is certified by a physician duly licensed to practice
medicine in this state as constituting an equal degree of disability
(specifying the particular condition) so as to prevent such person
from getting around without great difficulty (reference Vehicle and
Traffic Law § 404-a).
(e) The following on-street locations are for handicapped parking:
Street Location
4th, North Two spaces on the east side, adjacent to Olean
High School
South First two spaces at northeast end, Sundays only
13th Street North One space on the east side, directly south of the
"No Parking Here to Corner" sign south of
Washington Street
Sec. 24-113 CHARTER Sec. 24-113
C:579
Sec. 24-114. Standing or parking in bus stops or taxicab stands.
[Code 1971, § 28-88]
It shall be unlawful for any person to stand or park a vehicle other than a
bus in a bus stop or other than a taxicab in a taxicab stand when any such
bus stop or taxicab stand has been officially designated and appropriately
signed, except in an emergency or in compliance with directions of a police
officer or traffic control device.
Sec. 24-115. Designation of bus stops. [Code 1971, § 28-86]
Street Location
17th, South On the west side of South 17th Street from its
intersection with West State Street southerly
for a distance of 50 feet.
Henley Street, West On the north side of West Henley Street 79 feet
east from the northeast corner of South 1st
Street for a distance of 45 feet easterly.
Union Street Olean Municipal Building (2); (one each) Sears;
Council Opticians; Ray's Barbershop; Raxx
Dress Shop; Key Bank; Community Bank; On
the Side Sub Shop; Antique store (Shaner
Building); Old Rack and Rib Room site; To Your
Health Building; Jo Ann Fabric Store
On the west side of 17th Street from its
intersection with West State Street southerly
for a distance of 35 feet.
Union Street North At 132 North Union Street
Union Street North At the location formerly occupied by Meter No.
A40
Union Street North On the west side to the north of Angee's
Restaurant at 475 North Union Street
Union Street North In front of 705 North Union Street
Washington Street One space on the north side, directly east of the
"No Parking Here to Corner" sign on North
13th Street
(a) Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall be
deemed to affect the validity of any ordinance designating bus stops,
and all such ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full
force and effect to the same extent as if set out in full in this Code.
(b) Whenever any ordinance of this city designates a bus stop, it shall be
the duty of the director of public works to place and maintain
appropriate signs designating the limits of such stand. Except in an
emergency, no driver of a bus shall park or stand any bus on any street
at any place other than a bus stop for the purpose of this section.
Sec. 24-113 OLEAN CODE Sec. 24-116
C:580
Sec. 24-116. Parking or standing of taxicabs. [Code 1971, § 28-87]
It shall be unlawful for any driver of a taxicab to park or stand any taxicab at
any place other than an officially designated taxicab stand, except that this
provision shall not prevent the driver of any such vehicle from temporarily
stopping in accordance with other stopping or parking regulations at any
place for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading
passengers.
Sec. 24-117. Parking on subways of streets. [Code 1971, § 28-89;
Res. No. 135-94, 1-10-1995; Res. No. 45-09, 5-12-2009]
Sec. 24-118. Parking on premises or property other than public
streets. [Code 1971, § 28-90]
(a) 20It shall be unlawful and contrary to the provisions of this section to
park any vehicle upon the subway of any public street in the city, as
defined in § 1-2, if such subway is not covered/finished with blacktop or
concrete.
(b) It shall be unlawful and contrary to the provisions of this section to park
any vehicle upon the subway of any public street in the city, as defined
in § 1-2, in those areas of the city designated on the official zoning map
as R1, R2 and R3. Parking on the subway shall be prohibited in all other
areas of the city where such parking obstructs the public right-of-way.
(c) The prohibitions specified in this section shall not apply on the nights
that street sweeping is being carried on in that particular part of the
city, nor during snow and ice removal as provided in this Code.
(d) Any violation of this section shall be prosecuted in city court and shall
be punishable by a fine not to exceed $25.
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to park, stand, store, or leave a
motor vehicle upon any publicly or privately owned premises or
property, parking areas, or parking lots, without the consent and
permission of the owner or lessee of such premises.
(b) To effectuate the prohibition on such premises as described in
subsection (a) of this section, a conspicuous sign shall be posted at the
entrances to such parking lot or parking area informing the public as to
the permitted conditions of parking thereon. A sign as described in this
section shall be deemed substantial compliance with this section:
20.(Except in areas designated R1, R2 and R3, parking on the subway is permitted in the City
of Olean. The purpose of this amendment is to require that the subway be finished with
blacktop or concrete if vehicles are to be parked on it.)
Sec. 24-116 CHARTER Sec. 24-118
C:581
PARKING RESTRICTED (six inches)
EXCEPT FOR (LIST PERSONS OR CONDITIONS PERMITTED) ONLY
(four inches)
ALL OTHERS KEEP OUT (six inches)
UNDER PENALTY OF LAW (two inches)
VIOLATION—Sec. 24-118 of CODE OF ORDINANCES
POLICE ENFORCEMENT (two inches)
(c) Such sign shall be no more than three feet high by four feet wide. The
words "police enforcement" and "under penalty of law" on such signs
shall be construed, among other things, to mean a request by the owner
or lessee that the police or special patrolmen shall enforce the
provisions of this section against persons parking, standing, storing, or
leaving vehicles on such premises without the consent of the owner or
lessee, and that the police are authorized to enter upon such premises
to enforce the provisions of this division. Such sign shall state the
conditions of parking or the persons authorized by the owner or lessee
to use such premises for parking, or both. Persons not included within
such authorization or violating the regulations and conditions set out on
such sign shall be deemed to be using such premises unlawfully without
the authority and consent of the owner or lessee. This section may be
enforced by the police or special patrolmen in the same manner as
elsewhere provided for in this chapter for the enforcement of traffic or
parking ordinances, including the use of tags, summonses, towing, and
any other procedure authorized by law.
(d) Proof of ownership of a vehicle shall be presumptive evidence in an
action for enforcement of this section that the owner parked or caused
his vehicle to be parked on such premises.
(e) If such premises adjoin or abut a building or structure whose entrances
or exits open upon such parking area, no vehicle shall be left parked,
standing, or placed in such a manner as to obstruct such entrances or
exits to the street or public right-of-way. Such passageway shall be
equal in width to the width of such entrances or exits in each instance,
but in no case shall be less than five feet wide and shall permit persons
to enter and leave such building or structure with safety. A sign
attached to such building or structure at the place of such entrances or
exits shall inform users of such parking area as to such restrictions, and
failure to obey the regulations contained in this section shall be deemed
a violation of this section.
(f) On demand of the police, any owner or lessee requesting police
enforcement of this section shall furnish to the police a statement, in
writing, signed by him or his agent, to the effect that a specified vehicle
was unlawfully parked, stored, or left upon his premises at a certain
time or during a certain period without his consent or permission, and
such owner or lessee shall be available to testify to such facts in court at
Sec. 24-118 OLEAN CODE Sec. 24-118
C:582
Sec. 24-119. (Reserved)21
Sec. 24-120. through Sec. 24-133. (Reserved)
the request of the police. Failure of an owner or lessee to comply with
the request of the police, as set out in this subsection, shall be sufficient
cause for the chief of police or his subordinates to cease enforcing this
section at the premises of such owner or lessee who fails to give the
cooperation required in this subsection.
(g) Where any owner of any premises desires to completely prohibit
parking thereon, he may notify the public to that effect by a
conspicuous sign placed on such premises stating in substance:
NO PARKING
POLICE ENFORCEMENT
UNDER PENALTY OF LAW
SECTION 24-118 of CODE OF ORDINANCES
Such sign shall be not greater than two feet in height by three feet in
width, with red lettering not more than four inches high upon a white
background. Any person who parks or leaves a vehicle on such posted
premises shall be deemed in violation of this section.
(h) All signs erected pursuant to former section 28-90 are ratified and shall
be considered to be in compliance with this section.
21.Editor's Note: Res. No. 50-93, adopted May 25, 1993, repealed § 24-119, which pertained
to parking prohibited in specified area. See the Code Comparative Table.
Sec. 24-118 CHARTER Sec. 24-120
C:583

DIVISION 2
RESTRICTIONS AND PROHIBITIONS FOR SPECIFIC STREETS
(NONMETERED)
Sec. 24-134. Prohibited at all times. [Code 1971, § 28-101; Res. No.
97-91, 8-13-1991; Res. No. 156-91, 12-10-1991; Res. No. 149-91,
1-14-1992; Res. No. 16-92, 2-25-1992; Res. No. 38-92, 4-14-1992;
Res. No. 43-92, 4-14-1992; Res. No. 49-92, 4-14-1992; Res. No.
87-92, 5-12-1992; Res. No. 47-93, 4-13-1993; Res. No. 71-93,
6-8-1993; Res. No. 118-93, 8-24-1993; Res. No. 126-93, 9-15-1993;
Res. No. 127-93, 9-15-1993; Res. No. 132-93, 9-28-1993; Res. No.
135-93, 9-28-1993; Res. No. 184-93, 12-28-1993; Res. No. 48-94,
6-28-1994; Res. No. 49-94, § 2, 7-26-1994; Res. No. 50-94,
6-14-1994; Res. No. 59-94, 6-28-1994; Res. No. 61-94, 6-28-1994;
Res. No. 108-94, 10-25-1994; Res. No. 120-94, 11-22-1994; Res. No.
2-95, 2-14-1995; Res. No. 83-95, 10-24-1995; Res. No. 95-95,
11-28-1995; Res. No. 108-95, 1-9-1996; Res. No. 14-96, 3-12-1996;
Res. No. 18-96, 3-12-1996; Res. No. 28-96, 3-26-1996; Res. No.
47-96, 5-28-1996; Res. No. 24-97, 3-25-1997; Res. No. 74-97,
9-9-1997; Res. No. 111-97, 2-11-1997; Res. No. 10-98, 2-24-1998;
Res. No. 70-98, 10-13-1998; Res. No. 67-98, 11-24-1998; Res. No.
11-99, 2-23-1999; Res. No. 20-99, 2-23-1999; Res. No. 31-99,
4-6-1999; Res. No. 55-99, 8-24-1999; Res. No. 57-99, 8-24-1999;
Res. No. 55-00, 6-27-2000; Res. No. 74-00, 8-8-2000; Res. No. 86-00,
9-12-2000; Res. No. 96-00, 10-10-2000; Res. No. 60-01, 6-12-2001;
Res. No. 125-01, 11-13-2001; Res. No. 53-02, 7-9-2002; Res. No.
56-02, 7-9-2002; Res. No. 83-02, 7-9-2002; Res. No. 1-03,
1-28-2003; Res. No. 73-03, 9-9-2003; Res. No. 83-03, 9-23-2003;
Res. No. 90-03, 10-14-2003; Res. No. 93-03, 10-28-2003; Res. No.
10-04, 2-24-2004; Res. No. 11-04, 2-24-2004; Res. No. 32-04,
4-27-2004; Res. No. 34-04, 4-27-2004; Res. No. 67-04, 7-27-2004;
Res. No. 69-04, 7-27-2004; Res. No. 79-04, 8-10-2004; Res. No.
116-04, 11-23-2004; Res. No. 107-05, 10-25-2005; Res. No. 60-06,
5-23-2006; Res. No. 110-06, 9-26-2006; Res. No. 138-06,
12-26-2006; Res. No. 89-08, 10-14-2008; Res. No. 06-09; 2-10-2009;
Res. No. 68-09, 10-27-2009; Res. No. 07-10, 2-9-2010; Res. No.
56-10, 8-24-2010; Res. No. 57-10, 8-24-2010; Res. No. 75-10,
9-28-2010; Res. No. 77-10, 9-28-2010]
When signs are erected giving notice thereof, it shall be unlawful for any
person to park a vehicle at any time upon any of the following streets:
Sec. 24-134 CHARTER Sec. 24-134
C:585
Street Side Extent
Driveway between
112 Clinton Street,
South and 116
Clinton Street,
South
15 feet on either side of driveway.
1st Street East Between West Henley and Irving
Streets.
1st Street, North Both From Laurens Street to Sullivan Street
1st Street, North East From Laurens Street to Whitney
Avenue
1st Street, North East From 614 North 1st Street north to
North Union Street
1st Street, North East From its intersection with Wayne
Street north to the first driveway
1st Street, North East Between Wayne Street and Coleman
Street
1st Street, North West From State Street to Laurens Street
1st Street, North West From Sullivan Street to Reed Street
1st Street, North West Starting approximately 296 feet north
of the Pennsylvania Central tracks to
Wayne Street
2nd Street, North East Between Laurens Street and Sullivan
Street
2nd Street, North West 300 block
2nd Street, North West From the northerly end of the
driveway at 121 North 2nd Street and
to extend 61 feet south.
2nd Street, South West From State Street to Henley Street
3rd Avenue West From the northerly end of the
driveway at 409 3rd Avenue, to extend
30 feet south.
3rd Street, North East From its intersection with West State
Street to a point approximately 84 feet
north of such intersection
3rd Street, North East From the end of the premises known
as 330 North 3rd Street, north to the
end of the street
3rd Street, North East 35 feet north from its intersection with
West Sullivan Street
3rd Street, North East Between Laurens Street and Sullivan
Street
Sec. 24-134 OLEAN CODE Sec. 24-134
C:586
Street Side Extent
3rd Street, North East From the driveway of 330 North 3rd
Street to the intersection of Reed
Street
3rd Street, North Northeast Between driveway of Olean Travel
Service and Strochmann Company
3rd Street, North West From State Street to Laurens Street
3rd Street, North West From Sullivan Street to Reed Street
4th Street, North From the southerly driveway of Olean
Senior High School for a distance of
100 feet south
4th Street, North East From 80 feet north of State Street to
Putnam Street
4th Street, North East From Wayne Street to Coleman Street
4th Street, North East Between 168 feet and 48 feet from the
intersection with West Forest Avenue
4th Street, North West From Wayne Street northerly to the
north bounds of 509 North 4th Street
4th Street, North West From its southwest intersection with
West Sullivan Street southerly for 40
feet
4th Street, North West From the south boundary of 937 North
4th Street, to the north boundary of
939 North 4th Street
4th Street, North West From the south boundary of Penn
Avenue, to the north boundary of
Forest Avenue
4th Street, South East No parking and no standing between
Irving Street and West Henley Street
except the section for twenty-minutelimit
parking
4th Street, South East From its intersection with Irving
Street north to the driveway of School
10
4th Street, South West From West State Street to West Henley
Street
5th Avenue West From 402 5th Avenue north to the
dead end of the street
5th Street, North West Between Sullivan Street and Reed
Street
5th Street North West Between Washington and Sullivan
Streets
Sec. 24-134 CHARTER Sec. 24-134
C:587
Street Side Extent
5th Street, South West From its intersection with West State
Street south 25 feet
6th Street, North East From the south corner of driveway of
502 North 6th Street to a point 20 feet
south
6th Street North East From its intersection with Wayne
Street north approximately 110 feet
6th Street North West From State Street to Sullivan Street
6th Street, South
[Repealed
4-11-2017 by Res.
No. 22-17]
6th Street, South
[Added 9-27-2016
by Res. No. 78-16]
West From its intersection with West Henley
Street north approximately 295 feet
6th Street, South
[Added 4-11-2017
by Res. No. 22-17]
West From 175 feet south from its
intersection with West State Street
south to its intersection with West
Henley Street
7th Street North East From Wayne Street to Clark Bros
7th Street, North West From State Street to Sullivan Street
7th Street, South East From West Henley Street extending to
Irving Street to include the entire east
side of the block of South 7th Street
8th Street, North East Between Buffalo and Reed Street
8th Street, North East From Reed Street to Wayne Street
8th Street, North East From a point 70 feet north of West
State Street to Washington Street
8th Street, North West From its intersection with Buffalo
Street north to the southerly boundary
of Sullivan Street
8th Street, North West From driveway at 527 North 8th
Street north to end of street
8th Street, North
[Added 8-27-2013
by Res. No. 71-13]
West Between its intersection with West
State Street extending to its
intersection with Washington Street
8th Street, South East In the 200 block
8th Street, South West Between West State Street and Henley
Street
9th Street, North West From 121 North 9th Street to the
northerly end of 133 North 9th Street
Sec. 24-134 OLEAN CODE Sec. 24-134
C:588
Street Side Extent
9th Street, North West Between Reed Street and Wayne
Street
9th Street, South East 100 Block between West State and
West Henley Streets
9th Street, South West Between West Henley and Irving
Streets
10th Street, North East 100 block
10th Street, North West From Reed Street to Wayne Street
10th Street, South East Between West State and Irving Streets
11th Street, North West Between West Sullivan Street and
Reed Street
11th Street, North
[Added 9-25-2012
by Res. No. 66-12]
West Between Washington Street and
Sullivan Street
11th Street, North
[Added 8-27-2013
by Res. No. 70-13]
West Starting at a point 97 feet north from
its intersection with West State Street
extending to its intersection with
Washington Street
11th Street, South East From its intersection with West State
Street south 25 feet
12th Street, North East Beginning at a point approximately
100 feet from the north curbline of
West Street to Washington Street
12th Street, North West Between Reed Street and Sullivan
Street
12th Street, South West From State Street to Henley Street
13th Street, North East Intersection of West State Street at
existing crosswalk 65 feet easterly and
98 feet easterly from existing
crosswalk
13th Street, North West From Sullivan to Reed Streets
13th Street, South West Between West State Street and West
Henley Street
15th Street, North Both Between Sullivan Street and Subcon
Industries
15th Street, North East Northerly from West Sullivan Street
15th Street, North West Between Washington Street and
Sullivan Street
15th Street, North West From State Street to Washington
Street
Sec. 24-134 CHARTER Sec. 24-134
C:589
Street Side Extent
16th Street, South West Beginning at the intersection with
West State Street and extending to the
boundary line between 1703 West
State Street and 108 South 16th Street
17th Street, South East From State Street to Henley Street
19th Street, North East From approximately 60 feet north from
West State Street on northeast corner
19th Street, South East Entire length
19th Street, South West From intersection with West State
Street south to 112 South 19th Street
20th Street, South West The 200 block between Henley Street
and the sewer plant
24th Street, South East From State Street 96 feet north
25th Street, South
[Added 10-9-2012
by Res. No. 70-12]
West Starting at a point 60 feet to 125 feet
north from the end of the existing
pavement
26th Street, South East From its intersection with West State
Street to its southerly bounds
Alder Street [Added
11-29-2011 by
Res. No. 85-11]
Both Between Prospect Avenue and
Delaware Avenue
Alder Street Both From Seneca Avenue northerly to
Spring Street
Alder Street [Added
3-26-2013 by Res.
No. 17-13]
West No parking and no standing for a
distance of 25 feet north and south of
each Alder Street entrance and exit of
East View Elementary School
Arland Avenue North From Main Street to Route 16
Barry Street Both From State Street to Times Square
Barry Street Both From Tompkins Street to Hamilton
Street
Barry Street East From Hamilton Street to Sullivan
Street
Barry Street West From State Street to South Street
Barry Street West From Times Square to Tompkins
Street
Barry Street, North East Between the northerly curbline of East
State Street and a point 90 feet
northerly therefrom
Barry Street, North East South Street to State Street
Sec. 24-134 OLEAN CODE Sec. 24-134
C:590
Street Side Extent
Barry Street, North West From its intersection with Delaware
northerly to the driveway of the Social
Security parking lot
Barry Street, North West Between parking lot entrance/exit for
Social Security office and Delaware
Plaza
Barry Street, North West Between East State Street and Times
Square Street
Barry Street, South In front of the driveway at 107 1/2 S.
Barry Street
Barry Street, South East Between the southerly curbline of East
State Street and a point 115 feet
southerly therefrom
Barry Street South East From East Green Street to Franchot
Blvd
Barry Street, South West Between East State Street and South
Street
Bishop Street South Entire length
Brickell Avenue Both From Wayne Street to Coleman Street
Buffalo Street East From West Sullivan Street to North
9th Street
Center Street
[Added 11-13-2012
by Res. No. 75-12]
Both Between Main Street and First Avenue
Center Street South From its intersection with 1st Avenue
east to 33 feet beyond the intersection
Center Street South From its intersection with First Avenue
westerly for a distance of 20 feet
Clinton Street,
North
East From the intersection of Laurel
Avenue to a point approximately 30
feet south.
Clinton Street,
North
East From the intersection of North Clinton
and Tompkins Streets to a point 20
feet south of such intersection
Clinton, South East Between East Green and East Henley
Streets
Coleman Street North From its intersection with North Union
Street West to the first driveway.
Coleman Street North For a distance of 76 feet easterly from
its intersection with Van Campen
Avenue
Sec. 24-134 CHARTER Sec. 24-134
C:591
Street Side Extent
Coleman Street North From its intersection with North Union
Street west to 20 feet beyond the first
driveway
Coleman Street South From Union Street to North 1st Street
Coleman Street South From Van Campen Avenue to North
4th Street
Connell Street East Between North Union and River
Streets
Crown Street North Twenty feet easterly from intersection
with King Street
Delaware Avenue North From North Union Street to North
Barry Street
Duke Street East Beginning at the intersection of East
State Street for a distance of 50 feet
Edgewood Avenue Both From its intersection with Buffalo
Street to the end of the open street
Elm Street, East North Between Walnut Street and Ash Street
First Avenue
[Added 12-11-2012
by Res. No. 82-12]
West Starting at a point 255 feet south from
the curbline of Genesee Street, thence
south 35 feet
Forest Avenue, East West From North Union Street northerly to
Pine Street
Franklin Street Both Within the boundary lines of the Hysol
Corp. property
Front Street North From Main Street to a point 160 feet
east
Front Street Both From Main Street to East State Street
Fulton Street West From State Street to Henley Street
Garden Avenue South Twenty feet east from Davis Street
intersection,
Gardiner Avenue North Between Maple Street and North 4th
Street
Green Street, West North From its intersection with South 4th
Street east 25 feet
Green Street, West South From Union Street to 4th Street
Grossman Street West Entire length
Hamilton Avenue South Near the Boardmanville School
turnaround, a distance of approx. 25
feet from the fire hydrant to the exit of
the turnaround
Sec. 24-134 OLEAN CODE Sec. 24-134
C:592
Street Side Extent
Hamilton Street North From its intersection at North Union
Street to a point approximately 189
feet east
Henley Street, East North From Barry Street to Union Street
Henley Street, East North From South Clinton to its intersection
with Fulton Street
Henley Street, East South From its intersection with South Union
Street to the point of beginning of the
premises known as 116 East Henley
Street
Henley Street, East South From its intersection with South Barry
Street to its intersection with South
Clinton Street
Henley Street, East South From its intersection with South Barry
Street westerly 50 feet
Henley Street, East South Between South Union and South Barry
Streets
Henley Street, West North From the easterly curbline of South
1st Street to a point 58 feet east
Henley Street, West North Beginning at its intersection with
South 2nd Street easterly for a
distance of two car lengths
Henley Street, West North From West 2nd Street west to 138
South 2nd Street
Henley Street, West South No parking and no standing between
South 1st Street and South 4th Street
Henley Street, West South From its intersection with South 1st
Street, west approximately 96 feet
Homer Street
[Repealed
4-10-2012 by Res.
No. 09-12]
Homer Street Ext. North Between Niagara Mohawk poles 25
and 26
Homer Street East Beginning at the south boundary of the
lands occupied by Cecchi News
Agency located at 234 Homer Street
extending 200 feet northerly
therefrom
Hoop Street North From its intersection with Rowland
Avenue to go northwest to its end
Sec. 24-134 CHARTER Sec. 24-134
C:593
Street Side Extent
Irving Street North From South 2nd Street westerly to
South 11th Street
Irving Street North For a distance of 40 feet from Union
Street
Jay Street North From Barry Street east to end of Jay
Street
Jefferson Street West Entire length
Laurel Avenue South From its easterly end to a point
approximately 60 feet west
Laurens Street North From its intersection with North 2nd
Street westerly to a point equal to one
car length west of the entrance to the
parking lot of the Cattaraugus County
Health Department premises
Laurens Street North 40 feet west from the intersection of
North 2nd Street and 40 feet east from
the intersection of North 3rd Street
Laurens Street North 20 feet west from the intersection of
North 2nd Street and 20 feet east from
the intersection of North 3rd Street
Laurens Street North From its intersection with North 3rd
Street east 30 feet
Laurens Street North From Union Street to North 2nd Street
Laurens Street South From Union Street to North 3rd Street
Lincoln Avenue Both From the intersection of Buffalo Street
to the intersection of the Bethany
Evangelical Lutheran Church parking
lot.
Main Street East 73 feet south of the intersection of the
southeast corner of Hamilton Avenue
and Main Street for a distance going
southerly for 48 feet
Main Street South By Pizza Hut Restaurant 140 feet east
of the east line of North Union Street
Maple Street East From a distance of 150 feet north from
its intersection with West Forest
Avenue
Maple Street East Between its intersection with West
Forest Street to its intersection with
Gardiner Avenue
Maple Street West 1200 block between Elm and Oak
Streets
Sec. 24-134 OLEAN CODE Sec. 24-134
C:594
Street Side Extent
Orchard Avenue West In the 300 block
Orchard Street East Between East State Street and Garden
Avenue
Oviatt Street, West South Entire length
Penn Avenue North Entire length
Pleasant Street East From Elmore Avenue north to city line
Pleasant Street West From 343 West Pleasant Street to the
city line
Putnam Street North Between 4th Street and 6th Street
Putnam Street North Between its intersection with North
11th Street to its intersection with
North 12th Street
Queen Street West Between Bell Street and Division
Street
Queen Both Between Bell and Division Streets
Reed Street Both From Union Street to North 1st Street
Reed Street [Added
6-14-2016 by Res.
No. 46-16]
North No parking and no standing starting
from the east curbline of North 5th
Street, extending westerly to the west
curbline of North 6th Street
Reed Street [Added
6-9-2015 by Res.
No. 42-15]
North Starting from the east curbline of
North 5th Street, extending westerly
to the west curbline of North 6th
Street
Reed Street North Between its intersection with North
12th Street to its intersection with
North 13th Street
Reed Street
[Repealed
5-13-2014 by Res.
No. 41-14]
Reed Street South From its intersection with North 5th
Street approximately 90 feet west
Riverside Drive,
West
Both From South Union Street to Martha
Avenue
Root Street North Between North 1st Street and Maple
Street
Rowland Avenue East From East State Street to the end of
the street
Rowland Avenue West Between East State Street and the
railroad tracks
Sec. 24-134 CHARTER Sec. 24-134
C:595
Street Side Extent
School Street South From 420 School Street for a distance
of 100 feet east to 502 School Street
Seneca Street North For a distance of 375 feet westerly
from its intersection with King Street
Skyview Drive Both Entire length
Spring Street, East North From Adler to Queen Street
Spring Street, East North For a distance of 25 feet east and west
from the existing crosswalk by the
main entrance to East View
Elementary School
Spring Street, East South No standing for a distance of 50 feet
east and west from the crosswalk by
the main entrance to East View
Elementary School
Spring Street, East South No parking or standing for a distance
of 100 feet east and west from the
crosswalk by the main entry of East
View Elementary School.
Spring Street, East South From Front Street to Alder Street
State Street North From 24th Street 80 feet east
State Street, East From a point east of the Alcas
driveway to a point in the vicinity of
Grossman Avenue
State Street, East North Between the easterly curb of North
Barry Street and a point 100 feet
easterly therefrom
State Street, East North From a point 28 feet west of Pole 110
to a point six feet east of Pole 109
State Street, East
[Added 7-9-2013
by Res. No. 51-13]
North and
south
From Orchard Avenue east to the City
line
State Street, East South Between the easterly curbline of South
Barry Street and a point 85 feet
easterly therefrom
State Street, East South For a distance of 40 feet east and west
from Roland Avenue
State Street, East South At a point commencing at the
intersection of Front and East State
Street easterly to the city line
State Street, West Both From the intersection of 13th Street
westerly to the westerly city line
Sec. 24-134 OLEAN CODE Sec. 24-134
C:596
Street Side Extent
State Street, West Between the westerly curbline of
North Union Street and a point 45 feet
westerly therefrom
State Street, West On the subway to the city line
State Street, West South Between South Union Street and
South 1st Street
State Street, West South From Union Street to 1st Street
State Street, West South Between 4th Street and 5th Street
State Street, West South From the ambulance entrance to
Street Francis Hospital east to South
20th Street
State Street, West Next to 410 West State Street
State Street, West South In front of Crown Printing and
between South 11th Street and South
12th Street
State Street, West In front of 912 West State Street
Stowell Avenue West From its intersection between East
State Street and Griffin Street
Sullivan Street North Between 4th Street and 6th Street
Sullivan Street North For a distance of 50 feet east and 50
feet west of intersection of 3rd Street
Sullivan Street North From Union Street to North 4th Street
Sullivan Street, East Both For its entire length except for loading
and unloading at Montgomery Ward's
warehouse
Sullivan Street, West Both From the east corner of driveway
located at 707 West Sullivan Street to
a point approximately 35 feet east
Sullivan Street, West Both The 100 block
Sullivan Street, West North From North 2nd Street intersection
east 102 feet toward North 1st Street
Sullivan Street, West North From North 2nd Street to North 4th
Street
Sullivan Street, West South From its intersection with North 1st
Street to a point approximately 120
feet east of such intersection
Sullivan Street, West South From North 1st Street west to first
driveway
Sec. 24-134 CHARTER Sec. 24-134
C:597
Street Side Extent
Sullivan Street, West
[Added 11-24-2015
by Res. No.
111-15]
South From 11th Street to 12th Street
Times Square North From the intersection at North Union
Street to a point approximately 214
feet easterly
Tracey Street Both From corner 150 feet east
Union Street, North Both From Franklin Street to Connell Street
Union Street, North East At the intersection of East Pine, East
Oak, and East Elm Streets for a
distance of approximately 25 feet from
each corner
Union Street, North East Between the northerly curbline of East
State Street and a point 80 feet
northerly therefrom
Union Street, North
[Added 6-25-2013
by Res. No. 42-13]
East Starting from the northeast corner of
the intersection of North Union Street
to a point 140 feet north
Union Street, North West Between the northerly curbline of
West State Street and a point 60 feet
northerly therefrom
Union Street, North West From Forest Avenue to Water Street
Union Street North West 50 feet from its intersection with Elm
Street and to extend 33 feet south
Union Street, North West Between Franklin Street and the
northerly terminus of North Union
Street
Union Street, South East Between the southerly curbline of East
State Street and a point 45 feet
southerly therefrom
Union Street, South
[Added 6-12-2012
by Res. No. 45-12]
East From East State Street to South Street
Union Street, South East Between the southerly end of the
bridge over the Allegheny River and a
point 243 feet southerly therefrom
Union Street, South West Between the southerly curbline of
West State Street and a point 80 feet
southerly therefrom
Sec. 24-134 OLEAN CODE Sec. 24-134
C:598
Street Side Extent
Union Street South West From the southerly edge of the
Veterans' Memorial Bridge to extend
south for a distance of 95 feet
Vine Street At end of Vine Street
Walnut Street East Between its intersection with Pine
Street up to its intersection with East
Oak Street
Walnut Street
[Added 4-22-2014
by Res. No. 27-41]
West Between East Elm Street and East
Water Street
Washington Street North From its northwesterly intersection
with 13th Street West 25 feet
Washington Street South From North 4th Street westerly to
North 21st Street
Washington Street In front of the driveway providing
access to the premises at 1625
Washington Street
Water Street West North From Union Street to Maple Street
Wayne Street Both Between 8th Street and 12th Street
Wayne Street North Between North 1st Street and a point
35 feet west of the west edge of
Brickell Avenue
Wayne Street North From a point 35 feet east of the east
edge of North 4th Street to a point 35
feet west of the west edge of North 4th
Street
Wayne Street North From 4th Street to 12th Street
Exceptions. Parking is permitted as
follows:
From a point 42 feet westerly from the
intersection of North 8th Street and
Wayne Street for a distance of 100 feet
Beginning at a point 40 feet westerly
from the intersection of North 6th
Street and Wayne Street to a point 140
feet easterly of the intersection of
North 7th Street and Wayne Street
Wayne Street North From a point 35 feet east of the east
edge of North 5th Street to a point 35
feet west of the west edge of North 5th
Street
Sec. 24-134 CHARTER Sec. 24-134
C:599
Street Side Extent
Wayne Street North From a point 35 feet east of the east
edge of North 6th Street to a point 35
feet west of the west edge of North 6th
Street
Wayne Street North From North 7th Street to North 8th
Street
Wayne Street North From a point 35 feet east of the east
edge of North 7th Street to a point 35
feet west of the west edge of North 7th
Street
Wayne Street North From its intersection with the westerly
boundary of North 8th Street for a
distance of 25 feet west
Wayne Street North From a point 35 feet east of the east
edge of North 8th Street to a point 35
feet west of the west edge of North 8th
Street
Wayne Street North From a point 55 feet east of the
centerline of North 9th Street and
proceeding westerly to North 12th
Street
Wayne Street North From its intersection with Brickell
Avenue west 54 feet
Wayne Street North From its intersection with North Union
Street to Brickell Avenue
Wayne Street North From a point beginning at the
intersection of Van Campen Avenue to
a point 150 feet west of Van Campen
Avenue
Wayne Street South Between North 12th and North 1st
Street
Wayne Street South From Union Street to North 9th Street
Wayne Street North 350 feet west of intersection of Brickle
Avenue to a point 15 feet westerly
Whitney Avenue Both From North Union Street to North 1st
Street
Worden Avenue East 150 feet north of its intersection with
Washington Street
Wright Street East From State Street to north end of
Wright Street
Sec. 24-134 OLEAN CODE Sec. 24-134
C:600
Street Side Extent
York Street Both Between the easterly curbline of South
Union Street and a point 100 feet
easterly therefrom
York Street [Added
11-15-2017 by
Res. No. 85-17]
North No parking and no standing on the
straightaway between South Union
Street and East Riverside Drive (for a
total distance of 118 feet)
York Street [Added
11-15-2017 by
Res. No. 85-17]
South No parking and no standing between
South Union Street and East Riverside
Drive (for a total distance of 154 feet)
York Street South From its intersection with Monroe
Terrace to its intersection with
Vermont Street
York Street West From its intersection with the westerly
branch of York Street 100 feet south
Sec. 24-135. Prohibited from designated sign to corner. [Code
1971, § 28-101.1; Res. No. 78-90, 10-9-1990; Res. No. 121-92,
7-28-1992; Res. No. 136-92, 8-25-1992; Res. No. 170-92,
11-10-1992; Res. No. 172-92, 2-23-1993; Res. No. 67-93, 5-25-1993;
Res. No. 126-93, 9-15-1993; Res. No. 152-93, 10-26-1993; Res. No.
158-93, 12-14-1993; Res. No. 160-93, 12-14-1993; Res. No. 15-94,
3-22-1994; Res. No. 31-94, 4-26-1994; Res. No. 49-94, § 3,
7-26-1994; Res. No. 51-94, 6-14-1994; Res. No. 12-96, 2-27-1996;
Res. No. 72-96, 8-27-1996; Res. No. 73-96, 8-27-1996; Res. No.
14-97, 2-25-1997; Res. No. 40-97, 5-27-1997; Res. No. 41-97,
5-27-1997; Res. No. 42-97, 5-27-1997; Res. No. 43-97, 5-27-1997;
Res. No. 69-98, 9-8-1998; Res. No. 74-98, 11-24-1998; Res. No.
65-99, 8-24-1999; Res. No. 28-00, 4-5-2000; Res. No. 29-00,
4-5-2000; Res. No. 37-00, 5-9-2000; Res. No. 31-01, 4-24-2001; Res.
No. 45-01, 5-29-2001; Res. No. 53-01, 5-29-2001; Res. No. 59-01,
6-12-2001; Res. No. 72-01, 7-24-2001; Res. No. 95-01, 9-4-2001;
Res. No. 105-01, 10-9-2001; Res. No. 57-02, 6-11-2002; Res. No.
82-02, 7-9-2002; Res. No. 96-02, 9-10-2002; Res. No. 23-03,
4-8-2003; Res. No. 53-03, 7-8-2003; Res. No. 67-03 9-9-2003; Res.
No. 84-03, 9-23-2003; Res. No. 94-03, 10-28-2003; Res. No. 12-04,
2-24-2004; Res. No. 13-04, 2-24-2004; Res. No. 17-04, 3-23-2004;
Res. No. 33-04, 4-27-2004; Res. No. 39-04, 5-25-2004; Res. No.
88-04, 9-28-2004; Res. No. 105-04, 10-26-2004; Res. No. 106-04,
10-26-2004; Res. No. 118-04, 11-23-2004; Res. No. 119-04,
11-23-2004; Res. No. 120-04, 11-23-2004; Res. No. 67-05,
7-26-2005; Res. No. 129-05, 1-10-2006; Res. No. 26-06, 4-11-2006;
Res. No. 43-06, 4-25-2006; Res. No. 77-06, 6-27-2006; Res. No.
92-06, 7-25-2006; Res. No. 119-06, 10-24-2006; Res. No. 141-06,
12-26-2006; Res. No. 13-08, 2-26-2008; Res. No. 38-08, 5-13-2008;
Res. No. 85-08, 10-14-2008; Res. No. 86-08, 10-14-2008; Res. No.
Sec. 24-134 CHARTER Sec. 24-135
C:601
88-08, 10-14-2008; Res. No. 58-10, 8-24-2010; Res. No. 59-10,
8-24-2010; Res. No. 72-10, 9-28-2010; Res. No. 73-10, 9-28-2010;
Res. No. 74-10, 9-28-2010; Res. No. 03-11, 2-8-2011]
When signs are erected giving notice thereof, it shall be unlawful for any
person to park a vehicle at any time upon any of the following streets from
designation sign to the corner:
Street Side Extent
1st Avenue West 70 feet from the southwest corner of
1st Avenue and Genesee Street
1st Avenue [Added
10-9-2012 by Res.
No. 67-12]
West For a distance of 112 feet south of
Center Street
1st Street, North East 230 feet south from south curbline of
Laurens Street
1st Street, North East 32 feet north of its intersection with
Reed Street
2nd Avenue West 35 feet from its intersection with Front
Street
2nd Avenue West Southerly 65 feet from its intersection
with Genesee Street
2nd Street, North East 50 feet from its intersection with West
State Street
2nd Street, North West 72 feet from its intersection with West
State Street
2nd Street, North West 40 feet south of the curbline of
Laurens Street
2nd Street, South East In front of 117 South 2nd Street
3rd, North East 20 feet from the intersection of Lauren
Street
4th Avenue West From approximately 60 feet south of
its intersection with Center Street to
the fire hydrant.
4th Street, North East and
west
At its intersection with West Sullivan
Street for a distance of 60 feet north
4th Street, North West 40 feet south from its intersection with
Reed Street
4th Street, North East 15 feet south of the intersection from
Reed Street
4th, North East 20 feet south from the intersection of
Laurens Street
4th, North East 20 feet north from the intersection of
Laurens Street
Sec. 24-135 OLEAN CODE Sec. 24-135
C:602
Street Side Extent
4th Street, South Southeast 50 feet from its intersection with West
State Street
5th Street, North Northeast 115 feet north from its intersection
with Reed Street
6th Street, North East 44 feet south of the street line of
Washington Street
6th Street, North East From approximately 20 feet north of
its intersection with Putnam Street to
the intersection with Putnam Street
8th Street, North East 40 feet north from its intersection with
Buffalo Street
8th Street, South East 40 feet south from its intersection with
West State Street
9th Street, North East From the intersection of Wayne Street,
120 feet south
10th Street, North East 35 feet north from the intersection of
Buffalo Street
13th Street, North East 30 feet from the northeast intersection
of North 13th Street and Washington
Street
13th Street, South East 30 feet from the northeast corner of
the intersection of West Henley Street
and South 13th Street northerly for a
distance of 30 feet
13th Street, South East 90 feet south from the intersection
with West State Street
13th Street, South West 90 feet north of the north line of West
Henley Street
14th Street, North East 74 feet south from the southeast
intersection of Washington and North
14th Streets
14th Street, North East 95 feet north from its intersection with
West State Street
14th Street, North West On the 100 block of North 14th Street,
40 feet south from its intersection with
Washington Street
25th Street, South West Southerly from the intersection of the
south curbline of West State Street
and the west curbline of South 25th
Street for a distance of 40 feet
Sec. 24-135 CHARTER Sec. 24-135
C:603
Street Side Extent
18th Street, South East 81 feet south from the southeast
intersection of West State and South
18th Street
21st Street North East 58 feet south from the intersection
with Washington Street
21st Street, North
[Added 11-22-2016
by Res. No. 93-16]
East 100 feet north from the intersection of
West State Street
26th Street, South East 150 feet south from its intersection
with West State Street
26th Street, South West 70 feet south from its intersection with
West State Street
Alder Street and
East Spring Street
All
intersection
corners
100 feet from intersection
Avenue A North 128 feet east from its intersection with
Homer Street
Barry Street West Just northerly last metered parking
space immediately north of the Dragon
House Restaurant
Barry Street North West Just southerly last metered parking
space immediately south of the Dragon
House Restaurant
Barry Street North West 40 feet south of the intersection of
North Barry and Main Streets
Barry Street, North West From the intersection of North Barry
Street and Delaware Avenue to a point
180 feet north of the intersection
Barry Street, North East 20 feet south from the intersection of
Albany Avenue
Bell Street South 60 feet east from its intersection with
Queen Street
Bishop Street North From its intersection with Queen
Street easterly 100 feet
Bishop Street West 45 feet south from the intersection of
North 10th Street
Buffalo Street Northeast 40 feet west from its intersection with
North 8th Street
Buffalo Street West From its intersection with Washington
Street to a point approximately four
feet north of the driveway servicing
the resident at 807 Buffalo Street
Sec. 24-135 OLEAN CODE Sec. 24-135
C:604
Street Side Extent
Center Street South 30 feet east from the intersection with
2nd Avenue
Chestnut Street and
East State Street
intersection
West 100 feet from corner of East State
Street
Clark Street, North West 75 feet north from north curbline of
East State Street
Clinton Street,
South
Both Approximately 50 feet north from the
intersection of East Henley Street
Duke Street 150 feet westerly of street line of Duke
Street
Elm Street Corner of North Union Street
Elm Street, East East 90 feet from the southeast corner of
East Elm Street and Walnut Street
Elm Street, East South Opposite 209 East Elm Street, a
distance of 130 feet from its
intersection with Walnut Street
Forest Avenue, East All
intersection
corners
At the intersection of North Union
Street
Genesee Street North 160 feet west from its intersection
with Main Street
Griffin Street South Beginning at Duke Street westerly 100
feet
Griffin Street South 54 feet east from its intersection with
Stowell Avenue
Grossman Avenue
[Added 12-13-2016
by Res. No.
101-16]
East 120 feet south from its intersection
with East State Street
Hamilton Avenue North For a distance of 60 feet east from its
intersection with Main Street
Hamilton Avenue South 90 feet east from its intersection with
Main Street
Henley Street Northeast 50 feet east from the intersection of
South 4th Street and West Henley
Street
Henley Street, East North 196 feet east of intersection with
South Union Street
Highland Avenue South 60 feet west from the curbline of Front
Street
Sec. 24-135 CHARTER Sec. 24-135
C:605
Street Side Extent
Irving Street North 15 feet east from the intersection with
South 2nd Street
Irving Street North 15 feet west from the intersection with
South 2nd Street
King Street East 30 feet north from its intersection with
Seneca Avenue
King Street West 30 feet north from its intersection with
Seneca Avenue
Laurens Street North (pole) Install on light standard approximately
40 feet of the intersection of North
2nd Street
Laurens Street
[Added 4-22-2014
by Res. No. 21-14]
North 20 feet west of its intersection with
North 2nd Street
Laurens North 20 feet west from its intersection with
North 1st Street
Laurens North 20 feet west from its intersection with
North 4th Street
Laurens South 20 feet east from its intersection with
North 4th Street
Linwood Avenue East From Oviatt Street northerly 250 feet
Ohio Street, East North 20 feet east from the edge of the
sidewalk furthest from the corner of
York Street
Ohio Street, East South 20 feet east from the edge of the
sidewalk furthest from the corner of
York Street
Orchard Avenue At Bishop Street intersection
Oviatt Street West North From the intersection of the west
curbline of Main Street and the north
curb line of West Oviatt Street for a
distance of 40 feet
Pine Street, East North 125 feet east from the intersection
with North Union Street
Pine Street, East
[Added 6-28-2016
by Res. No. 47-16]
South 20 feet west from the curbline of
Walnut Street
Pine Street, East South 30 feet from the southeast corner of
East Pine Street and Walnut Street
Prospect Avenue
[Added 6-13-2017
by Res. No. 43-17]
South For a distance of 880 feet east from its
intersection with Front Street
Sec. 24-135 OLEAN CODE Sec. 24-135
C:606
Street Side Extent
Putnam Street South 20 feet west from its intersection with
North 5th Street
Putnam Street Southeast 20 feet west from the edge of the
sidewalk furthest from the corner of
North 11th Street
Putnam Street Southwest 20 feet east from the edge of the
sidewalk furthest from the corner of
North 12th Street
Reed Street North 15 feet east from the intersection of
North 4th Street
Reed Street North 85 feet west from the intersection of
North 7th Street
Reed Street South 15 feet west from the intersection of
North 4th Street
Reed Street [Added
5-13-2014 by Res.
No. 42-14]
South 15 feet east from the intersection with
North 5th Street
Reed Street [Added
6-14-2016 by Res.
No. 45-16]
South 40 feet east from the curbline of North
6th Street
Reed Street South 20 feet west from the edge of the
sidewalk furthest from the corner of
North 12th Street
Reed Street South 20 feet east from the edge of the
sidewalk furthest from the corner of
North 13th Street
School Street South From the intersection of the east
curbline of Front Street and the south
curbline of School Street for a distance
of 195 feet easterly
Spring Street, West North curb Near Niagra Mohawk pole No. 2
situated at the northeast corner line of
110 W. Spring Street
State Street, West North From its intersection with North 3rd
Street
State Street West South 65 feet west of west curbline of South
1st Street
State Street, West South 85 feet west of its intersection with
South 3rd Street
State Street, West South To the driveway of the Campbell Oil
Co. station, 719 West State Street
Sec. 24-135 CHARTER Sec. 24-135
C:607
Street Side Extent
State Street West Southwest
Corner
40 feet west of its intersection with
South 12th Street
Sullivan Street, West North 68 feet westerly from the northwest
corner of West Sullivan Street and
North 12th Street
Tompkins South 20 feet from the southeasterly edge of
the handicap accessibility ramp on
Tompkins Street at its intersection
with North Berry Street
Union Street, North From the premises of 1220 North
Union Street to a point 30 feet further
from the intersection of North Union
Street and East Oak Street
Union Street, North
[Added 8-25-2015
by Res. No. 72-15]
Northeast 35 feet from its intersection with the
crosswalk at East Forest Avenue
Union Street, North
[Added 9-9-2014
by Res. No. 90-14]
Northeast 50 feet from its intersection with the
crosswalk at East Forest Avenue
Union Street, North
[Added 8-25-2015
by Res. No. 72-15]
Northwest 35 feet from its intersection with the
crosswalk at West Forest Avenue
Union Street, North
[Added 9-9-2014
by Res. No. 90-14]
Northwest 50 feet from its intersection with the
crosswalk at West Forest Avenue
Union Street, North Northwest
corner
25 feet from its intersection with
Franklin Street
Union Street, North
[Added 8-25-2015
by Res. No. 72-15]
Southeast 35 feet from its intersection with the
crosswalk at East Forest Avenue
Union Street, North
[Added 9-9-2014
by Res. No. 90-14]
Southeast 70 feet from its intersection with the
crosswalk at East Forest Avenue
Union Street, North
[Added 8-25-2015
by Res. No. 72-15]
Southwest 35 feet from its intersection with the
crosswalk at West Forest Avenue
Union Street, North
[Added 9-9-2014
by Res. No. 90-14]
Southwest 50 feet from its intersection with the
crosswalk at West Forest Avenue
Union Street, North Southwest 20 feet south from its intersection with
the crosswalk at East Forest Street
Union Street, North Southwest 20 feet south from its intersection with
the crosswalk at West Forest Street
Sec. 24-135 OLEAN CODE Sec. 24-135
C:608
Street Side Extent
Union Street, North West In front of 701 North Union Street, at
the west line of said street.
Union Street, North West 30 feet south from the intersection
with West Water
Union Street, North West 80 feet south from the intersection of
the south curb of West Elm Street and
the west curb of North Union Street
Union Street East 20 feet from its intersection with East
Henley Street
Union Street, S. West 64 feet from its intersection with West
State Street
Union Street, S. West 20 feet north from the southwest
corner of West Riverside Dr.
Washington Street North Between 11th Street and 12th Street
58 feet east from the corner of 12th
Street
Washington North From the intersection of 12th Street
westerly to the boundary between
1302 1/2 and 1306 Washington Street
Washington Street North 27 feet from its northwest intersection
with North 6th Street
Washington Street North 52 feet east from the intersection with
North 13th Street
Washington Street North 54 feet west of the northwest corner of
the intersection of North 13th Street
and Washington Street
Sec. 24-136. Seasonal restrictions.22 [Res. No. 42-10, 6-8-2010;
amended 1-10-2012 by Res. No. 96-11]
The standing or parking of vehicles upon the streets of the City shall be
prohibited from May 15 until October 15 in each year, according to the
following biweekly schedule:
(1) No parking shall be permitted from 2:00 a.m. until 7:00 a.m. on the
following streets in the City:
a. Week A: [Amended 9-27-2016 by Res. No. 77-16]
22.Editor's Note: Former Sec. 24-136, Alternate side of the street parking, added 5-27-2008
by Res. No. 36-06, was repealed 10-14-2008 by Res. No. 87-08.
Sec. 24-135 CHARTER Sec. 24-136
C:609
Sunday night/Monday morning: Center Street; School Street;
Genesee Street; Inwood Drive; Woodview Avenue; Woodview
Court; Oviatt Street; Hamilton Avenue; Euclid Avenue; VanBuren
Avenue; Willow Street; Rosedale Terrace; East and West Baldwin
Avenue; Madison Avenue; Delaware Avenue; (from North Union
Street to Olean Creek); Root Street; East Connell Street;
Brookview Avenue; Gardiner Avenue; East and West Forest
Avenue; East and West Water Street; East and West Elm Street;
East and West Oak Street; E Pine Street; Thorn Street; West
Arland Avenue; Highland Terrace; Stardust Lane; Skyview Drive;
Satellite Circle; Gemini Drive.
Monday night/Tuesday morning: Higgins Avenue; North 4th Street
(from Wayne St to Spruce St); Spruce Street; North 1st Street
(from Wayne Street to North Union Street); North Union Street
(from North 1st Street to end); Keating Avenue; Maple Street;
Walnut Street; River Street (from East Forest Avenue to Pine
Street); Martin Street; North Barry Street (from Main Street to
Delaware Avenue); Main Street; Front Street (from Main Street
to School Street); Fifth Avenue; Fourth Avenue; Third Avenue;
Second Avenue; First Avenue; Fairview Avenue.
Tuesday night/Wednesday morning: Wayne Street; Buffalo Street
(from 12th Street to City line); Homer Street; Fountain Street;
Johnson Street; Franklin Street; Coleman Street; North 5th Street
(from Wayne Street to dead end); North 6th Street (from Wayne
Street to dead end); North 7th Street (from Wayne Street to dead
end); North 8th Street (from Wayne Street to dead end).
Wednesday night/Thursday morning: North Barry Street (East
State Street to dead end); South Barry Street; North Clinton
Street; South Clinton Street; Fulton Street; East Riverside Drive
(from South Union Street to end of curbing); Indiana Avenue;
Bradley Drive; Carolina Street; Vermont Street; Virginia Street;
East and West Ohio Street; York Street; Garfield Court; Grant
Court; Monroe Terrace; West Riverside Drive; Martha Avenue;
North 1st Street (from State Street to Wayne Street); South 1st
Street; North and South 2nd Street; North and South 3rd Street;
North 4th Street (from State to Reed Street); South 4th Street
(from State Street to Green Street).
b. Week B:
Sunday night/Monday morning: Front Street; (from School Street
to East State Street); Prospect Avenue; Grandview Avenue; Seneca
Avenue; Garden Avenue; Bishop Street; Griffin Street; Plum
Street; Goodrich Avenue; Brook Street; Prince Street; Crown
Street (from Queen Street to King Street); Bell Street; Delaware
Avenue (from Queen Street to Gulf Street); Kingston Drive;
Division Street; East Spring Street.
Sec. 24-136 OLEAN CODE Sec. 24-136
C:610
Sec. 24-137. Seasonal alternate parking. [Code 1971, § 28-102.1]
Parking prohibition signs shall be erected on each side of the 100 block of
South 3rd Street with the following wording for the appropriate side of the
street:
East side: No Parking Tuesday, Thursday, Friday, 10:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m.,
October 1 through April 1, Seasonal.
West side: Parking only Tuesday, Thursday, Friday, 7:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m.,
October 1 through April 1, Seasonal.
Sec. 24-138. Prohibited between 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m., Monday
through Friday. [Code 1971, § 28-103]
Upon the following streets or parts thereof, it shall be unlawful for any
person to park a vehicle between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m.,
Monday through Friday, when signs are in place giving notice thereof:
Monday night/Tuesday morning: Rowland Avenue; Hoop Street;
Grossman Avenue; Osgood Avenue; Jefferson Street; Richmond
Avenue; Niagara Street; North and South Clark Street; Orchard
Avenue; Chestnut Street; King Street; Queen Street; Alder Street;
Stowell Avenue; Duke Street; Charles Street; James Street.
Tuesday night/Wednesday morning: Worden Avenue; Winters
Avenue; North and South 5th; North and South 6th; North and
South 7th; North and South 8th; North and South 9th; North and
South 10th Street; North and South 11th Street; North and South
12th Street; Putnam Street (between 11th Street and 12th Street);
North and South 13th Street; North and South 14th Street; North
15th Street; South 16th Street; North and South 17th Street;
North and South 18th Street; North and South 19th Street; North
20th Street; North 21st Street; North 24th Street; South 25th
Street; South 26th Street.
Wednesday night/Thursday morning: Whitney Avenue; Reed Street
(from 7th Street to 13th Street); W Sullivan Street; Laurens
Street; Washington Street; Buffalo Street (from Washington Street
to Wayne Street); West Henley Street; Irving Street; West Greene
Street; Hamilton Street; Tompkins Street; Laurel Avenue; Times
Square; South Street; East Henley Street; East Greene Street;
Adams Street; Franchot Boulevard.
(2) No parking or standing of vehicles shall be permitted between 3:00 a.m.
to 6:00 a.m. Monday through Saturday on North and South Union
Street (between south City line and Main Street); West State Street;
and East State Street (from east City line to 15th Street).
Sec. 24-136 CHARTER Sec. 24-138
C:611
Street Side Extent
State Street, East North Between a point 100 feet east of the
east curbline of North Barry Street
and Clinton Street
Sec. 24-139. Prohibited between 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. and 3:00
p.m. and 5:00 p.m., Monday through Friday. [Code 1971, § 28-104;
Res. No. 09-07, 2-13-2007]
Upon the following streets or parts thereof, it shall be unlawful for any
person to park a vehicle between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. and
3:00 p.m. and 5:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, when signs are in place
giving notice thereof:
Street Side Extent
Buffalo Street East Between West Sullivan and North 9th
Street
Martin Street East Beginning 352 feet northwest from the
intersection with East Connell Street
and ending 402 northwest from same.
Sec. 24-140. Prohibited between 7:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m., Monday
through Friday. [Code 1971, § 28-104.1; Res. No. 109-06, 9-26-2006]
Upon the following streets or parts thereof, it shall be unlawful for any
person to park a vehicle between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m.,
Monday through Friday, when signs are in place giving notice thereof:
Street Side Extent
17th Street, North
[Added 1-8-2013
by Res. No. 84-12]
Both Between Washington Street and
Sullivan Street
Hamilton Avenue South No parking and no standing from "No
Parking Here to Corner" sign easterly
90 feet
Main Street East No parking and no standing between
Oviatt Street and Hamilton Avenue
Sullivan Street, West North Between 4th Street and 5th Street.
Union Street, North
[Repealed
4-28-2015 by Res.
No. 29-15]
Washington Street North No parking and no standing from the
northwest corner of North 15th Street
westerly to a point 130 feet east of
North 17th Street.
Sec. 24-138 OLEAN CODE Sec. 24-141
C:612
Sec. 24-141. Prohibited between 7:30 a.m. to 3:30 p.m. except on
weekends and holidays. [Code 1971, § 28-104.2]
Upon the following streets or parts thereof, it shall be unlawful for any
person to park a vehicle between the hours of 7:30 a.m. and 3:30 p.m.,
except on weekends and holidays:
Street Side Extent
Jefferson Street East From 107 to 111 Jefferson Street
Sec. 24-142. Prohibited between 8:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. [Code
1971, § 28-105; Res. No. 137-90, 5-28-1991; Res. No. 08-10,
2-9-2010; Res. No. 76-10, 9-28-2010]
Upon the following streets or parts thereof, it shall be unlawful for any
person to park a vehicle between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m., when
signs are in place giving notice thereof:
Street Side Extent
Barry Street, North Both From House No. 307 to Luther
Manufacture Company
Elm Street, East South From National Grid Pole #4 extending
east 140 feet to National Grid Pole #5
West Forrest Avenue
South
Maple
Street, and
North 4th
Street
Sec. 24-143. Overnight parking prohibited. [Added 11-22-2016 by
Res. No. 91-16]
Upon the following streets or parts thereof, it shall be unlawful for any
person to park a vehicle between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 5:00 a.m.
seven days per week, when signs are in place giving notice thereof:
Street Side Extent
Reed Street North Throughout the entire
portion of paved rightof-
way
Sec. 24-144. Prohibited between 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. except on
Saturdays, Sundays, and holidays. [Code 1971, § 28-105.01; Res. No.
76-91, 8-13-1991; Res. No. 63-93, 5-25-1993; Res. No. 49-94, § 1,
7-26-1994; Res. No. 61-95, 9-12-1995; Res. No. 37-03, 6-10-2003;
Res. No. 39-03, 7-8-2003; Res. No. 18-10, 3-23-2010]
Upon the following streets or parts thereof, it shall be unlawful for any
person to park a vehicle between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m.,
Sec. 24-141 CHARTER Sec. 24-144
C:613
except on Saturdays, Sundays, and holidays, when signs are in place giving
notice of thereof:
Street Side Extent
N. 2nd Street East At 116 No. 2nd Street and to extend
north 20 feet from the northern edge
of the driveway at 116 North 2nd
Street.
Henley, W. South From the corner of South 4th Street
to the corner of South 5th Street
Sec. 24-145. Prohibited between 8:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m., Monday
through Friday. [Code 1971, § 28-105.02]
Upon the following streets or parts thereof, it shall be unlawful for any
person to park a vehicle between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m.,
Monday through Friday, when signs are in place giving notice thereof:
Street Side Extent
Elm Street, East Southeasterly
Between Walnut Street and River
Street opposite the end of the
Transfiguration Church School, a total
distance where parking is prohibited
for 56 feet.
Sec. 24-146. Prohibited between 9:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m., Monday
through Friday. [Res. No. 56-91, 5-28-1991]
It is unlawful to park a motor vehicle between 9:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. on
any day except Saturday or Sunday in any of the following locations:
301—303 South Union Street (Kustom Car Care).
Sec. 24-147. Prohibited between 9:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m. [Code
1971, § 28-105.2]
Parking shall be prohibited on both sides of Delaware Avenue from Union
Street to Barry Street from 9:00 a.m. until 11:00 p.m. Appropriate signs
shall be erected on Delaware Avenue to enforce prohibition of parking.
Sec. 24-148. Prohibited between 4:00 p.m. and 6:00 p.m., Monday
through Friday. [Code 1971, § 28-106]
Upon the following streets or parts thereof, it shall be unlawful for any
person to park a vehicle between the hours of 4:00 p.m. and 6:00 p.m.,
Monday through Friday, when signs are in place giving notice thereof:
Sec. 24-144 OLEAN CODE Sec. 24-148
C:614
Street Side Extent
State Street, East South Between a point 85 feet east of the
easterly curbline of South Barry Street
and Clinton Street
Sec. 24-149. Prohibited except on Saturday from 4:00 p.m. to 7:00
p.m. and on Sunday from 6:00 a.m. to 2:00 p.m. [Code 1971,
§ 28-106.1]
Upon the following streets or parts thereof, it shall be unlawful for any
person to park a vehicle except on Saturday from 4:00 p.m. to 7:00 p.m. and
on Sunday from 6:00 a.m. to 2:00 p.m.:
Street Side Extent
1st Street, South East Between West State Street and West
Henry Street
Sec. 24-150. Five-hour limit. [Code 1971, § 28-107]
Upon the following streets or parts thereof, it shall be unlawful for any
person to park a vehicle for a period of time longer than five hours at any
time, when signs are in place giving notice thereof:
Street Side Extent
State Street, East Both From Union Street to Barry Street
Sec. 24-151. Two-hour limit—Generally. [Code 1971, § 28-108; Res.
No. 97-10, 12-28-2010]
Upon the following streets or parts thereof, it shall be unlawful for any
person to park a vehicle for a period of time longer than two hours at any
time, when signs are in place giving notice thereof:
Street Side Extent
4th Street, North East From Wayne Street to Lincoln Street
5th Street, North Both From Wayne Street to Clark Bros.
10th Street, North
[Added 4-9-2013
by Res. No. 20-13]
West From West State Street for a distance
of 145 feet north
Barry Street West From Hamilton Street to Economic
Club.
Coleman Street North From Van Campen Avenue to North
4th Street
Hamilton Street Both From Union Street to Barry Street
Sullivan Street, East Both From Union Street to Barry Street
Times Square Both From Union Street to Barry Street
Sec. 24-148 CHARTER Sec. 24-151
C:615
Street Side Extent
Union Street, North Both From PRR tracks to Reed Street
Union Street, North
[Added 8-25-2015
by Res. No. 74-15]
Both From Sullivan Street North to Main
Street
Wayne Street North From North 4th Street to North 5th
Street
Sec. 24-152. Same—Monday through Friday. [Code 1971, § 28-109;
Res. No. 17-09, 3-10-2009]
Upon the following streets or parts thereof, it shall be unlawful for any
person to park a vehicle for a period of time longer than two hours, Monday
through Friday, when signs are in place giving notice thereof:
Street Side Extent
(Reserved)
Sec. 24-153. Same — Parallel parking between 8:00 a.m. and 4:00
p.m. [Code 1971, § 28-109.1]
Upon the following streets or parts thereof, parallel parking shall be
allowed, for a time limit of two hours, between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and
4:00 p.m., when signs are in place giving notice thereof:
Street Side Extent
6th Street, North East From West State Street to Putnam
Street
Sec. 24-154. Same—Between 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. [Code 1971,
§ 28-110; Res. No. 126-93, 9-15-1993]
Upon the following streets or parts thereof, it shall be unlawful for any
person to park a vehicle for a period of time longer than two hours, between
the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m., when signs are in place giving notice
thereof:
Street Side Extent
3rd. Street, North
[Repealed
11-10-2015 by
Res. No. 101-15]
Tompkins South From the "No Parking Here to Corner"
sign to the westerly bounds of 206
Tompkins Street
Sec. 24-151 OLEAN CODE Sec. 24-154.1
C:616
Sec. 24-154.1. Same—Between 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. [Res. No.
3-94, 2-22-1994; Res. No. 32-94, 4-26-1994]
Upon the following streets or parts thereof, it shall be unlawful for any
person to park a vehicle for a period of time longer than two hours, between
the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, when signs
are in place giving notice thereof.
Street Side Extent
Tompkins South From the "No Parking Here to Corner
sign to the westerly bounds of North
Clinton Street
Sec. 24-155. Same—Between 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m., Monday
through Friday. [Code 1971, § 28-111; Res. No. 68-92, 4-28-1992;
Res. No. 95-00, 10-10-2000]
Upon the following streets or parts thereof, it shall be unlawful for any
person to park a vehicle for a period of time longer than two hours, between
the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, when signs
are in place giving notice thereof:
Street Side Extent
2nd Street, North West Commencing from 215 North 2nd
Street (north line) to intersection of
North 2nd and Laurens Streets.
4th Street, N. West Commencing from 327 North 4th
Street north to the intersection of
Reed and North 4th Streets
Coleman Street North For its entire length.
Sec. 24-155.1. Same—Between 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. Mondays
through Fridays. [Res. No. 15-02, 2-26-2002]
Upon the following streets or parts thereof, it shall be unlawful for any
person to park a vehicle for a period of time longer than two hours, between
the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, when signs
are in place giving notice thereof.
Street Side Extent
Wayne Street North In the 400 Block.
Sec. 24-156. Same—Between 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m., except
Sundays and holidays. [Code 1971, § 28-111.1]
Upon the following streets or parts thereof, it shall be unlawful for any
person to park a vehicle for a period of time longer than two hours, between
the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m., except Sundays and holidays, when
signs are in place giving notice thereof:
Sec. 24-154.1 CHARTER Sec. 24-156
C:617
Street Side Extent
2nd Street, North West In the 100 Block.
Sec. 24-157. Two-hour parking — 7:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m., Monday
through Friday. [Added 8-23-2011 by Res. No. 59-11; 9-13-2011 by
Res. No. 64-11; 4-28-2015 by Res. No. 30-15; 8-25-2015 by Res. No.
73-15; 9-27-2016 by Res. No. 75-16; 12-13-2016 by Res. No. 98-16]
Upon the following streets or parts thereof, it shall be unlawful for any
person to park a vehicle for a period of time longer than two hours, between
the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m., except Saturdays, Sundays and
holidays, when signs are in place giving notice thereof:
Street Side Extent
6th Street, South
[Added 4-11-2017 by
Res. No. 22-17]
West From its intersection with West State
Street south approximately 175 feet
State Street, West Both From Union Street west to 13th Street
Union Street, North Both From Henley Street north to Main
Street
Sec. 24-157.1. Two-hour parking—8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m., Monday
through Saturday. [Res. No. 73-93, 6-8-1993; Res. No. 104-93,
8-24-1993]
It shall be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle for a period of time
longer than two hours, between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m.,
Monday through Saturday, when signs are in place giving notice thereof:
Street Side Extent
Tompkins Street South From the east bounds of the "No
Parking Here to Corner" sign easterly
to Clinton Street
Sec. 24-158. One-hour limit—Generally. [Code 1971, § 28-112; Res.
No. 45-93, 3-23-1993]
Upon the following streets or parts thereof, it shall be unlawful for any
person to park a vehicle for a period of time longer than one hour at any
time, when signs are in place giving notice thereof:
Street Side Extent
N. 19th Street East From the "No Parking Here to Corner"
sign approximately 47 feet to the
driveway.
Clark Street, South East
State Street, West Both From Union Street to 4th Street
Sec. 24-156 OLEAN CODE Sec. 24-158
C:618
Street Side Extent
State Street, West North From North 4th Street to North 7th
Street
Union Street, North Both From State Street to PRR tracks.
Union Street, South East From State Street to South Street
Wayne Street North Starting 54 feet west of Brickell
Avenue to the PRR tracks.
Sec. 24-159. Same—Between 9:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m., except
Sundays. [Code 1971, § 28-112.1]
Upon the following streets or parts thereof, it shall be unlawful for any
person to park a vehicle for a period of time longer than one hour, between
9:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m., except Sundays, when signs are in place giving
notice thereof:
Street Side Extent
2nd Street, North East From West State Street 280 feet for
the first sign, and a second sign to be
placed 48 feet north of the first sign.
2nd Street, North West From a point 40 feet south of the
curbline of Laurens Street, and a
second sign 90 feet south of the
curbline of Laurens Street
Sec. 24-160. Same—Between 9:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., except
Sundays. [Code 1971, § 28-112.2]
Appropriate signs shall be erected on the north side of West Sullivan Street
beginning at its intersection with Buffalo Street 125 feet west allowing one
hour parking from 9:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m., except Sunday.
Sec. 24-161. Same—Between 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. [Code 1971,
§ 28-113]
Upon the following streets or parts thereof, it shall be unlawful for any
person to park a vehicle for a period of time longer than one hour, between
the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., when signs are in place giving notice
thereof:
Street Side Extent
7th Street, North West From Reed Street to Clark Bros.
8th Street, North West From Wayne Street to Clark Bros.
9th Street, North West From Reed Street to Wayne Street
10th Street, North West From State Street to a point
approximately 100 feet north.
Sec. 24-158 CHARTER Sec. 24-161
C:619
Street Side Extent
11th Street, North West From State Street to a point
approximately 100 feet north.
Sec. 24-162. Same—Between 8:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. [Code 1971,
§ 28-114]
Upon the following streets or parts thereof, it shall be unlawful for any
person to park a vehicle for a period of time longer than one hour, between
the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m., when signs are in place giving notice
thereof:
Street Side Extent
2nd Street, North East From the intersection of State Street
and 2nd Street, 261 feet north.
Sec. 24-163. Thirty-minute limit—Generally. [Code 1971, § 28-115;
Res. No. 171-92, 11-10-1992; Res. No. 151-93, 10-26-1993; Res. No.
137-06, 12-26-2006]
Upon the following streets or parts thereof, it shall be unlawful for any
person to park a vehicle for a longer period of time than 30 minutes, when
signs are in place giving notice thereof:
Street Side Extent
Union Street, North Both Beginning at its intersection with West
Oak Street and extending 75 feet
south.
Sec. 24-164. Same—8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. except Sundays and
holidays. [Code 1971, § 28-115.1; Res. No. 84-95, 11-14-1995; Res.
No. 114-01, 10-23-2001]
Upon the following streets or parts thereof, it shall be unlawful for any
person to park a vehicle for a longer period of time than 30 minutes
between 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m., except Sundays and holidays, when signs
are in place giving notice thereof:
Street Side Extent
2nd Street, N. East Beginning 45 feet from the corner of
Laurens Street, south of the driveway
of 120 North 2nd Street
8th Street, South East Between the driveways of 109 S. 8th
Street and 111 S. 8th Street
Sec. 24-165. Same—8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. [Code 1971, § 28-115.2]
Upon the following streets or parts thereof, it shall be unlawful for any
person to park a vehicle for a longer period of time than 30 minutes
Sec. 24-161 OLEAN CODE Sec. 24-165
C:620
between 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m., when signs are in place giving notice
thereof:
Street Side Extent
4th Street, N. East Widened portion running from the
intersection of West State Street and
North 4th Street
13th Street, South West Between W. State Street and W. Henley
Street
Sec. 24-166. Twenty-minute limit—Generally. [Code 1971, § 28-116;
Res. No. 108-94, 11-22-1994; Res. No. 41-99, 6-8-1999]
Upon the following streets or parts thereof, it shall be unlawful for any
person to park a vehicle for a longer period of time than 20 minutes, when
signs are in place giving notice thereof:
Street Side Extent
8th., North East From a point 20 feet north of West
State Street to a point 70 feet
northerly of West State Street
Clinton Street,
North
East 95 feet north of its intersection with
East State Street
State Street, East North From Save-Way Market to 51 ft.
Union Street, South West From State Street to Library.
Wayne Street North From 7th Street to 100 feet east.
Sec. 24-167. Same—8:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. Monday through Friday.
[Res. No. 112-92, 7-28-1992]
Upon the following streets or parts thereof, it shall be unlawful for any
person to park a vehicle for a longer time than 20 minutes between 8:00
a.m. and 4:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, when signs are in place giving
notice thereof:
Street Side Extent
4th Street, South East Beginning at the northwesterly corner
of the Ivers J. Norton School building
for a distance of 135 feet to the
southwesterly corner of the Ivers J.
Norton School building.
Sec. 24-165 CHARTER Sec. 24-168
C:621
Sec. 24-168. Fifteen-minute limit—Generally. [Code 1971,
§ 28-116.1; Res. No. 101-94, 10-11-1994; Res. No. 95-03,
10-28-2003; Res. No. 06-08, 2-12-2008]
Upon the following streets or parts thereof, it shall be unlawful for any
person to park a vehicle for a longer period of time than 15 minutes, when
signs are in place giving notice thereof:
Street Side Extent
Seneca Street North In front of 707 Seneca Street
State Street, East North At 661 East State Street
Sec. 24-169. Same—8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. Monday through Friday.
[Code 1971, § 28-116.1.1; Res. No. 51-94, 6-14-1994; Res. No.
61-94, 6-28-1994; Res. No. 50-98, 6-9-1998; Res. No. 2-05,
1-11-2005; Res. No. 108-06, 9-26-2006]
Upon the following streets or parts thereof, it shall be unlawful for any
person to park a vehicle for a longer period than 15 minutes between 8:00
a.m. and 5:00 p.m. Monday through Friday, when signs are in place giving
notice thereof:
Street Side Extent
4th Street, North East Starting at a point 45 feet south from
its intersection with Laurens Street
and to continue 90 feet south from its
starting point.
Laurens Street North The 200 block.
Laurens Street South From the western boundary of 413
Laurens Street to the "here to corner"
sign at North 4th Street
Main Street East In front of School 530 feet from the
crosswalk
Sec. 24-170. Same—9:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m., except Sunday. [Code
1971, § 28-116.2]
Upon the following streets or portions thereof, it shall be unlawful for
any person to park a vehicle for a longer period of time than 15 minutes
between 9:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m., except Sunday, when signs are in place
giving notice thereof:
Street Side Extent
Walnut Street West corner At its intersection with East Pine
Street
Sec. 24-168 OLEAN CODE Sec. 24-171
C:622
Sec. 24-171. Same—9:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. [Code 1971, § 28-116.3]
Upon the following streets or portions thereof, it shall be unlawful for
any person to park a vehicle for a longer period of time than 15 minutes
between 9:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m.:
Street Side Extent
State Street, East In front of 649 East State Street
Sec. 24-172. Reserved.23
Sec. 24-173. Parking during snowfalls. [Code 1971, § 28-118; Res.
No. 6-96, 2-13-1996; Res. No. 46-01, 5-29-2001; Res. No. 08-09,
3-24-2009; Res. No. 18-13, 3-26-2013; Res. No. 102-15, 11-24-2015]
(a) Definitions. The following words and phrases, when used in this article,
shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this section,
except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
CHIEF — The Chief of Police or, in his/her absence, the duly authorized
representative.
DIRECTOR — The Director of Public Works or, in his/her absence, the
duly authorized representative.
MAYOR — The Mayor of the City or, in his/her absence, his/her duly
authorized representative.
PRIMARY STREETS — Designated as follows: North and South Union;
East and West State.
ROADWAY — That portion of a street or highway improved, designed or
ordinarily used for vehicular travel, exclusive of the shoulder or berm.
SECONDARY STREETS — Shall be designated as all streets other than
those identified as primary or subprimary streets.
SNOW EVENT — The proactive response plan declaring that parking
restrictions will be in effect to allow City snowplows to effectively clear
City streets.
STREET or HIGHWAY — The entire width between the boundary lines
of every publicly maintained when any part thereof is open to the use
of the public for purposes of vehicular travel.
SUBPRIMARY STREETS — Shall be designated as follows: Alder from
Seneca to Spring; Buffalo; Clark; Clinton, North and South;
Constitution; Delaware from Union to Barry; Eighth, North, between
West Sullivan Street and Wayne Street; Elm, East and West; Euclid,
15th; First South from State to Irving; First, North; Forest, North (200
and 300 blocks); Fourth, South (200 block); Fourth, North from Wayne
23.Editor's Note—Former Sec. 24-172, Parking on South First Street between West State and
West Henley Streets, adopted as § 28-117 of the 1971 Code, was repealed July 27, 2004, by
Res. No. 68-04.
Sec. 24-171 CHARTER Sec. 24-173
C:623
north; Franchot Boulevard (east of Union); Franklin; Front; Genesee;
Green, West; Hamilton; Henley West; Higgins; Highland Terrace;
Homer; Indiana Avenue; Irving; Johnson; King; Laurens; Madison;
Main; 19th, South; Oregon; Oviatt (east of Main); Pine; Prospect;
Queen; Reed from Third to 13th; River; Seneca; Seventh; South; Spring,
East; Spruce; Stardust; Sullivan, West, from Union to 15th; Sunrise,
from Stardust to Van Buren; Terrace; Third, North (300 block); 12th;
21st; 24th; Times Square; Union Street, North Extension; Van Buren;
Washington; Wayne; York.
(b) Snow event declaration and procedure.
(1) Declaration: The Mayor or his designee, after consultation with the
Director and Chief, may declare a snow event on the basis of falling
snow, sleet, or freezing rain, or on the basis of a forecast by the
National Weather Service or other weather service, that weather
conditions will make it necessary to impose parking restrictions in
order to allow City snowplows to effectively clear City's streets.
(2) Notice: The City shall cause a public announcement of such parking
prohibitions and/or restrictions and the areas designated for said
restrictions by means of broadcasts and/or telecasts from various
commercial stations serving the City and on the public access
channel of any cable television franchisee servicing the City, and
social media resources available to the City. The Director shall
cause a notice of declaration to be posted in the City Building for
such period of time as the parking regulations are in effect, and the
Chief shall notify police dispatch of the same.
(3) Termination: Once in effect, a prohibition under this section shall
remain in effect until terminated by announcement of the individual
declaring the snow event in the same manner of notice as above.
(c) Prohibition.
(1) No person shall allow any vehicle to remain parked on any City
street in violation the parking restrictions instituted as part of a
declared snow event as set forth herein.
(2) Restrictions for primary and subprimary streets. Upon declaration
of a snow event, the parking of motor vehicles on primary streets
shall be prohibited between the hours of 3:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m.,
and parking on subprimary streets shall be prohibited between
12:00 midnight and 7:00 a.m.
(3) Restrictions for secondary streets. Upon declaration of a snow
event, the parking of motor vehicles on secondary streets shall be
prohibited between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m.
(d) Enforcement.
Sec. 24-173 OLEAN CODE Sec. 24-173
C:624
(1) Whenever this section is alleged to have been violated, the Chief or
the appropriate designee shall have the authority to issue and serve
a ticket upon the violator if he or she has reasonable cause to
believe that a violation of this section has been committed. Such
ticket shall be in the form authorized by state law.
(2) Members of the Police Department are hereby further authorized
to remove or cause the removal and/or impounding of any vehicle
that obstructs or otherwise impedes traffic on any street in the City.
Such vehicle may be removed and conveyed by or under the
direction of a member of the Police Department. The Chief is
authorized to engage the services of any private towing company to
remove vehicles that are found in violation of the prohibitions of
this section. Before the owner or person in charge of such vehicle
shall be permitted to remove the same from the custody of the
private towing company, said owner shall furnish evidence of
identity and ownership and shall sign a receipt and pay a fee to
cover cost of removal plus the cost of storage.
(e) Exemptions.
(1) In all areas of the City, an owner of a motor vehicle who resides at
premises which do not have a driveway shall be permitted to park
their vehicles in any City-owned public parking lot free of charge
during the snow event.
(2) Motor vehicles with handicapped stickers and duly authorized
emergency response vehicles shall also be exempt from the
provisions of this section.
(3) In the event that the Mayor excepts certain streets from the snow
event, those vehicles parked on streets or portions of streets
specifically excepted from the declaration of emergency shall be
exempt from the provisions of this section.
(4) A stalled vehicle shall not exempt the owner of the vehicle from the
penalties of this section. Whenever a vehicle becomes stalled for
any reason on any City street on which there is a parking
prohibition in effect, the person operating such vehicle shall take
immediate action to have the vehicle towed or pushed off the
roadway. No person shall abandon or leave his/her vehicle in the
roadway except for the purpose of immediately securing
assistance.
(f) Relationship to other laws. Any provision of this section which becomes
effective by declaration as prescribed above shall, while temporarily in
effect, take precedence over other conflicting provisions of law
normally in effect, except that it shall not take precedent over
provisions of law relating to traffic accidents, emergency travel of
authorized emergency vehicles, or emergency traffic directions by a
police officer. Nothing in this section shall be construed to permit
Sec. 24-173 CHARTER Sec. 24-173
C:625
Sec. 24-174. Parking restricted in War Veterans Park. [Code 1971,
§ 28-119]
When signs are in place giving notice thereof, parking in War Veterans Park
shall be restricted to park visitors and stadium patrons only.
Sec. 24-175. No parking between driveway. [Res. No. 96-95,
11-28-1995]
A "No Parking Between Driveway" sign shall be installed as appropriate at:
308 North Clinton Street.
Sec. 24-176. No blocking of driveways. [Res. No. 94-99, 12-14-1999]
A "Do Not Block Driveway" sign be installed at:
629 East State Street in front of Mickey's Deli.
Sec. 24-177. through Sec. 24-190. (Reserved)
parking at any time or place where it is forbidden by any other
provision of law.
(g) Penalty. The fine for any violation of this section shall be $50 and shall
be imposed on the registered owner of the vehicle. This fine is in
addition to any costs for removal and storage payable to any towing
company engaged to remove a vehicle under this section.
Sec. 24-173 OLEAN CODE Sec. 24-177
C:626
DIVISION 3
METERED PARKING24
Sec. 24-191. Meter zones. [Code 1971, § 28-123; Res. No. 55-92,
4-14-1992; Res. No. 88-02, 8-13-2002; Res. No. 30-11, 5-24-2011;
Res. No. 73-13, 9-10-2013; 12-10-2013 by Res. No. 96-2013;
12-10-2013 by Res. No. 97-13; amended 8-23-2011 by Res. No.
59-11; 9-13-2011 by Res. No. 64-11; 4-28-2015 by Res. No. 30-15;
8-25-2015 by Res. No. 73-15; 9-27-2016 by Res. No. 75-16;
12-13-2016 by Res. No. 98-16]
Parking meters shall be installed, operated, maintained, policed, and
supervised on the streets or parts of streets, and municipally owned parking
areas described below:
Hamilton Street. South side from Union Street to North Barry Street.
Olean Municipal Building Parking Lot.
Times Square. North and South sides from Union Street to Barry Street.
Union Street, North. Both sides from Sullivan Street North to Main Street.
Union Street, North. East and West sides from State Street to Coleman
Street.
Union Street, South. East side from South Street to East Henley Street,
except there not be placed a parking meter in front of any lot currently
occupied solely as a residence.
Sec. 24-192. Construction; regulation. [Code 1971, § 28-124; Res.
No. 88-02, 8-13-2002; Res. No. 62-05, 7-12-2005; Res. No. 70-06,
6-13-2006; Res. No. 62-07, 8-28-2007]
(a) Parking meters shall be so devised and regulated as to provide for
parking periods not in excess of three hours for $0.25 per 30 minutes in
parking meter zones lying outside and exclusive of the following zones:
(1) That zone commencing at the intersection of Union Street with
Coleman Street and extending south to the intersection of North
Union Street and State Street, except as provided for otherwise in
§ 24-192(f).
(b) All parking meters, except such meters as may be established by other
provisions of law, lying in:
(1) That parking meter zone commencing at the intersection of North
Union Street and Coleman Street and extending south to the
intersection of North Union Street and State Street; and
(2) (Reserved)
24.State law reference—Power of city relative to parking meters, Vehicle and Traffic Law
§ 1640(a)(9).
Sec. 24-191 CHARTER Sec. 24-192
C:627
Sec. 24-193. Designation of parking spaces. [Code 1971, § 28-125]
The director of the department of public works shall designate by
appropriate markings parking meter spaces as determined by the common
council.
Sec. 24-194. Vehicles to be parked within lines. [Code 1971,
§ 28-126]
Any vehicle parked in any parking meter space established by this division
shall be parked with the front bumper of such vehicle alongside of or in line
with the parking meter adjacent to such parking meter space, or parallel
space, or as otherwise indicated between parallel lines. It shall be unlawful
(3) That zone commencing at the intersection of South Street and
South Union Street and extending east on the south side of the
street to the intersection of South Barry Street and South Street:
Shall be operated by the insertion of one or more $0.10 coins for
20 minutes, or a $0.25 coin for one hour.
(c) Until such time as meters shall be modified so as to implement the
foregoing, currently metered fees shall be enforceable.
(d) The common council hereby authorizes placement of short-term meters
throughout the city. Such short-term meters shall be for parking period
as described below:
(1) Not to exceed 10 minutes at a fee of $0.05.
(2) Not to exceed 20 minutes at a fee of $0.10.
(3) Not to exceed 30 minutes at a fee of $0.05. per 10 minutes.
(e) All parking meters, except such meters as may be established by other
provisions of law lying in:
(1) That zone commencing at the intersection of Whitney Avenue and
First Street and extending east to the intersection of Whitney
Avenue and North Union Street:
Shall be so devised and regulated as to provided for parking
periods not in excess of five hours for $0.25 per hour.
(f) All parking meters in the following zones, except such meters as may be
established by other provisions of law, shall be so devised and regulated
as to provide parking periods not in excess of eight hours by the
insertion of one or more $0.05 coins for 10 minutes, $0.10 coins for 20
minutes, or $0.25 coins for one hour:
(1) That zone commencing at the intersection of North Union Street
and Whitney Avenue extending 520.6 feet southerly on the east
side of North Union Street.
Sec. 24-192 OLEAN CODE Sec. 24-194
C:628
for any person to park any vehicle across any line or marking designating
the parking meter space, or to park any vehicle in such a way that such
vehicle shall not be wholly within a parking space, as designated by such
lines or markings.
Sec. 24-195. Deposit of coin. [Code 1971, § 28-127; Res. No. 88-02,
8-13-2002]
Sec. 24-196. Overtime metered parking. [Code 1971, § 28-127.1]
It shall be unlawful to be parked at a meter for which time has expired. The
passage of an interval in excess of one hour since the issuance of a prior
notice and citation shall constitute a separate offense for which additional
notice and citation may be made. In the enforcement of this provision, no
more than three separate notices and citations in a twenty-four-hour period
shall be made upon any vehicle continuously parked at the same metered
location.
Sec. 24-197. Overtime parking; parking adjacent to expired meter.
[Code 1971, § 28-128; Res. No. 88-02, 8-13-2002]
(a) In order that the police officers may properly compute the time during
which a vehicle is parked in any parking meter space established by this
division, the owner or operator of such vehicle shall, upon entering
such parking space during the time of limited parking, immediately
deposit one $0.05 coin or one or more $0.10 coins or one or more $0.25
coins of the United States in the parking meter situated at the parking
space and shall set in operation the meter erected adjacent to the space
in which his car is parked.
(b) Five cents, 0.10 or $0.25 coins of the United States shall be the only
coins used to operate the parking meters.
(a) Between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. daily, except Sundays, it
shall be unlawful for any person to park a motor vehicle for a period
longer than the time period fixed by this division and governed by a
parking meter. Such restrictions shall not apply to New Year's Day,
Memorial Day, Independence Day, Labor Day, Thanksgiving Day, and
Christmas Day, and if any such days are on Sunday, the next day
thereafter.
(b) It shall be unlawful for any person to permit a vehicle to remain in any
parking meter space when such meter is displaying a signal showing
that such vehicle shall have been parked beyond the period of time
fixed by this division. It shall be unlawful for any person to cause, allow,
permit, or suffer any vehicle registered in his name to be parked
overtime or beyond the lawful period of time described in this division.
(c) It shall be unlawful for any car to be parked in any parking meter space
for a period in excess of 12 minutes for each $0.01 deposited or one
hour for a $0.05 coin in those parking meter zones located outside of
Sec. 24-194 CHARTER Sec. 24-197
C:629
Sec. 24-198. Deposit of slugs prohibited. [Code 1971, § 28-129]
It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit or cause to be deposited in
any parking meter installed pursuant to this division any slug, device, or
substitute for a coin of the United States.
Sec. 24-199. Defacing, injuring, tampering with, etc., meters. [Code
1971, § 28-130]
It shall be unlawful for any unauthorized person to deface, injure, tamper
with, open, break, destroy, or impair a parking meter installed pursuant to
this division.
Sec. 24-200. Commercial vehicles. [Code 1971, § 28-131]
Commercial vehicles using a parking meter space established by this
division and not engaged in either loading or unloading freight or
passengers shall comply with all the provisions of this division.
Sec. 24-201. Parking meter fund. [Code 1971, § 28-133]
The moneys collected from the parking meters installed pursuant to this
division are to be deposited by the city clerk in a parking meter fund, which
may be disbursed on order of the common council.
the area embraced from the east side of North Union Street from
the Pennsylvania Railroad to the East State Street intersection and
the west of North Union Street from the Pennsylvania Railroad to the
West State Street intersection. Where the meter adjacent to such space
indicates that the space has been occupied for a period in excess of 12
minutes for each $0.01 deposited or one hour for a $0.05 coin, it shall
be presumed that this regulation has been violated. In that parking
meter zone located from the east side of North Union Street from the
Pennsylvania Railroad to the East State Street intersection and from
the west side of North Union Street from the Pennsylvania Railroad
to the West State Street intersection, it shall be unlawful for any car
to be parked in any parking meter space for a period in excess of 30
minutes for each $0.05 coin deposited, and where the meter adjacent
to such space indicates that the space has been occupied for a period
in excess of one-half hour for each $0.05 coin deposited, it shall be
presumed that this regulation has been violated. It is further presumed
that the owner or operator of any vehicle occupying a space adjacent
to a parking meter in which 12 minutes or a multiple thereof or onehalf
hour's time or one full hour's time, as the case may be, has run as
indicated on the meter, is guilty of a violation of this section.
(d) Nothing in this division shall prevent the owner or operator of a vehicle
from parking his vehicle in a space without depositing a coin, as
provided in this division, where it appears that 12 minutes, a multiple
thereof, or one to five full hours' time has not run since the deposit of a
previous coin.
Sec. 24-197 OLEAN CODE Sec. 24-202
C:630
Sec. 24-202. Parking meter bag fees for contractors and persons
showing special circumstances. [Code 1971, § 28-134]
The parking meter bag fees charged by the city to contractors and persons
showing special circumstances shall be: $5 per day with a returnable $15
deposit.
Sec. 24-203. Violations of division—Report required. [Code 1971,
§ 28-135]
It shall be the duty of each traffic patrolman or such other officer as shall be
instructed by the chief of police, in his beat or district, to take the number
of any meter at which any vehicle is overparked, as provided in this division.
Such officer shall also take the state vehicle tag number of such vehicle and
report such number to the police department, together with the length of
time during which such vehicle is parked in violation of any of the provisions
of this division, as well as any other facts, a knowledge of which is necessary
to a thorough understanding of the circumstances attending such violation.
Sec. 24-204. (Reserved)25
Sec. 24-205. Additional penalty. [Res. No. 99-92, § 28-137,
6-9-1992]
In addition to any other penalty as may be provided by law, the penalty as
provided by section 24-204 shall be increased until paid in accordance with
the following schedule:
Sec. 24-206. through Sec. 24-225. (Reserved)
(1) After 10 days, two times the basic penalty provided by section 24-204.
(2) After 30 days, four times the basic penalty provided by section 24-204.
(3) After 60 days, eight times the basic penalty provided by section 24-204.
(4) After 90 days, 16 times the basic penalty provided by section 24-204.
Notwithstanding the mathematical calculations as provided by this
section, the maximum additional penalty shall be $100.
25.Editor's Note: Res. No. 50-93, adopted May 25, 1993, repealed § 24-204, which pertained
to notice to be attached to vehicle. See the Code Comparative Table.
Sec. 24-202 CHARTER Sec. 24-206
C:631

DIVISION 4
MUNICIPAL PARKING LOTS
Sec. 24-226. Description of facility. [Code 1971, § 28-140]
The offstreet parking facilities shall consist of real property owned by the
city and being more fully described as follows:
All that certain tract or parcel of land situated in the City of Olean, County
of Cattaraugus, State of New York, and being lots 1, 26, 28, 30, 32, 34, and
part of lots 2, 27, 29, 36, 38, 40 and 42 in block no. 60 according to a map
made by T.J. Gosseline, Esq. of the Village (now City) of Olean, bounded and
described as follows:
Beginning at a point in the easterly bounds of North First Street, such
point being north 00° 20 feet 34 inches west, 418.21 feet from the point of
intersection of such easterly bounds of North First Street with the northerly
bounds of Laurens Street, and running thence from such point of beginning
and along such easterly bounds of North First Street, north 00° 20 feet
34 inches west, 256.88 feet to the point of intersection of such easterly
bounds of North First Street with the southerly bounds of West Sullivan
Street as opened (such West Sullivan Street being opened to a width of 60
feet); thence along such southerly bounds of West Sullivan Street as opened,
south 89° 17 feet 38 inches east, 162.51 feet to a point; thence south 00°
02 feet 34 inches east, parallel to the easterly border of North First Street,
88.73 feet to a point; thence south 89° 56 feet 52 inches west, parallel
to the northerly bounds of Laurens Street, 8.50 feet to the southeasterly
corner of lot 28, block 60; thence south 00° 02 feet 34 inches east, along the
easterly bounds of lots 30, 32 and 34, and parallel to the easterly bounds
of North First Street, 75 feet to the southeasterly corner of lot 34; thence
south 89° 56 feet 52 inches west, along the southerly bounds of lot 34 and
parallel to the northerly bounds of Laurens Street, 32.00 feet to a point;
thence south 00° 02 feet 34 inches east, parallel to the easterly bounds of
North First Street, 8.00 feet to a point; thence south 89° 56 feet 52 inches
west, parallel to the northerly bounds of Laurens Street, 5.00 feet to a point;
thence south 00° 02 feet 34 inches east, parallel to the easterly bounds of
North First Street, 48.00 feet to a point; thence north 89° 56 feet 52 inches
east, parallel to the northerly bounds of Laurens Street, 5.00 feet to a point;
thence south 00° 02 feet 34 inches east, parallel to the easterly bounds of
North First Street, 35 feet to a point; thence south 89° 56 feet 52 inches
west, parallel to the northerly bounds of Laurens Street, 122.00 feet to the
place of beginning, and containing 0.8495 acres of land more or less.
Excepting and reserving to Benedict John Bordonaro, et al., a certain
easement 8.00 feet in width, such easement being a portion of the premises
conveyed by Georgia W. Devilin to Benedict John Bordonaro, et al. by deed
dated January 20, 1959, and recorded in the Cattaraugus County Clerk's
Office on January 21, 1959, in Liber 589 Deeds at page 285, such easement
being more particularly described as follows:
Sec. 24-226 CHARTER Sec. 24-226
C:633
Beginning at the northwest corner of lot no. 36, block no. 60 of the T. J.
Gosseline survey, such point also being located in the easterly bounds of
North First Street and running thence from such point of beginning and
along the northerly bounds of such lot no. 36, north 89° 56 feet 52 inches
east, 122.00 feet to a point; thence south 00° 02 feet 34 inches east, 8.00
feet to a point; thence south 89° 56 feet 52 inches west, 122.00 feet to a
point in such easterly bounds of North First Street, north 00° 02 feet 34
inches, 8.00 feet to the point and place of beginning.
Sec. 24-227. Periods when lot open. [Code 1971, § 28-141.2]
The lot shall be open for public parking during those periods that may be
set by the common council from time to time.
Sec. 24-228. Liability of registered owner of vehicle; penalty for
violation. [Code 1971, § 28-141.6]
The registered owner of any vehicle parked within the lot in violation of this
article shall, on conviction thereof, be fined the sum of $10.
Sec. 24-229. Removal, recovery of improperly parked vehicles,
generally. [Code 1971, § 28-141.7]
Any vehicle parked on the lot in violation of this article shall be removed
to a garage, automobile pound, or other place of safety. The registered
owner of such vehicle shall be entitled to recover the vehicle upon proper
identification and upon exhibiting the certificate of registration to the city.
Upon proper identification, the registered owner will be required to pay
to the city the reasonable value of the costs and removal and storage of
the vehicle which costs are hereby declared to be a lien upon the vehicle
pursuant to General Municipal Law § 20(30). In addition thereto, the owner
of such vehicle may on conviction thereof be fined pursuant to sections
24-228 and 24-231(a).
Sec. 24-230. Removal of vehicles by police officer. [Code 1971,
§ 28-141.8]
Any police officer finding a vehicle parked in violation of this article is
hereby authorized to provide for the removal of such vehicle to a garage,
automobile pound, or other place of safety.
Sec. 24-231. Parking permit. [Code 1971, §§ 28-141, 28-141.1,
28-141.3, 28-141.5; Res. No. 115-94, 11-8-1994]
(a) Any motor vehicle parked within the limits of the lot during the period
in which the lot is open for public parking which does not have a permit
displayed pursuant to this section shall be parked in violation of this
article.
Sec. 24-226 OLEAN CODE Sec. 24-231
C:634
Sec. 24-232. Commercial or freight carrying vehicles or trailers
prohibited. [Code 1971, § 28-141.9]
No commercial or freight carrying vehicle or trailer shall be parked in the
lot at any time.
Sec. 24-233. Fees for parking in city lots. [Res. No. 9-03, 2-25-2003,
effective 6-1-2003; Res. No. 63-07, 8-28-2007]
The city fees for parking in city-owned parking lots are $0.25 for one-hour
parking, and $30 for monthly parking.
Sec. 24-234. Two-hour parking. [Added 9-12-2017 by Res. No.
77-17]
Within City Parking Lot #10 (located on the corner of Laurens Street and
North First Street), it shall be unlawful for any person without a permit to
park a vehicle for a period of time longer than two hours, when signs are in
place giving notice thereof.
(b) Permits to park motor vehicles on the facility shall be issued by the city
clerk upon payment of a monthly fee to be set from time to time by the
common council.
(c) Each permit shall entitle the vehicle to park on the facility during the
hours that it is open for public parking.
(d) Each permit to park shall be issued for a period of one month
commencing on the first calendar day thereof and expire by its terms on
midnight on the last calendar day of the same month.
(e) Each vehicle parked on the lot during the hours in which it is open for
public parking shall have the permit issued to the vehicle displayed in
the interior of the vehicle. The permit shall be so displayed that it can
be seen by observation through the front windshield or left front
window of the vehicle.
(f) It is the policy of the city to encourage the purchase of parking permits
in bulk in order to facilitate downtown development. To this end, until
further action of the common council, there shall be applied a 25%
reduction in monthly parking rates to any user of municipal parking lots
purchasing 20 or more monthly parking permits providing payment for
a twelve-month period for all such parking spaces made in advance. All
such parking spaces reserved shall be on a first come, first serve basis
and shall be subject to availability with the specified lot. Utilization of
the general authority pursuant to this resolution shall be subject to
such regulations as from time to time may be established by the city
clerk and any such arrangements made by user may be revoked by the
common council at any time upon repayment of the pro-rata amount
remaining utilized.
Sec. 24-231 CHARTER Sec. 24-235
C:635
Sec. 24-235. through Sec. 24-250. (Reserved)
Sec. 24-235 OLEAN CODE Sec. 24-235
C:636
ARTICLE V
MISCELLANEOUS RULES
Sec. 24-251. Restrictions upon pedestrians. [Code 1971, §§ 28-167,
28-168]
Sec. 24-252. Funeral or other processions. [Code 1971, § 28-35]
Sec. 24-253. Coasting, etc., on streets or roadways. [Code 1971,
§ 28-12]
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate, propel, or coast any carts or
bobs upon any public street or roadway in the city excepting such streets
or roadways as may be designated by the common council as permissible
for such purpose. A street or roadway for the purpose of this section shall
mean that portion of a public street or highway which has been improved,
designed, or ordinarily used for vehicular travel, exclusive of the berm or
shoulder.
(a) No pedestrian shall cross a roadway at any place other than by a route
at right angles to the curb or by the shortest route to the opposite curb
except in a crosswalk.
(b) Between adjacent intersections at which traffic control signals are in
operation, pedestrians shall not cross at any place except in a
crosswalk.
(c) No pedestrian shall cross a roadway other than in a crosswalk in the
control traffic district or in any business district.
(d) No pedestrian shall cross a roadway other than in a crosswalk upon any
of the through streets or parkways as set forth in this article.
Authority to regulate the crossing of roadways by pedestrians, Vehicle
and Traffic Law § 1640(a)(3)
Pedestrians, Vehicle and Traffic Law § 1150 et seq.
(a) No driver of a vehicle shall drive between the vehicles comprising a
funeral or other authorized procession while they are in motion and
when such vehicles are conspicuously designated, as required by this
section. This provision shall not apply at intersections where traffic is
controlled by traffic control signals or police officers.
(b) Each driver in a funeral or other procession shall drive as near to the
righthand edge of the roadway as is practicable and shall follow the
vehicle ahead as close as is practicable and safe.
(c) A funeral composed of a procession of vehicles shall be identified as
such by the display upon the outside of each vehicle by a pennant or by
such other method as may be determined by the traffic division.
Sec. 24-251 CHARTER Sec. 24-254
C:637
Sec. 24-254. Use of skateboards. [Code 1971, § 18-9]
(a) Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following terms shall
have the meanings indicated:
BUSINESS DISTRICT — The business districts of the city are as follows:
State Street, Union Street, Wayne Street and Front Street.
SKATEBOARD — A single platform which is mounted on wheels, having
no mechanism or other device with which to steer or control the
direction of movement thereof while being used, operated, or ridden.
(b) Skateboards on roads and highways. Every person operating a
skateboard upon the paved portion of a highway or road, dedicated or
otherwise, shall operate such skateboard in strict observance of all laws
applicable to vehicles and the use thereof and in compliance with all
rules of the road applicable to the operation of a vehicle and in
compliance with all traffic ordinances, except as to those provisions of
laws and ordinances which by their nature can have no application.
(c) Skateboards emerging from alleys, driveways, and buildings. The
operator of a skateboard emerging from an alley, driveway, or building
shall, upon approaching a sidewalk, yield the right-of-way to all
pedestrians approaching on the sidewalk.
(d) Standing, storage, or parking of skateboards. No person shall stand,
park, or otherwise place in a position of temporary storage a
skateboard upon a highway, street, sidewalk, or against any building
abutting a sidewalk in such manner which shall obstruct or render
injury to a pedestrian or interfere with vehicular traffic.
(e) Skateboarding prohibited in certain places. No person shall use,
operate, or ride upon any skateboard on any sidewalk or on any
highway or road within any business district.
(f) Operation on sidewalks. Whenever any person shall operate a
skateboard upon a sidewalk, such person shall yield the right-of-way to
any pedestrian and shall give audible signal before overtaking and
passing such pedestrian.
(g) Responsibility of parent or guardian. The parent of the minor child or
the guardian of any minor shall not authorize or knowingly permit any
such child to violate any of the provisions of this section.
(h) Penalties for offenses; fees.
(1) Any person violating any provisions of this section shall be guilty of
an offense and shall forfeit and pay a fine not to exceed $25 for
each and every offense.
(2) Any skateboard operated in violation of this section may be
immediately impounded. The city shall store such impounded
skateboards in a suitable, secure location. No impounded
skateboards may be released until all storage costs and fees have
Sec. 24-254 OLEAN CODE Sec. 24-254
C:638
Sec. 24-255. Operating motor vehicles in public parks prohibited.
[Code 1971, § 28-10]
Sec. 24-256. Riding bicycles in public parks or playgrounds
prohibited. [Code 1971, § 28-11]
Riding of bicycles in any of the public parks or playgrounds of the city shall
be prohibited.
Sec. 24-257. Use of bicycles and rollerblades. [Res. No. 4-98,
2-10-1998]
been paid. The violator shall be responsible for the payment of all
such costs and fees. The per diem storage fee shall be $2. The
impound fee shall be $5.
(a) It shall be a violation of this section to operate a motor vehicle within
the boundaries of any of the public parks of the city.
(b) Motor vehicles, within the meaning of this section, shall be defined as
every vehicle operated or driven by any power other than muscular
power, with the exception of vehicles necessary for maintenance.
(a) (Definitions.) For the purpose of this section, the following terms have
the meaning indicated:
BICYCLES — A vehicles consisting of a frame mounted on two or three
wheels equipped with foot pedals.
BUSINESS DISTRICT — The business districts of the city for purpose
of this section is from Whitney Avenue south along North Union Street
to the intersection of Route 417; and from the intersection of Route 417
west along West State Street to the intersection of 4th Street.
ROLLERBLADES — A device with wheels placed on, or in substitution
for, shoes.
(b) Bicycling and rollerblades prohibited in certain places. No person shall
use, operate, or ride upon any bicycle or rollerblades on any sidewalk
within any business district.
(c) Operation on sidewalks. Whenever any person shall operate a bicycle or
rollerblades upon a sidewalk, such a person shall yield the right-of-way
to any pedestrian and give an audible signal before overtaking and
passing such pedestrian.
(d) Responsibility of parent or guardian. The parent or guardian of a minor
child or the guardian of any minor shall not authorize or knowingly
permit any person or any such child to violate any provision of this
section.
(e) Penalties of offenses, (i) Any person violating any provision of this
section shall be guilty of an offense and shall forfeit and pay a fine not to
Sec. 24-254 CHARTER Sec. 24-257
C:639
exceed $25 for each and every offense; (ii) Any bicycle operated in
violation of this section may be immediately impounded. The city shall
store such impounded bicycle in a suitable, secure location. No
impounded bicycle may be released until all storage costs and fees have
been paid. The violator shall be responsible for payment of all such fees
and costs. The per diem storage fee shall be $2. The impound fee shall
be $5.
Sec. 24-257 OLEAN CODE Sec. 24-257
C:640
Chapter 25
TRAILERS, TRAILER CAMPS, AND TOURIST CAMPS
CROSS REFERENCES
Definitions and rules of construction
generally, § 1-2.
Buildings, building regulations and fire
prevention, ch. 6.
Licenses, permits and miscellaneous business
regulations, ch. 13
Planning and development, ch. 18.
Sec. 25-1. Definitions. [Code 1971, § 29-1; Res. No. 4-93, 1-26-1993;
Res. No. 87-95, 10-24-1995; Res. No. 57-97, 5-27-1997; Res. No.
95-02, 9-10-2002)]
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:
AUTOMOBILE TRAILER, TRAILER COACH OR TRAILER — Any vehicle not
propelled by its own power drawn on the public highways by a motor vehicle
as defined in Section 120-5 of the New York State Vehicle and Traffic Law
operated thereon, except motorcycle sidecars, vehicles being towed by nonrigid
support and vehicles designed and primarily used for other purposes
and occasionally drawn by such motor vehicle, including any vehicle or
structure so designed and constructed in such a manner as will permit
occupancy thereof as sleeping quarters for one or more persons and so
designed that it is or may be mounted on wheels and used or drawn by
its own or other motive power. Specifically, excluded from this definition
shall be dwellings referred to as "manufactured housing" provided such
dwelling comply with U.S. Housing and Urban Development Regulations (24
CFR, Part 36) and further provided any such dwelling shall also meet the
following criterion:
The dwelling shall be built on a permanent foundation with a cellar or
basement.
(1)
(2) The dwelling shall be minimum body width of 24 feet.
(3) The dwelling shall have a roof pitch of not less than four in 12.
(4) The dwelling shall have an overhang of at least eight inches.
The dwelling shall have a shingled roof with vinyl or aluminum siding.
Wood siding shall be permitted with the consent of the common council
and mayor by resolution.
(5)
The dwelling shall comply with all structural and thermal components
for this zone.
(6)
Sec. 24-257 CHARTER Sec. 25-1
C:641
CABIN PLOT — A section of ground not less than 30 feet by 40 feet in area
upon which only one camp cottage or cabin is located.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — A self-propelled or towed vehicle containing a
living unit not intended for permanent occupancy.
TOURIST CAMP — Any park, tourist park, tourist court, camp, court, site,
lot, parcel, or tract of land upon which one or more camp cottages or cabins
are located and maintained for the accommodation of transients by the day,
week, or month, whether a charge is made or not.
TRAILER CAMP — Any park, trailer park, trailer court, court, camp, site,
lot, parcel, or tract of land designed, maintained, or intended for the
purpose of supplying a location or accommodations for any trailer coach
and upon which any trailer coach is parked and shall include all buildings
used or intended for use as part of the equipment thereof, whether a charge
is made for the use of the trailer camp and its facilities or not. "Trailer
camp" shall not include automobile or trailer sales lots on which unoccupied
trailers are parked for purposes of inspection and sale.
UNIT — A section of ground of not less than 800 square feet of unoccupied
space in an area designated as the location for only one automobile and one
trailer.
Sec. 25-2. Code enforcement office: general powers and duties.
[Code 1971, § 29-3; Res. No. 91-90, § II, 3-12-1991]
Sec. 25-3. Parking of trailers. (Code 1971, § 29-4; Res. No. 91-90,
§ III, 3-12-1991; Res. No. 87-95, 10-24-1995)
The dwelling, its construction, and required municipal approvals shall
be otherwise as provided or required by the local, state and federal law
and regulation.
(7)
(a) It is hereby made the duty of the code enforcement office to enforce all
provisions of this chapter or such provisions as may hereinafter be
enacted. For the purpose of securing such enforcement, the code
enforcement office shall have the right and hereby is empowered to
enter upon any premises upon which any automobile trailers, camp
cottages, or cabins are located or about to be located and to inspect
such trailers, cottages, or cabins and all accommodations connected
therewith at any reasonable time.
(b) The code enforcement office is further empowered to issue orders
granting, renewing, and revoking such permits, as are provided for in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
(a) It shall be unlawful, within the limits of the city for any person to park
any trailer, automobile trailer, trailer coach or recreational vehicle on
any street, alley, or highway or other public place or on any tract of land
owned by any person, occupied or unoccupied, within the city, except as
provided in this chapter.
Sec. 25-1 OLEAN CODE Sec. 25-3
C:642
(b) Emergency or temporary parking of any trailer, automobile trailer,
trailer coach or recreational vehicle is permitted on any street, alley, or
highway for not longer than one hour, subject to any other and further
prohibitions, regulations, or limitations imposed by the traffic and
parking regulations or ordinances for street, alley or highway.
(c) Notwithstanding any provision of this chapter to the contrary, parking
of one unoccupied trailer or recreational vehicle in an accessory private
garage building or in a rear yard or side yard, in any district is
permitted subject to the set back requirements of the zoning code.
Furthermore, an unoccupied trailer or recreational vehicle may be
parked on a private driveway on any residential lot provided the trailer
or recreational vehicle is registered to the owner or actual occupant of
the property and does not interfere with the exists from the dwelling or
otherwise protrude into the street or sidewalk.
(d) Notwithstanding any provision of this chapter to the contrary, parking
and/or occupancy of a trailer or recreational vehicle in the driveway,
side yard, or rear yard of a dwelling by a bonafide guest of the property
is permitted for 72 hours provided that the registered owners of the
trailer or recreational vehicle do not maintain a residence within 50
miles of the city.
(e) Notwithstanding any provision of this chapter to the contrary, parking
and overnight occupancy of trailers when in connection with an activity
sponsored by a property owner in areas zoned by the zoning code of the
city as B-1 (Business-1), B-2 (Business-2), and industrial districts shall
be permitted when the landowner obtains a permit from the code
enforcement office for the use of the property for temporary trailer
parking and occupancy, providing:
(1) Fifty feet is maintained between the trailer and any occupied
building.
(2) Twenty feet is maintained between any two or more trailers on the
same premises.
(3) Fifty feet is maintained between the trailer and the public right-ofway.
(4) Trailers shall be self-contained (water and sanitary) and meet all
department of transportation and health department requirements
or shall be connected to city services.
(5) The property owner sponsoring or authorizing the temporary
parking, as provided in this section, shall be responsible for all
activities within the permit area.
(6) There shall be an application fee of $50 for authority to permit
parking of one or more trailers for any seven-day period. Permit
shall be issued by the code enforcement office upon inspection of
the property to ensure compliance and shall be for a seven calendar
Sec. 25-3 CHARTER Sec. 25-3
C:643
Sec. 25-4. Applicability of plumbing, electrical, and building
ordinances. [Code 1971, § 29-6]
All plumbing, electrical, building, and other work on, or at any camp
licensed under this chapter shall be in accordance with the ordinances of
the city regulating such work, unless such ordinances are specifically made
inapplicable under the terms of this chapter.
Sec. 25-5. Trailer or tourist camp in city prohibited.
No person shall own, operate, or maintain any trailer or tourist camp in the
city.
Chapter 26
VEHICLES FOR HIRE
CROSS REFERENCES
Definitions and rules of construction
generally, § 1-2.
Private ambulances, § 10-46 et seq.
Licenses, permits and miscellaneous business
regulations, ch. 13.
STATE LAW REFERENCES
Authority to license and regulate businesses
and occupations, General City Law § 20(13).
Authority to regulate taxicabs, General
Municipal Law § 181.
day period, and shall not be renewable for the same activity for a
period of 80 days.
(f) Notwithstanding any provision of this chapter to the contrary, the code
enforcement office may issue a permit to park construction trailers on
parcels of land owned or leased by applicant for a period not in excess
of six months with no more than one renewal to be authorized. A fee in
the amount of $25 per month shall be paid upon the issuance of any
permit, and an additional fee of $25 shall be paid upon any renewal to
the permit. Permits issued by the code enforcement office in connection
with this provision shall specifically prohibit any applicant or agency or
its employee or any person to dwell in such trailer or to occupy the
trailer overnight. Permits will specifically prohibit the permittee to
connect the trailer with the city water supply and/or sanitary sewer
systems.
Sec. 25-3 OLEAN CODE Sec. 25-5
C:644
ARTICLE I
IN GENERAL
Sec. 26-1. through Sec. 26-20. (Reserved)
Sec. 26-1 CHARTER Sec. 26-1
C:645

ARTICLE II
OMNIBUSES
Sec. 26-21. through Sec. 26-40. (Reserved)
Sec. 26-21 CHARTER Sec. 26-21
C:647

ARTICLE III
TAXICABS
DIVISION 1
GENERALLY
Sec. 26-41. Definitions. [Code 1971, § 30-25]
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:
DRIVER — Any person who drives a taxicab, whether such person is the
owner of such vehicle or employed by the owner.
DRIVER'S LICENSE — Permission granted by the city to the person holding
such license to operate and drive upon the streets of such city any licensed
taxicab.
OWNER — Any person owning or having control of the use of a taxicab used
for hire upon the streets of the city.
TAXICAB — Any motor vehicle engaged in the business of carrying persons
for hire, excepting a sightseeing car, whether such vehicle is operated from
a street stand or subject to calls from a garage, home, or office.
TAXICAB LICENSE — Permission granted to the holder of such license by
the city to keep and use for hire a taxicab in such city.
TAXICAB STAND — Any place in any public street which is designated and
exclusively reserved for the use of taxicabs.
Sec. 26-42. Vehicles exempted. [Code 1971, § 30-26]
Vehicles operated as part of the bus transportation system or operating with
permission of the Interstate Commerce Commission, ambulances, vehicles
used by undertakers in the conduct of their business, and vehicles rented
for the purpose of being driven by the person renting such vehicle shall be
exempt from the provisions of this article.
Sec. 26-43. Penalty for violation of article by owner. [Code 1971,
§ 30-82]
Any owner who operates or permits the operation of a taxicab which is not
licensed or equipped in accordance with the provisions of this article, who
operates or permits the operation of such a vehicle the license of which
has been suspended or revoked, or who otherwise violates any provision or
requirement of this article shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided
in section 1-8.
Sec. 26-41 CHARTER Sec. 26-44
C:649
Sec. 26-44. Suspension and revocation of license. [Code 1971,
§ 30-83]
In addition to the fine or imprisonment, or both, provided for in this article,
any licensee shall be subject to the suspension or revocation of his license
upon conviction for a violation. The chief of police may, at his discretion,
suspend a license granted under the provisions of this article pending the
determination of a charge for violation against any holder of such a license.
Sec. 26-45. Fraudulent misrepresentation by driver. [Code 1971,
§ 30-76]
No person owning or driving a taxicab shall deceive any passenger who may
ride or who may desire to ride in any such vehicle as to his destination by
the shortest route, the lawful price to be charged for such ride, convey such
passengers to a place other than that directed by them, or in any other way
than by the shortest route.
Sec. 26-46. Cruising and soliciting. [Code 1971, § 30-74]
No taxicab, while waiting employment by passengers, shall stand on any
public street or place, at a parking place controlled by a parking meter,
or at any place other than at or upon a public taxicab stand, designated
and established in accordance with this article. However, the owner of such
vehicle may use parking places controlled by parking meters at such times
as such vehicle is being used for his own private and personal purposes,
provided that at such times there shall be displayed a large legible sign on
the windshield of such vehicle reading "This Car Not For Hire." Nor shall
any driver of a taxicab seek employment by repeatedly and persistently
driving his vehicle up and down the street adjoining any theater, hall, hotel,
public gathering place, railway, or bus station, or interfere with the proper
access to or egress from such places, but any driver may solicit employment
by driving through any public street or place without stops other than those
necessary by reason of traffic or traffic control, and at such speed so as not
to interfere with or impede traffic.
Sec. 26-47. Lost articles. [Code 1971, § 30-75]
Every driver of a taxicab shall take to the nearest police station and leave
with the officer in charge any property lost or left in his vehicle, and such
police officer shall issue to the driver a receipt therefor. Such articles shall
be held at police headquarters, unless sooner claimed by the owner thereof,
for a period of six months. If no claim is made by the owner within that
period, such articles shall be returned to the driver upon presentation of the
original receipt.
Sec. 26-48. through Sec. 26-60. (Reserved)
Sec. 26-44 OLEAN CODE Sec. 26-48
C:650
DIVISION 2
OWNER'S LICENSE
Sec. 26-61. Required. [Code 1971, § 30-46]
It shall be unlawful for any person to use or keep for hire within the city any
taxicab without first having obtained a license therefor. Such person shall
have such license in force and effect in accordance with the provisions of
this division.
Sec. 26-62. Application. [Code 1971, § 30-47]
An application for an owner's license shall be made by the owner of the
vehicle to the chief of police upon a blank form furnished by the chief of
police and shall state:
Sec. 26-63. Proof of insurance of vehicle. [Code 1971, § 30-48]
No owner's license for any vehicle shall be issued until proof is furnished to
the chief of police that liability insurance in the sums of $50,000 per person,
$100,000 for each accident, and $10,000 for property damage is carried on
each vehicle. If insurance is not carried, any license for the vehicle will be
automatically revoked.
Sec. 26-64. Fees for vehicles. [Code 1971, § 30-51(a)]
The taxicab owner's license fee per annum shall be as now or hereafter
established by ordinance.
Sec. 26-65. Duration. [Code 1971, § 30-51(b)]
Each taxicab owner's license shall be issued as of August 1 and shall expire
on July 31 next succeeding unless sooner suspended or revoked.
(1) The name, residence, and age of the owner of the taxicab;
(2) The manufacturer and type of the vehicle to be used, the serial number,
the state license number, the year of manufacture, and the seating
capacity of the vehicle;
(3) Whether the vehicle has been previously licensed to operate as a
taxicab and, if so, for what year and in what place;
(4) Whether the applicant has previously held an owner's license and if
such license has ever been revoked and, if so, for what cause;
(5) The applicant's previous experience, if any, as the owner or driver of a
taxicab;
(6) Such other information as the chief of police may require.
Sec. 26-61 CHARTER Sec. 26-66
C:651
Sec. 26-66. Issuance; display; change of ownership. [Code 1971,
§ 30-49]
Sec. 26-67. Register. [Code 1971, § 30-53]
The chief of police shall keep a register of the name of each person to whom
an owner's license for a taxicab is issued in accordance with this division.
This register shall also contain the license number and a description of such
vehicle, together with a complete record of inspections.
Sec. 26-68. Transfer. [Code 1971, § 30-50(a)]
No taxicab owner's license shall be transferred, sold, or assigned without
the written approval of the common council, which approval shall not
be unreasonably withheld. If the state registration number of any vehicle
licensed as a taxicab shall be changed during the time when such vehicle is
licensed by the city, such change and the new registration number shall be
immediately reported to the chief of police.
Sec. 26-69. [eplacement of vehicle.
If a vehicle is licensed as a taxicab and the owner thereof removes such
taxicab from service and substitutes another vehicle therefor, such fact
shall be immediately reported to the chief of police. Upon request, after
an inspection of the new vehicle to be used for taxicab purposes, and after
surrender of the owner's license for such vehicle, a new owner's license
shall be issued for such vehicle for the remainder of the license year at a fee
in the amount now or hereafter established by ordinance.
(a) If, upon inspection, a taxicab is determined to be of proper
construction, in proper condition, and in compliance with the provisions
of this article, then upon the approval of the application and the
payment of the required license fee, the chief of police shall issue a
suitable owner's license for such vehicle of such size and form as may
from time to time be prescribed by the chief of police. The license shall
remain the property of the city and shall be for identification purposes
only.
(b) The owner shall be required to display the license in a prominent
position on the exterior of the car or, at the discretion of the chief of
police, at such a place on the interior of the car as the chief of police
may direct. It shall be the responsibility of the owner to affix the license
pursuant to the directions of the chief of police and to maintain the
license in such condition that it is readily identifiable and the
particulars on the license may be read.
(c) The license holder of any taxicab shall immediately notify the chief of
police of any change in ownership of his vehicle and shall surrender his
license to the chief of police if such change of ownership occurs.
Sec. 26-66 OLEAN CODE Sec. 26-70
C:652
Sec. 26-70. Suspension and revocation. [Code 1971, § 30-52]
A taxicab owner's license may be revoked or suspended at any time at the
discretion of the chief of police if the vehicle licensed is used for immoral
business or purposes, if the license holder is convicted of a violation of this
article, or twice convicted within a period of six months of a violation of
any state law relating to the operation of taxicabs. Whenever any owner's
license is revoked, the license shall be surrendered to the chief of police.
If an owner's license is suspended, the license shall be surrendered to the
chief of police and retained by him until the suspension period expires. If
any person to whom an owner's license is issued has such license suspended
on three occasions, such owner's license shall thereupon be revoked.
Sec. 26-71. through Sec. 26-85. (Reserved)
Sec. 26-70 CHARTER Sec. 26-71
C:653

DIVISION 3
DRIVER'S LICENSE
Sec. 26-86. Required. [Code 1971, § 30-32]
No person shall drive a taxicab and no person shall permit anyone to
drive a taxicab within the limits of the city without such driver having first
obtained, paid for and having in force and effect a driver's license under the
provisions of this division.
Sec. 26-87. Application. [Code 1971, § 30-33]
Each applicant for a taxicab driver's license must comply with the following
to the satisfaction of the chief of police:
Sec. 26-88. Photograph of driver. [Code 1971, § 30-35]
Every applicant for a taxicab driver's license shall file with his application
three unmounted, unretouched, clear, front view photographs of himself
taken within 30 days preceding the filing of his application. The
photographs shall be of a size required by the chief of police, and one of
them shall be attached to the driver's license when such license is issued.
Every licensed driver shall permanently display in the taxicab which the
driver is operating, at a place designated by the chief of police, his city
taxicab driver's license containing his photograph so that the license is
clearly visible to the occupants of the vehicle.
(1) Must first have obtained a state chauffeur's license.
(2) Be of the age of 18 years or over.
(3) Be of sound physique with good eyesight and not subject to epilepsy,
vertigo, heart trouble, or any other infirmity of body or mind, which
might render him unfit for the safe operation of a public vehicle.
(4) Fill out on a blank form, to be provided by the chief of police, a
statement giving his full name, residence, places of residence for five
years previous to moving to his present address; age, height, color of
eyes and hair; place of birth, length of time he has resided in the city,
whether a citizen of the United States; places of previous employment;
whether married or single; whether he has ever been arrested or
convicted of a felony or misdemeanor; whether he has been summoned
to court; whether he has been previously licensed as a driver or
chauffeur, and if so, whether his license has ever been revoked, and for
what cause; and the number of chauffeur's license issued by the state
which statement shall be signed and sworn to by the applicant and filed
with the chief of police as a permanent record. Any false statements by
the applicant for a driver's license shall be promptly reported by the
chief of police to the district attorney of the county. The chief of police is
hereby authorized and empowered to require any additional
information as he may deem necessary.
Sec. 26-86 CHARTER Sec. 26-89
C:655
Sec. 26-89. Examination of drivers. [Code 1971, § 30-34]
Each applicant for a taxicab driver's license shall be examined by the chief
of police or a member of his department designated by him as to the
applicant's knowledge of the provisions of this article, the traffic regulations
of the city, the motor vehicle and highway traffic laws of the state, and the
geography of the city. If the results of such examination are not satisfactory
to the chief of police, a driver's license shall be refused.
Sec. 26-90. Annual fees; transfer. [Code 1971, § 30-38)
The license fee per annum for each original taxicab driver's license and for
each renewal thereof shall be as now or hereafter established by ordinance
or resolution. Such licenses shall not be transferable.
Sec. 26-91. Issuance. [Code 1971, § 30-36]
Upon satisfactory fulfillment of the requirements of this division, there shall
be issued to the applicant a license which shall be in such form as to contain
a photograph and signature of the licensee, and blank spaces upon which
a record may be made of any arrest of or serious complaint against him.
All licenses shall be numbered in the order in which they are issued and
shall contain the name and place of residence of the licensee and the date of
issuance and expiration of the license. Any licensee who defaces, removes,
or obliterates any official entry made upon his license shall be punished by
the revocation of his license. Driver's licenses shall be issued as of August
1, in each and every year, and shall be valid to and including July 31, next
succeeding, unless previously suspended or revoked.
Sec. 26-92. Record. [Code 1971, § 30-40]
There shall be kept in the office of the chief of police a complete record
of each license issued to a driver, and of all renewals, suspensions, and
revocations thereof, which record shall be kept on file with the original
application of the driver for a license.
Sec. 26-93. Renewal. [Code 1971, § 30-37]
The chief of police may renew a taxicab driver's license from year to year
by appropriate endorsement thereon. A driver, in applying for a renewal
of his license, shall make such application not less than 30 days next
preceding its expiration upon a form furnished by the chief of police entitled
"Application for Renewal of License," which shall be filled out with the full
name and address of the applicant together with a statement of the date
upon which his original license was granted, the number thereof, and such
other information as the licensing officials may deem necessary.
Sec. 26-94. Suspension and revocation. [Code 1971, § 30-39]
(a) A taxicab driver's license or permit may at any time be suspended or
revoked for cause after a hearing by the chief of police. Any such
Sec. 26-89 OLEAN CODE Sec. 26-94
C:656
Sec. 26-95. through Sec. 26-110. (Reserved)
suspension shall be noted on the license together with a statement
of the reasons therefor. When the license or permit is suspended or
revoked, a note of the revocation or suspension shall be forthwith sent
to the common council.
(b) A second suspension for the same reason, or, in any case, a third
suspension of a driver's license, shall cause the revocation of the
license. No driver whose license or permit has been revoked shall be
again licensed as a taxicab driver in the city unless upon the
presentation of reasons satisfactory to the common council.
Sec. 26-94 CHARTER Sec. 26-95
C:657

DIVISION 4
STANDS
Sec. 26-111. Location and number; license fee. [Code 1971,
§ 30-59(a)]
The location and number of public taxicab stands heretofore established is
continued. The common council shall establish a greater or lesser number of
stands and shall relocate the existing location of the stands upon a showing
by the owner of a licensed taxicab of public necessity and convenience in so
doing.
Sec. 26-112. [ental fee.
Each owner of a licensed taxicab in the city shall pay to the city the sum
now or hereafter established by ordinance per year for each stand rented
by the owner. The city will issue to each owner of taxicabs within the city
one stand for all taxicabs owned up to and including five, two stands for all
taxicabs up to and including 10, and three stands to any owner owning more
than 10 licensed taxicabs.
Sec. 26-113. Duties of driver. [Code 1971, § 30-60]
It shall be the duty and obligation of the driver of the taxicab to keep the
stand at which his vehicle is located in a clean and sanitary condition. While
a taxicab is at a taxicab stand, the driver shall remain at the car or within a
distance of 100 feet thereof.
Sec. 26-114. through Sec. 26-130. (Reserved)
Sec. 26-111 CHARTER Sec. 26-114
C:659

DIVISION 5
RATES AND CHARGES
Sec. 26-131. Schedule. [Code 1971, § 30-66]
The common council shall fix from time to time a schedule of rates for the
operation of taxicabs within the city. Such rates shall be made public by
the common council and duly posted at the police station and city clerk's
office. Whenever rates shall be changed by the common council, a copy of
the new rate schedule shall be mailed to each taxicab owner at the address
appearing on the license of the owner. Waiting time shall be included in the
schedule of rates published under this section. The owner of each cab shall
keep and maintain a schedule of rates in each cab at a place approved by
the chief of police.
Sec. 26-132. Overcharge and disputed fares. [Code 1971, § 30-68]
No taxicab owner or operator shall charge or attempt to charge a higher
rate of fare than is provided for by this division, nor shall any passenger
refuse to pay the proper and legal fare. All disputes as to fares shall be
determined by the officer in charge of the police station nearest to the place
where the dispute occurred. Whenever a passenger requests a receipt, such
a receipt shall be furnished by the driver of a taxicab. The receipt shall
include the name of the driver, the name of the licensed owner, and the
amount of the fare collected.
Sec. 26-133. Prepayment of fares. [Code 1971, § 30-67]
Every driver of a taxicab shall have the right to demand payment of the
regular fare in advance and may refuse employment unless prepaid, but no
driver of a taxicab shall otherwise refuse or neglect to convey an orderly
person upon request anywhere in the city unless previously engaged.
Sec. 26-131 CHARTER Sec. 26-133
C:661
Chapter 27
WATER AND SEWERS AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL
CHARTER REFERENCES
Sewers and drains, Art. XXIV.
CROSS REFERENCES
Definitions and rules of construction
generally, § 1-2.
Environmental control, ch. 8.
Health and human services, ch. 10.
Nuisances, ch. 16.
Solid Waste, ch. 20.
LOCAL LAW REFERENCES
Water, § LL7-21 et seq.
Sec. 26-133 OLEAN CODE Sec. 26-133
C:662
ARTICLE I
[AmendedPO4-L2I8C-Y2 0I1N5 GBEyNREeRsA. LNo. 28-15]
Sec. 27-1. Rules and regulations, generally.
(a) Supervision of system. The water and sewer system and all structures
or properties connected to the City of Olean water and sewer system
shall be under the supervision of the Department of Public Works. All
work performed in connection with the system shall conform with the
New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code and shall be
subject to inspection by the Code Enforcement Office. The Department
of Public Works may establish such other and further regulations as
may be necessary or appropriate to assure implementation and
standardization of the policy matters contained in this article.
(b) Policy creates a contract. Each and every person who shall be supplied
or whose property shall be supplied with water by the City of Olean
must agree to comply and must comply with these rules and
regulations, and the same shall constitute a part of the contract existing
between such person and the City. Any owner and/or consumer of water
service supplied under Article II below shall, as condition of such
service, be obligated to adhere to each and every other article of this
chapter as applicable.
(c) Properties outside City limits. No water or sewer service shall be
provided to any person or property residing outside the City of Olean,
unless such property is located in a municipality with an established
water and sewer district and such district is has entered into an
intermunicipal agreement with the City.
(d) Connections. Any owner of a structure or property that is connected to
the water and sewer system shall be responsible for maintaining, at his
or her expense, the supply and connecting lines of the property to the
water and sewer mains. Any owner seeking to connect his or her
property to the water and sewer mains shall be required to obtain a
permit from the Department, and the connection shall be completed in
the manner approved by the Office of Code Enforcement. Any work
contracted by the owner under this section shall be performed by a
contractor and plumber licensed by the City. The owner, at his or her
option, may request that the City undertake the work necessary to
perform the connections, and the City shall bill the owner the actual
cost incurred by the City, plus an additional service fee of $100.
(e) Disconnections upon demolition. Any owner of a structure or property
which is connected to the city water and sewer system who applies for a
permit authorizing the demolition or removal of the connected
structure shall, at his or her own expense, be required to disconnect
any water or sewer line servicing the structure at the City mains. The
disconnect shall be completed in the manner approved by the Office of
Code Enforcement prior to the demolition of the structure unless
otherwise agreed to by the City. Any work contracted by the owner
Sec. 27-1 CHARTER Sec. 27-1
C:663
Sec. 27-2. through Sec. 27-5. (Reserved)
under this section shall be performed by a contractor and plumber
licensed by the City. The owner, at his or her option, may request that
the City undertake the work necessary to perform the disconnect and
the City shall bill the owner the actual cost incurred by the City plus an
additional service fee of $100, all of which is to be paid in advance by
the owner. If any owner shall fail to disconnect the lines from the mains,
the City may undertake the necessary work and shall be entitled to file
a lien against the property for the actual cost incurred, plus a penalty
of $500.
(f) Water Division. All transactions under this Chapter 27 shall be with the
Department of Public Works, and all matters herein prescribed to be
done by the Water Division or Sewer Division shall respectively be had
with and done by the Department of Public Works for the City.
(g) Violations. It shall be unlawful to violate any provision of this chapter.
(h) Monthly minimum. All premises, whether vacant or not, which is
serviced by a meter, whether or not said premises is occupied will be
charged a minimum monthly fee plus any water consumption.
(i) Regulatory authority. Those rules and regulations not specifically
enumerated in this chapter which are necessary to the safe and efficient
management of the water system shall be prescribed by the Director of
Public Works and described in the Water and Sewer Policy, as amended
from time to time.
Sec. 27-1 OLEAN CODE Sec. 27-2
C:664
ARTICLE II
WATER
DIVISION 1
WATER, SEWER, AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL
Sec. 27-6. Definitions. [Added 4-28-2015 by Res. No. 28-15]
As used in this article, the words and phrases listed below shall be deemed
to have the following meanings:
APPLICANT — The owner or occupant of property, or his or her authorized
agent, applying for water service from the City.
CONSUMER — The owner or occupant of premises to which water service
is furnished as provided in this chapter.
CUSTOMER — The consumer of record receiving water service from the
City.
DATE OF PRESENTATION — The date upon which a bill or notice is mailed
or delivered personally to the customer.
DEPARTMENT or DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC WORKS — The City of Olean
Department of Public Works.
FIRE PROTECTION SERVICE — Delivery of water to premises for automatic
fire protection.
BUILDER, CONTRACTOR or REAL ESTATE DEVELOPER — Any person
owning or having an interest in a plot or tract of land who applies for a
supply of water to such premises which are intended to be sold, conveyed
or leased by said person to an owner or occupant.
CITY — The City of Olean.
CROSS CONNECTION — Any unprotected connection between any part
of a water system used or intended to supply water for drinking purposes
and any source or system containing water or any substance that is not
or cannot be approved as equally safe, wholesome and potable for human
consumption.
DEPARTMENT — The City of Olean Water Division of the Department of
Public Works of the City of Olean.
INDUSTRIAL SERVICE — Delivery of water to a customer for use in
manufacturing or processing activities.
MAIN EXTENSIONS — Extension of distribution pipelines, exclusive of
service connections, beyond existing facilities.
METERED PREMISES — The integral property or area, including
improvements thereon, to which water service is or will be provided. The
word "premises," as used herein, shall mean any structure, or component
thereof, serviced by its own individual meter.
Sec. 27-6 CHARTER Sec. 27-6
C:665
OWNER — The person who has legal or equitable title to the premises and
who is ultimately responsible for unpaid water charges which are levied
against the property.
OWNER'S SERVICE PIPE — The pipe or tubing leading from the curb
stop and curb box across the customer's or other person's property to the
building, structure or premises.
PERSON — An individual, firm, association, lessee or corporation, either
public or private.
PRIVATE STREET — Any street, avenue, road or way that is not for any
highway purpose under the jurisdiction of the legislative body of a village,
town, city, county or the State of New York.
PUBLIC STREET — Any street, avenue, road or way that is for any highway
purpose under the jurisdiction of the legislative body of any village, town,
city, county or State of New York.
RESIDENTIAL SERVICE — Delivery of water to one- to four-family
residential dwellings for household residential purposes, including water
for sprinkling lawns, gardens, and shrubbery; watering livestock; washing
vehicles; and other similar and customary purposes.
SERVICE CONNECTION — The tap or connection to the main, corporation
stop, curb box, curb stop, and sufficient tubing or pipe to connect the
corporation stop to the curb box.
SPECIFICATIONS — The written requirements adopted by the Department
and published for general reference concerning requirements for work and
materials related to the water system.
WATER BILL — A bill that includes but is not limited to water and sewer
charges, rents, and corresponding late fees and penalties.
WATER SYSTEM, WATER SUPPLY SYSTEM or PUBLIC WATER SUPPLY
— The entire system of pipes, valves, buildings, reservoirs, plants, wells,
and other facilities owned by the City and used for the supply, treatment,
storage and transmission of water.
Sec. 27-7. Required water connections. [Added 4-28-2015 by Res.
No. 28-15]
(a) Generally. The owner of any house, building, or property used for
human occupancy, employment, recreation, or other purpose, situated
within the City and abutting on any street, alley, or right-of-way in
which there is now located, or may in the future be located, a public
potable water main of the City, is hereby required, at his expense, to
connect such facilities directly with the proper public potable water
main in accordance with the provision of this article, within 90 days
after the date of official notice to do so, provided that potable water is
required by the New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building
Code.
Sec. 27-6 OLEAN CODE Sec. 27-7
C:666
Sec. 27-8. Description of service. [Added 4-28-2015 by Res. No.
28-15]
Sec. 27-9. Classes of service. [Added 4-28-2015 by Res. No. 28-15]
Sec. 27-10. Application for service. [Added 4-28-2015 by Res. No.
28-15]
(b) Private water wells; use. The installation of private water wells in the
City is prohibited unless permission is obtained through a resolution of
the Common Council. Any private water well authorized by the
Common Council shall be for nonhuman consumption purposes only
and in no way shall such well be connected to the water system, nor
shall it discharge into the sanitary sewer system.
(a) Supply. The Department will exercise reasonable diligence and care to
deliver a continuous and sufficient supply of water to a customer at a
proper pressure and to avoid any shortage or interruption in delivery.
The Department has, however, the right to limit the amount of water
furnished.
(b) Quality. The Department will exercise reasonable diligence and care to
deliver a continuous and sufficient supply of water to a customer at a
proper pressure and to avoid any shortage or interruption in delivery.
The Department has, however, the right to limit the amount of water
furnished.
(c) Service area. The City will supply water to the City of Olean and may
supply the same to other water districts and other potential users based
upon an intermunicipal agreement. The Department reserves the right
to refuse or limit service to any consumer located outside the City if the
supply of water for the City or its inhabitants becomes insufficient
because of such outside service.
(a) Residential.
(b) Commercial.
(c) Industrial.
(d) Fire Protection.
(a) Generally. All applications for the use of water must be made, in
writing, on forms provided by the Department and signed by the owner
of the property where service is to be provided.
(1) No agreement will be entered into by the City with any applicant
for service until all charges due from the applicant for water
services at any premises now or heretofore owned or occupied by
him which are in arrears shall have been paid.
Sec. 27-7 CHARTER Sec. 27-10
C:667
(2) When acted upon by the Department, the application shall
constitute a contract between the City and the owner obligating the
owner to be responsible for the payment to the City of the
established rates and charges and further obligates the owner and
any consumer at the property to comply with the Department's
rules and regulations. The City shall have all remedies at law and at
equity available for the enforcement of the contract, including the
collection of rates and charges, and the contract may be terminated
by the City without recourse of the applicant, its successors and/or
assigns.
(3) Applications will be accepted subject to there being an existing
main owned by or under the management and operation of the City
and/or a municipal system in a street, right-of-way or easement
abutting the premises to be served. Acceptance shall in no way
obligate the City to extend its mains to service the premises except
as hereinafter provided.
(b) Separate application for each premises. A separate application must be
made for each metered premises as defined in Section 27-2.
Submetering may be permitted subject to the approval of the
Department; unless so approved, submetering is prohibited.
(c) Notification of discontinuance. Any consumer desiring to discontinue
the use of water must notify the Water Department, and an employee of
the Department will shut the water off at the curb. No rebate will be
made for any period of discontinuance.
(d) Temporary service. Application of builders, contractors, real estate
developers and others for temporary water service may be accepted
and temporary water service may be supplied, providing it does not
interfere with use of water for other customers. The quantity of water
taken for such purposes shall be determined either by meter or by
estimate, and shall be paid for in accordance with the rate schedule
applicable to metered commercial purposes and any premium levied by
the City. Customers requiring temporary water service shall reimburse
the City for all its expense in connection with providing necessary
temporary service connections. A deposit specified by the Department
may be required.
(e) Extension of public mains. Applications for the extension of public
mains may be initiated by the Department or by a petition by abutting
property owners, as well as owners of the property to be served by the
extension. Applications for the extension of public mains may be denied
by the Department for failure to fully comply with the laws of the City or
the rules, regulations and specifications adopted under those laws, or if
approval of the application is not in the best interest of the City. The
Department reserves the right to refuse all petitions for extensions of
mains where the estimated water rents will not warrant the cost of
installation or for other bonafide reasons.
Sec. 27-10 OLEAN CODE Sec. 27-10
C:668
Sec. 27-11. Extension of public mains. [Added 4-28-2015 by Res.
No. 28-15]
(f) Costs and expenses of service. All costs and expenses incidental to the
installation and connection of the service connection shall be borne by
the customer. The customer shall indemnify and hold harmless the City
from any and all loss, liability, damage, injury or expense directly or
indirectly resulting from or arising out of the work done under or in
connection the approved application and/or installation.
(g) Plumbing plan required in certain instances. Where service is desired
for multiple-dwelling, commercial, or industrial use, a detailed
plumbing plan showing service supply, fixtures and equipment and any
other water use facilities must be submitted at the time of application.
(h) Effect of application. The application for water service is merely a
written request for service and does not bind the applicant to take
service for any particular length of time nor does it bind the Water
Department to give service, except under reasonable conditions.
(a) Generally. Notwithstanding the application requirements as set forth in
Section 27-5, water and sewer accounts may be established in the name
of a non-owner-occupant (consumer) of property supplied service,
provided the additional requirements of this section have been met.
(b) Accommodation only. This section is an accommodation to the owner
and occupant of a supplied property. The property owner remains liable
for all water and sewer charges incurred for service to the property, and
the City reserves all its rights to the collection of fees and enforcement
of the policies in this chapter.
(c) Eligibility.
(1) The property owner must be a registered landlord as defined in
Section 6-80 and must be in good standing with all obligations to
the City for the property subject to the agreement.
(2) The consumer must be in good standing with the Water Division
and current in all obligations to the City.
(d) Disconnection of service for nonpayment.
(1) Generally. A property owner is prohibited from terminating service
for nonpayment by a consumer on his or her own; however, a
property owner may request termination of the water service for
nonpayment, provided he or she signs a written authorization
attesting that the request for disconnection is for nonpayment of
the water bill by the consumer and for no other purpose. The
written authorization must be accompanied with nonrefundable
disconnect fee of $75.
Sec. 27-10 CHARTER Sec. 27-11
C:669
Sec. 27-12. Rendering of water bills. [Added 4-28-2015 by Res. No.
28-15]
Sec. 27-13. Failure to pay water bill when due. [Added 4-28-2015 by
Res. No. 28-15]
(2) Procedure. Upon receipt of the authorization and fee the Water
Division will post a ten-day termination for nonpayment notice at
the property. Upon the expiration of the ten-day notice, the
property owner (or their representative) shall contact the Water
Division to check the status of the bill and schedule an appointment
to be present at the property in order to allow the Division access to
the meter being disconnected to verify the water is off at the curb
stop. [Amended 2-9-2016 by Res. No. 04-16]
(3) Restoration of service. Water service will not be restored to the
property until the past due amount is paid in full or the service is
placed into the property owner's name.
(4) Effect of nonpayment. Nonpayment of charges by the first day of
the month following the disconnection will terminate the landlordtenant
agreement, and the service will automatically revert in the
property owner's name; restoration of service to the property will
not occur until the past due amount is paid in full, and the minimum
monthly fee shall continue to accrue.
(e) Voluntary termination of agreement. The tenant and landlord may
terminate the agreement at any time by written authorization signed by
both parties.
(f) Reservation of rights. The City reserves the right to reject any landlordtenant
application for any reason without recourse.
(g) Hold harmless. The property owner and consumer agree to defend,
indemnify and hold the City, its officers, officials, employees harmless
from any and all claims, injuries, damages, losses or suits, including
attorney fees, arising out of or in connection with the administration of
the landlord-tenant water agreement.
(a) Water bills for all consumers will be issued on the first day of the month
following the preceding month's reading for the prior month's usage.
(b) The property owner shall be responsible for the payment of all bills
rendered for water services. Failure to receive a bill shall not be
considered an act or waiver of payment.
(a) Water bills are due and payable on the 17th day of the month in which
the bill is issued.
(b) On the 20th day of the month in which the bill is issued, a late fee of
10% (10% of the total monthly water account balance) will be assessed
and added to the account. A monthly list of delinquent accounts will be
Sec. 27-11 OLEAN CODE Sec. 27-13
C:670
Sec. 27-14. Partial payments on account. [Added 4-28-2015 by Res.
No. 28-15]
Sec. 27-15. Special bills; when due and payable. [Added 4-28-2015
by Res. No. 28-15]
All special bills and charges for services rendered, materials sold or
expenses incurred by the Water Department in connection with the rules
and regulations set forth herein must be paid at the office of the City Clerk
within 45 days after the bill is rendered.
Sec. 27-16. Shutoff for failure to comply. [Added 4-28-2015 by Res.
No. 28-15]
In case any provision of this chapter is not complied with at any premises, or
the owner of any premises fails to do any matter required to be done by him
or her in accordance with the rules and regulations set forth herein, or such
owner fails to make any payments of money payable to the City under or in
accordance with such rules and regulations or any payment of water rents
or rates due to the City for the supply of water, or otherwise with reference
to such premises, the Water Department may shut off the water supply from
such premises until such provision of this chapter is complied with, such
matter is done and such payments made; and when any water supply is so
shut off, no advance payment made to the City for the supply of water at
such premises, or any part of such payment need be refunded by reason of
such shutting off of such water supply. Water service shut off shall occur in
accordance with the provisions set forth in Section 27-13.
Sec. 27-17. Shutting off water. [Added 4-28-2015 by Res. No. 28-15]
made available in the City Clerk's office and will be posted on the City's
webpage.
(c) No late notices will be mailed to property addresses; however, the
property owner or consumer may have the option to be notified by
electronic mail if so available.
(a) All electronic payments must be for the full monthly bill amount.
[Amended 2-9-2016 by Res. No. 04-16]
(b) Partial payments will be accepted; however, the account will not be
considered current and may reflect a past due status until the amount
due is paid in full. [Amended 2-9-2016 by Res. No. 04-16]
(c) The Department is not authorized to accept partial payments on
accounts for those accounts which have been established under a
landlord-tenant agreement.
(a) Right of City. Water may be shut off by the Water Department from any
service or main for the purpose of making or constructing new work or
making repairs in the water system, or for enforcement of payment of
Sec. 27-13 CHARTER Sec. 27-17
C:671
Sec. 27-18. Disputed bills and adjustments. [Added 4-28-2015 by
Res. No. 28-15]
No City official is authorized to make adjustments in the water or sewer
bills after issuance. If a customer wishes to dispute his or her bill, it must be
submitted, in writing, to the Mayor within 90 days of the bill date as listed
on the bill. A dispute committee consisting of the Mayor, DPW Director and
a community member at large who reside within the City of Olean will hear
the case and make a recommendation to the Common Council, at which
time the Council will have the final say as to whether an adjustment can be
made.
Sec. 27-19. through Sec. 27-20. (Reserved)
Sec. 27-21. Connecting or supply pipes. [1971 Charter Laws § 189;
Laws of N.Y. (1915), ch. 535, § 55; L.L. No. 3-1934, § 5]
The connecting or supplying pipes leading from buildings or yards to the
distribution pipe shall be inserted and kept in order at the expense of the
owner or occupant of the buildings or yards. Such connecting or supplying
pipes shall not be inserted or connected with the main pipe until a permit
therefor shall be obtained from the Common Council or other persons
having charge thereof. All such connecting or supplying pipes shall be so
constructed and connected in the manner directed by the Common Council
or persons in charge.
Sec. 27-22. Rates and charges. [Code 1971, § 31-13; Res. No.
121-93, 9-15-1993; Res. No. 42-94, 7-26-1994; Res. No. 53-96,
moneys or charges due to the City for water supply and for other
matters in accordance with the rules and regulations set forth in this
chapter in order to enforce compliance with such rules and regulations.
In case of making or constructing new work or in making repairs, the
right is reserved to shut off the water from any consumer without notice
for as long a period as may be necessary.
(b) Notice. In the event of shutoff for violation of these rules and
regulations, written notice shall be sent, prior to shutoff, by certified
mail to the owners of the premises as shown by the latest assessment
rolls of said City. Notice shall also be conspicuously posted on the front
door of the building. Each notice shall be postmarked and posted not
less than 15 days prior to shutoff. The notice shall include the
anticipated date the water will be shut off, the reason for the shutoff,
and it shall notify the property owners and tenants of their right to
request a hearing. The City may, in its discretion, provide additional
notice, but failure to do so does not preclude shutoff. It is understood
and agreed, however, the City is not liable for any damage which may
result to any person or premises from the shutting off of the water from
any main or service for any purpose whatever, even in cases where no
notice is given.
Sec. 27-17 OLEAN CODE Sec. 27-22
C:672
6-11-1996; Res. No. 99-99, 12-21-1999; Res. No. 34-03, 5-27-2003;
Res. No. 125-04, 12-14-2004; Res. No. 59-06, 5-9-2006; Res. No.
27-07, 4-10-2007; Res. No. 23-08, 3-11-2008; Res. No. 25-08,
3-11-2008; Res. No. 72-08, 8-26-2008; 4-28-2015 by Res. No. 28-15]
The Common Council shall, from time to time, establish, by resolution,
service fees for the provision of certain services by the City's Water
Department, such fees to offset the reasonable costs for labor and materials
of the City in connection with the following activities:
Sec. 27-23. (Reserved)27
Sec. 27-24. (Reserved)28
Sec. 27-25. Meter requirements; general regulations. [Res. No.
72-08, 8-26-2008; Res. No. 52-09, 7-28-2009]
(1) The current water and sewer rate schedule is attached hereto as
"Schedule A."26
(2) Water rates. In order for the Council to change water rates, it shall hold
a public hearing prior to adoption of resolution.
(a) All meters shall be of a type, size and manufacture approved by the city.
(b) The city shall furnish the official water meter for each property at its
expense in those instances where the diameter of the meter is two
inches or less; in those instances where the diameter of the meter is in
excess of two inches, the city shall furnish the meter at the expense of
the property owner. In either case, the meter shall remain the property
of the city and shall be installed and protected by the property owner at
his expense. Normal maintenance on this water meter shall be provided
by the city. Maintenance, repair or replacement required because of
improper use, accident, hot water, freezing, vandalism, theft, removal
without the prior authorization of the Water Department or other
extraordinary cause shall be at the property owner's expense. In
addition to the actual cost of repair or replacement of the meter, the
property owner shall pay the fee set forth in Sec. 27-23, Service fees.29
(c) Only one official water meter shall be used to record water
consumption for each service line. The official water meter shall be the
only one read by the Water Department. Any and all additional meters
desired by the property owner shall be installed on the house or outlet
side of the official water meter, and all such additional meters shall be
26.Editor's Note: Schedule A is on file in the City offices.
27.Editor's Note: Former § 27-23, Service fees, as amended, was repealed by Res. No. 72-08,
8-26-2006.
28.Editor’s Note: Former Sec. 27-24, Required water connections, was superseded 4-28-2015
by Res. No. 28-15. See now Sec. 27-7.
29.Editor's Note: See now Sec. 27-22, Rates and charges.
Sec. 27-22 CHARTER Sec. 27-25
C:673
Sec. 27-26. Installation. [Res. No. 72-08, 8-26-2008; Res. No. 52-09,
7-28-2009]
furnished, installed and maintained by the property owners at their
expense.
(d) Gate valves, check valves and approved backflow-prevention devices
shall be installed at the official water meter in accordance with the
specification of the City of Olean Water Department. No other devices
or appurtenances shall be installed on the street or inlet side of the
official water meter unless approved in writing by the Water
Department.
(e) When a backflow-prevention device is to be installed on the outlet or
house side of the official water meter, no connections, taps, fixtures,
devices or other appurtenances shall be allowed between the backflowprevention
device and the official water meter.
(f) All valves, check valves, backflow preventers and other fixtures must be
of a type approved by the Water Department.
(g) No person, persons, firm, partnership, corporation or other entity shall,
without written authorization of the Water Department or its designee,
interfere with, tamper with, unseal or remove the official water meter
after it has been inspected, approved and sealed by the Water
Department, by order of the Water Department.
(h) Whenever a water meter, previously recorded in the records kept by the
Water Department as having been sealed by the Water Department,
shall be found to have been interfered with, tampered with, unsealed or
removed without verbal or written authorization of the Water
Department or its designee, the property owner shall be charged the
fees provided in Sec. 27-23, Service fees,30 of the City of Olean,
together with the actual cost of repairing, replacing and/or resealing
the water meter. The imposition of such fees shall not be held to bar any
criminal prosecution for violation of any provision of this section nor to
bar the imposition of penalties as provided in Sec. 1-8 of the Code of
Ordinances.
(a) The official water meter shall be set in a position as close as practical to
the point where the water service line enters the building.
(b) Except where the Water Department has permitted otherwise in
writing, the official water meter shall not be located in excess of 50 feet
from the property line. It shall be the responsibility of the property
owner to protect the water meter as directed.
(c) Unless otherwise directed by the Water Department, the rated size of
the official water meter shall be equal to or less than the diameter of the
30.Editor's Note: See Sec. 27-22, Rates and charges.
Sec. 27-25 OLEAN CODE Sec. 27-26
C:674
Sec. 27-27. Responsibilities of city and consumer. [Res. No. 72-08,
8-26-2008]
domestic service line. A minimum of a three-inch meter will be required
for service lines four inches in diameter or larger.
(d) In the case of service lines greater than two inches in diameter, a valved
bypass shall be installed to facilitate testing and meter repair. The valve
on the bypass shall be sealed by the Water Department.
(e) All water meters shall be installed by a licensed plumber at the expense
of the property owner. Whenever a water meter is to be replaced by a
new water meter, the plumber shall obtain the new meter from the
Water Department and shall post a deposit of $100. The deposit shall be
returned to the plumber upon his return of the old water meter to the
Water Department.
(a) An official water meter damaged by frost, negligence or misuse by the
property owner or any other person shall be replaced and repaired at
the property owner's expense as outlined in the water and sewer rate
schedule. [Amended 4-28-2015 by Res. No. 28-15]
(b) The city will not be held responsible in any way for damage to service
lines, meters, house piping, valves or any other fixtures as a result of
frost or any other reasons, nor shall the city be responsible in any way
for damage to property from the above causes or from leakage of water
from any part of the service lines or house piping.
(c) If, by special request and the approval of the Water Department, a
meter has been removed and the service shut off at the curb for a full
billing period, there will be no service charge for that particular period.
(d) The consumer in any premises not equipped with a curb box and curb
faucet shall install, if for any reason the service of water to such
premises is or should be discontinued, whether temporarily or
otherwise, such curb box and curb faucet of the size, type and in the
manner approved by the Water Department.
(e) In the event that it is necessary for the city to remove or replace the
official water meter and the Water Department is of the opinion that
such removal or replacement cannot be effected or is inadvisable until
repairs have been made by the property owner to the service line or
house piping, the Water Department may order repairs to be made by
the property owner at his expense.
(f) The Water Department shall have the sole right to determine the
location, size, type and manufacture of any and all meters, connections
and other appliances.
(g) In the event that it becomes necessary to change the location, size, type
or manufacture of a water meter, the expense shall be borne by the
consumer.
Sec. 27-26 CHARTER Sec. 27-27
C:675
Sec. 27-28. Accessibility; failure of meter to register. [Res. No.
72-08, 8-26-2008]
Sec. 27-29. Accuracy and testing. [Res. No. 72-08, 8-26-2008]
(h) In any event, the city shall not be liable for any damage to service lines,
house piping or property caused by removal, replacement or testing of
the official water meter or for any cause whatsoever.
(a) The property owner shall keep the official water meter, backflowprevention
devices and other fixtures readily accessible and
unobstructed for inspection, testing, reading and repair. Where meters,
backflow-prevention devices or other required devices and fixtures are
in locations which are inaccessible or unsafe due to water or other
obstructions as determined by the Water Department, the property
owner shall be responsible for the removal of water or obstructions at
his expense.
(b) The Water Department or any employee of the Water Department shall
have the right to enter the premises or property of any property owner,
tenant or other consumer where city water is being supplied at any time
between 8:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. for the purpose of installing,
inspecting, reading, removing, testing or repairing the official water
meter or for inspecting the backflow-prevention devices or any fixtures
used in connection with the water system for any purpose whatsoever.
(c) When access to the meter cannot be had for any quarter, the customer
may be billed for water consumption upon the basis of average usage
indicated by the records of the Water Department, based upon the
water meter reading for the preceding year, the actual consumption to
be billed on the next available meter reading.
(d) Whenever a meter fails to register the quantity of water consumed, the
consumer shall be charged for water consumption upon the basis of
average usage indicated by the water meter reading for the year
preceding its failure to register.
(a) Any person making a complaint as to the correctness of a water bill
must do so within 10 days after the rendition of the bill by making a
written application to the Water Department.
(b) The Accounts Manager of the Water Department is authorized to
correct any bill which resulted from a meter which has been tested and
found inaccurate. Any adjustment to a bill will be for the period tested
only. No adjustments will be made for prior billing periods. Any claim
for a reduction in a water bill which does not relate to a claimed
inaccuracy of the meter shall be referred to the Water Department. The
Water Department shall have no authority to reduce a water bill for any
reason other than tested inaccuracy of a meter. Any such other claims
for reduction shall be reviewed by the Water Department and shall be
Sec. 27-27 OLEAN CODE Sec. 27-29
C:676
Sec. 27-30. Specifications; remote registers. [Res. No. 72-08,
8-26-2008; Res. No. 52-09, 7-28-2009]
submitted by it with its recommendations to the City Council for
determination. The determination of the Council shall be final.
(c) Whenever the accuracy of the meter is in issue, a test shall be a made.
The expense incurred in making such test shall be borne by the
consumer, except that if the meter is found to register inaccurately, the
cost of the test shall be borne by the city. No meter shall, however, be
considered inaccurate that does not vary more than 2% from the
normal. Reasonable opportunity will be given the protesting consumer
to be present at such test.
(d) If the meter tested is inaccurate, any adjustments to the bill will be for
the period tested only. No adjustment will be given for prior billing
periods.
(e) The Water Department may require a meter test at any time if it
appears the official water meter has been tampered with, the seal
broken or removed or when there is significant change in recorded
consumption.
(f) Only official water meters shall be tested for accuracy. If necessary, the
meter shall be replaced at the Water Department's option.
(a) The Water Department shall establish specifications for official water
meters furnished by the city.
(b) The location of all remote registers shall be established by the Water
Department.
Sec. 27-29 CHARTER Sec. 27-30
C:677

DIVISION 2
BACKFLOW-PREVENTION REQUIREMENTS
Sec. 27-31. General regulations. [Res. No. 72-08, 8-26-2008; Res.
No. 52-09, 7-28-2009]
Sec. 27-32. Installation. [Res. No. 72-08, 8-26-2008]
(a) The Water Department shall establish specifications for backflowprevention
devices, and no device shall be installed without the Water
Department's permission.
(b) Each service line to a facility shall be protected in a manner
commensurate with the degree of hazard of the facility. The degree of
hazard and type of backflow-prevention device to be used to achieve
containment shall be based on use of the facility and availability of
containments.
(c) The Water Department shall determine the type of backflow-prevention
device to be installed based upon the determination of the degree of
actual or potential hazard.
(d) All reduced-pressure-zone devices (RPZ) and double-check-valve
assemblies (DCV) must be on the current listing of acceptable devices
issued by New York State Department of Health. The design of all
backflow-prevention-device installations shall be approved by the New
York State Department of Health or Cattaraugus County Department of
Health.
(e) All backflow-prevention devices shall be subject to approval by the
Water Department.
(f) Backflow-prevention devices shall be required as indicated for the
following types of uses:
Degree of
Hazard
(illustrative
only) Type of Facility
Type of Protection
(minimum
requirement)
Hazardous Industrial plants, metalplating
industries,
hospitals, nursing homes,
medical buildings,
sanitariums, laboratories,
veterinary facilities
Acceptable air gap or
reduced-pressure-zone
device (RPZ)
(g) No cross-connections are permitted between a supplementary water
supply and the city's water supply.
Sec. 27-31 CHARTER Sec. 27-32
C:679
Sec. 27-33. Testing. [Res. No. 72-08, 8-26-2008]
Sec. 27-34. through Sec. 27-40. (Reserved)
(a) Unless otherwise specified, backflow-prevention device(s) shall be
installed at the official water meter as required by the Plumbing Code of
the City of Olean.
(b) No RPZ or DCV backflow-prevention device shall be placed in service
until such time as a completed works approval has been issued by the
New York State Department of Health or the Cattaraugus County
Department of Health.
(c) All backflow-prevention devices shall be furnished, installed, tested,
protected and maintained by the property owner at his own expense.
(a) After installation, all backflow-prevention devices shall be tested in
place by a certified backflow-prevention-device tester in the presence of
the Water Department's authorized representative. The tester's written
certification shall be furnished to the Water Department within 10 days
after the test has been performed. A new service line will not be put into
service before certification is received and approved by the Water
Department.
(b) Yearly tests shall be performed on each RPZ and DCV backflowprevention
device by a certified backflow-prevention device tester to
ensure continued reliability. The tester's written report shall be
forwarded to the Water Department within 10 days after the test has
been performed.
(c) Any backflow-prevention device which fails to function properly shall be
repaired or replaced within 30 days or as directed by the Water
Department and tested after the repair or replacement by a certified
backflow-prevention-device tester. The tester's written report shall be
forwarded to the Water Department within 10 days after the test has
been performed.
(d) The results of all tests as specified herein under this section, shall be
forwarded to the Cattaraugus County Department of Health by the
tester within 10 days after the test has been performed.
Sec. 27-32 OLEAN CODE Sec. 27-34
C:680
ARTICLE III
[Amended SIEnW ItEs RESn tAirNeDty S4E-W26A-G20E1 D6IBSyPORSeAs.L No. 25-16]
DIVISION 1
GENERALLY
Sec. 27-41. Definitions.
(a) Definitions. Unless otherwise stated in the section where the term is
used in this article, the meaning of terms used in this article shall be as
stated below. When not inconsistent with the context, the present tense
shall include the future, and words used in the plural shall include the
singular and vice versa. Futhermore, a masculine pronoun shall include
the feminine. "Shall" is mandatory; "may" is permissive.
ABNORMAL SEWAGE — Sewage whose concentration of one or more
characteristics of normal sewage exceeds the maximum concentrations
of the characteristics of normal sewage. See "normal sewage."
ACT or THE ACT — The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also
known as the Clean Water Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq., as
may be amended.
ADMINISTRATOR — The Regional Administrator of the United States
Environmental Protection Agency (USEPA), Region 2.
AMMONIA — The result obtained, using an approved laboratory
procedure, to determine the quantity of ammonia in a sample,
expressed as milligrams of nitrogen per liter.
APPLICANT — That person who makes application for any permit. The
applicant may be an owner, new or old, or his agent.
APPROVAL AUTHORITY — The USEPA, or the New York State
Department of Environmental Conservation (NYSDEC), in the event the
NYSDEC is delegated approval authority responsibility by the USEPA.
APPROVED LABORATORY PROCEDURE — The procedures defined as
"standard methods" in this article, or other procedures approved by
the Superintendent, for flow measurement or determination of the
concentration of pollutants or their surrogates in waters, wastewaters,
and/or sludges.
ASTM (AMERICAN SOCIETY FOR TESTING AND MATERIALS) — The
latest edition of any ASTM specification, when stipulated in this article.
AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE OF THE INDUSTRIAL USER — An
authorized representative of the industrial user may be:
A principal executive officer of at least the level of vice-president,
if the industrial user is a corporation;
(1)
A general partner or proprietor, if the industrial user is a
partnership or proprietorship, respectively;
(2)
Sec. 27-41 CHARTER Sec. 27-41
C:681
BACKGROUND CONCENTRATION — The sewage concentration of a
pollutant in process water supply, as determined by the industry and
which corresponds to the same time period as that of the wastewater
sample acquisition.
BOD (BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND) — The quantity of oxygen
utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard
laboratory procedure in five days at 20° C., expressed in parts per
million by weight.
BUILDER — Any person or corporation who undertakes to construct,
either under contract or for resale, any building.
BUILDING DRAIN — That part of the lowest horizontal piping of a
drainage system which receives the discharge from soil, waste, and
other drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to
the building sewer, beginning five feet outside the inner face of the
building wall.
BUILDING SEWER — The extension from the building drain to the
public sewer or other place of disposal.
CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARDS — The National
Categorical Pretreatment Standards or Standard, including without
limitation the definitions and standards contained in 40 CFR Chapter
(1), Subchapter (N), Parts 405 through 471.
CHLORINE DEMAND — The result obtained when using an approved
laboratory procedure to determine the difference between the amount
of chlorine added to a sample and the amount of chlorine remaining in
the sample at the end of a specified contact time at room temperature,
expressed in milligrams per liter.
CHLORINE REQUIREMENT — The difference between the amount of
chlorine added to water, sewage, or industrial wastes and the amount
of residual chlorine remaining at the end of a fifteen-minute contact
period.
CITY — The City of Olean, incorporated on April 26, 1893.
CITY CHARTER — The Charter of the City, as amended.
COD (CHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND) — The result obtained when
using an approved laboratory procedure to measure the oxygen
requirement of that portion of matter in a sample that is susceptible
to oxidation by a specific chemical oxidant expressed in milligrams per
liter.
COLOR — The optical density at the visual wave length of maximum
absorption, relative to distilled water. One-hundred-percent
transmittance is equivalent to zero optical density.
A duly authorized representative of the individual designated
above, if such representative is responsible for the overall
operation of the facilities from which the indirect discharge
originates.
(3)
Sec. 27-41 OLEAN CODE Sec. 27-41
C:682
COMBINED SEWER — A sewer receiving both surface runoff and
sewage.
COMPOSITE SAMPLE — The sample resulting from the combination
of individual samples of wastewater taken at selected intervals, for a
specified time period. The individual samples may have equal volumes
or the individual volumes may be proportioned to the flow at the time
of sampling.
CONNECTION — Attachment of one user to a sewer. (See "extension.")
CONNECTION CHARGE (TAP FEE) — The one-time application fee to
offset City of Olean expenses to process an application for a connection
of a building/street lateral to the public sewer. The fee also covers plan
review, permit issuance, street repair cost, and inspection costs. The
fee may be scaled to the amount of work involved, or to the size of the
public sewer involved.
CONTRACTOR — Any person, firm, or corporation approved by the
Common Council to do work in the City.
CONTROL AUTHORITY — The City of Olean.
CONTROL MANHOLE — A manhole accessible to the Control Authority
in or upstream of the street lateral, such that samples collected from
the manhole represent the discharge to the POTW.
CONVENTIONAL POLLUTANT — A pollutant that the POTW treatment
plant was designed to treat, defined in accordance with the Act.
COOLING WATER — Water used for cooling that does not come into
direct contact with any raw material, intermediate product, waste
product, or finished product.
COUNTY — Cattaraugus County.
DEVELOPER — Any person or corporation who undertakes to construct
simultaneously more than one housing unit on a given tract or land
subdivision.
DIRECT DISCHARGE — The discharge of treated or untreated
wastewater directly to the waters of the State of New York. (For
reference, see "indirect discharge.")
DIRECTOR — The Director of Public Works for the City, or his
authorized deputy, agent or representative.
DOMESTIC WASTES — See "sewage, domestic."
DRY SEWERS — The sanitary sewer installed in anticipation of future
connection to a POTW but which is not used, in the meantime, for
transport of storm or sanitary sewage.
EASEMENT — An acquired legal right for the specific use of land
owned by others.
END OF PIPE — For the purpose of determining compliance with
limitations prescribed by Article 9, "end of pipe" shall mean the control
Sec. 27-41 CHARTER Sec. 27-41
C:683
manhole, provided the samples collected from the control manhole are
representative of the discharge to the POTW.
END OF PIPE CONCENTRATION — The concentration of a substance
in a sample of wastewater at end of pipe.
END OF PROCESS CONCENTRATION — See "National Categorical
Pretreatment Standard."
ENFORCEMENT RESPONSE PLAN — The plan containing detailed
procedures indicating how the Control Authority will investigate and
respond to instances of industrial noncompliance, including, without
limitation, violations which will adversely affect the operation or
implementation of the pretreatment program and the Control
Authority's response thereto.
EPA — The United States Environmental Protection Agency.
EXTENSION — Attachment of a sewer line with more than one user to
an existing sewer line.
FACILITY — All buildings, other structures, grounds and contiguous
property at any locations related to or connected with a user at the
user's location.
FLOATABLE OIL — Oil, grease, or fat in a physical state such that it
will separate by gravity from wastewater by treatment in a wastewater
treatment facility.
FLOW RATE — The quantity of liquid or waste that flows in a certain
period of time.
FWPCAA — The Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments, or
the Act.
GARBAGE — Solid wastes from the preparation, cooking, and
dispensing of food, and from the handling, storage, and sale of produce.
GRAB SAMPLE — A single sample of wastewater representing the
physical, chemical, and biological characteristics of the wastewater at
one point and time.
ICS FORM — The form used by the NYSDEC to survey industries to
perform and update the Industrial Chemical Survey.
INDIRECT DISCHARGE — The introduction of pollutants into a POTW
from any nondomestic source.
INDUSTRIAL — Meaning or pertaining to industry, manufacturing,
commerce, trade, business, or institution, and is distinguished from
domestic or residential.
INDUSTRIAL CHEMICAL SURVEY (ICS) — The survey of industries in
New York State, initiated by the NYSDEC, to determine chemical usage
and storage by those industries.
INDUSTRIAL PRETREATMENT PROGRAM (IPP) — A program
administered by a POTW that meets the criteria established in Title
Sec. 27-41 OLEAN CODE Sec. 27-41
C:684
40, Protection of Environment, Chapter I, Environmental Protection
Agency, Part 403, General pretreatment regulations for existing and
new sources of pollution, and which has been approved by a Regional
Administrator or State Director in accordance with 403.11 of the above
regulation.
INDUSTRIAL PRETREATMENT PROGRAM ADMINISTRATOR (IPP
ADMINISTRATOR) — The Director of Public Works or the Wastewater
Treatment Plant Chief Operator acting on behalf of the Control
Authority.
INDUSTRIAL USER — Any source of indirect discharge, including all
nondomestic sources and including commercial facilities, hospitals, and
government agencies.
INDUSTRIAL WASTES — The liquid, solid, and gaseous waste,
including suspended solids, resulting from the processes employed in
industrial or commercial establishments.
INFILTRATION — Water, other than wastewater, that enters a sewer
system (excluding building drains) from the ground through such
means as defective pipes, pipe joints, connections, or manholes.
Infiltration does not include, and is distinguished from, inflow.
Infiltration is inadvertent, that is, not purposely designed or built into
the sewer or drain.
INFLOW — Water, other than wastewater, that enters a sewer system
(including building drains) from sources such as, but not limited to,
roof leaders, cellar drains, area drains, drains from springs and swampy
areas, manhole covers, cross connections between storm sewers and
sanitary sewers, catch basins, cooling towers, stormwaters, foundation
drains, swimming pools, surface runoff, street wash waters, or
drainage. Inflow does not include, and is distinguished from,
infiltration. Inflow is purposely designed and/or built into the sewer or
drain.
INSPECTOR — The plumbing and building inspector of the City, or his
authorized deputy, agent, or representative.
INTERFERENCE — A discharge that alone or in conjunction with a
discharge or discharges from other sources inhibits or disrupts the
publicly owned treatment works (POTW), its treatment processes or
operations, or its sludge processes, use, or disposal, and therefore
causes a violation of the POTW's State Pollutant Discharge Elimination
(SPDES) permit or prevents sewage sludge use or disposal in
compliance with specified applicable federal or state statutes,
regulations, or permits.
LATERAL, BUILDING — The sewer extension from the building drain to
the street lateral or other place of wastewater disposal.
LATERAL, STREET — The sewer extension from the public sewer to the
property line.
Sec. 27-41 CHARTER Sec. 27-41
C:685
NATIONAL CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARD or
CATEGORICAL STANDARD — Any regulation containing pollutant
discharge limits promulgated by the EPA in accordance with Section
307(B) and (C) of the Act (22 U.S.C. 1347), which applies to a specific
category of industrial users. These standards apply at the end of the
categorical process ("end of process").
NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM
(NPDES) PERMIT — A permit issued pursuant to Section 402 of the Act
(33 U.S.C. § 1342).
NATIONAL PROHIBITIVE DISCHARGE STANDARD or PROHIBITIVE
DISCHARGE STANDARD — Any regulation developed under the
authority of Section 307(B) of the Act, and 40 CFR 403.5.
NATURAL OUTLET — Any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake,
or other body of surface water or groundwater.
NEW OWNER — That individual or entity who purchased property
within the service area of the City of Olean after the effective date of
this article.
NEW SOURCE — A facility from which there is or may be a discharge
of pollutants, construction of which began after publication of the
proposed pretreatment standard pursuant to Section 307(c) of the
Clean Water Act (CWA) which will apply to the facility if standards are
promulgated.
NEW USER — A discharger to the POTW who commences discharge
after the effective date of this article.
NONCOMPLIANCE — Any violation of the provisions of this chapter
pertaining to the introduction, continuing discharge, or failure to install
controls to reduce concentrations of pollutants into the POTW.
NORMAL SEWAGE — See "sewage, normal."
NPDES — The National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System.
NUISANCE — The use or lack of use of the POTW in such a manner
so as to endanger life or health, give offense to the senses, or obstruct
or otherwise interfere with the reasonable use or maintenance of the
POTW.
NYSDEC — The New York State Department of Environmental
Conservation or other duly authorized official of said department.
NYSDPW — New York State Department of Public Works.
OIL AND GREASE — The result obtained when using an approved
laboratory procedure to determine the quantity of fats, wax, grease,
and oil in a sample, expressed in milligrams per liter.
OLD OWNER — That individual or entity who owns or owned a
property, within the service area of the POTW, purchased prior to the
effective date of this article, or who inherited the property at any time
Sec. 27-41 OLEAN CODE Sec. 27-41
C:686
and intends to sell the property, or has sold the property to a new
owner; also the agent of the old owner.
OTHER WASTES — Garbage (shredded or unshredded), refuse, wood,
egg shells, coffee grounds, sawdust, shavings, bark, sand, lime, ashes,
and all other discarded matter not normally present in sewage or
industrial wastes. Also, the discarded matter not normally present in
sewage or industrial waste.
OUTLET SEWER — A public sewer constructed and paid for at the
general expense of the City.
OWNER — Any individual, firm, company, association, society, person,
or group having title to real property.
PASS THROUGH — A discharge that exits the POTW in quantities
or concentrations that, alone or with discharges from other sources,
causes a violation of the POTW's NPDES permit.
PERMIT — A temporary revocable written document allowing use of
the POTW for specified wastes over a limited period of time, containing
sampling locations and reporting frequencies, and requiring other
actions as authorized by this article.
PERMIT TO DISCHARGE — A written permit to deposit or discharge
industrial waste into the POTW.
PERSON — Any individual, firm, company, association, society,
corporation or group, including a city, town, or village.
PETITION SEWER — A public sewer constructed and paid for at the
expense of the owners of property adjoining the sewer.
PHOSPHORUS, TOTAL — See "total phosphorus."
pH — The negative logarithm of the concentration of hydrogen ions in
the grams-ionic weights per liter of solution.
POLLUTANT — Any solid, liquid, or gaseous waste containing any of
the following: soluble or insoluble substances of organic or inorganic
nature which may deplete the dissolved oxygen content of the receiving
stream; settleable solids that may form sludge deposits; grease and oils;
floating solids which may cause unsightly appearance; color; phenols
and other substances to an extent which would impart any taste or
odor to the receiving stream; and toxic or poisonous substances in
suspension, colloidal state, solution, or gases.
POLLUTION — The man-made or man-induced alteration of the
chemical, physical, biological, and/or radiological integrity of the state's
waters, lands and/or airs resulting from the introduction of a pollutant
into these media.
POTW TREATMENT PLANT — That portion of the POTW which is
designed to provide treatment of municipal sewage and industrial
waste.
Sec. 27-41 CHARTER Sec. 27-41
C:687
PRETREATMENT (TREATMENT) — The reduction of the amount of
pollutants, the elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature
of pollutant properties in wastewater to a less harmful state prior
to or in lieu of discharging or otherwise introducing such pollutants
into a POTW. The reduction or alteration can be achieved by physical,
chemical, or biological process, process changes, or by other means,
except as prohibited by 40 CFR 403.6(D).
PRETREATMENT REQUIREMENTS — Any substantive or procedural
requirement related to pretreatment other than a National
Pretreatment Standard imposed on an industrial user.
PRETREATMENT STANDARD or NATIONAL PRETREATMENT
STANDARD — Any categorical standard or prohibitive discharge
standard.
PRIORITY POLLUTANTS — The most recently revised or updated list,
developed by the EPA, in accordance with the Act.
PROHIBITIVE DISCHARGE STANDARD — See "national prohibitive
discharge standard."
PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE — The wastes from the preparation,
cooking, and dispensing of food that has been shredded to such degree
that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions
normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than 1/2
inch in any dimension.
PROPERTY LINE — The edge of a public street line if the building sewer
is to connect with the public sewer in a public street.
PUBLIC SEWER — A sewer in which all owners of abutting properties
have equal rights, and is controlled by public authority.
PUBLICLY OWNED TREATMENT WORKS (POTW) — A treatment
works, as defined by Section 212 of the Act, (33 U.S.C 1292), which
is owned, in this instance, by City of Olean. This definition includes
any sewers and appurtenances that transport wastewater to the POTW
treatment plant, but does not include pipes, sewers, or other
conveyances not connected directly or indirectly to a facility providing
treatment.
RECEIVING WATERS — A natural water course or body of water
(usually waters of the state) into which treated or untreated sewage is
discharged.
RECORDS — Shall include, but not be limited to, any printed,
typewritten, handwritten or otherwise recorded matter of whatever
character (including paper or electronic media), including, but not
limited to, letters, files, memoranda, directives, notes and notebooks,
correspondence, descriptions, telephone call slips, photographs,
permits, applications, reports, compilations, films, graphs and
inspection reports. For the purposes of this article, "records" shall
mean records of and relating to waste generation, reuse and disposal,
and shall include records of usage of raw materials.
Sec. 27-41 OLEAN CODE Sec. 27-41
C:688
ROOF DRAIN — A drain installed to receive water collecting on the
surface of a roof for disposal.
SANITARY SEWER — A sewer which carries sewage and to which
storm, surface, and groundwaters are not intentionally admitted.
SEPTAGE — All liquids and solids in and removed from septic tanks,
holding tanks, cesspools, or approved type of chemical toilets, including
but not limited to those serving private residences, commercial
establishments, institutions, and industries. Also sludge from small
sewage treatment plants. Septage shall not have been contaminated
with substances of concern or priority pollutants.
SEPTIC TANK — A private domestic sewage treatment system
consisting of an underground tank (with suitable baffling), constructed
in accordance with any and/or all local and state requirements.
SERVICE AREA OF THE POTW — The legally defined bounds of real
property from which wastewater may be discharged into the POTW.
The bounds shall be established, altered, changed, modified, reduced,
enlarged, combined, or consolidated by action of the City of Olean
Council.
SEWAGE — A combination of the water-carried wastes from residences,
business buildings, institutions, and industrial establishments.
SEWAGE TREATMENT PLANT — Any arrangement of devices and
structures used for treating sewage.
SEWAGE, DOMESTIC (DOMESTIC WASTES) — Liquid wastes from
the noncommercial preparation, cooking, and handling of food, liquid
wastes containing human excrement and similar matter from the
sanitary conveniences in dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial
buildings, and institutions, or liquid wastes from clothes washing and/
or floor/wall washing. Therefore, domestic sewage includes both black
water and grey water. (See "sewage, sanitary.")
SEWAGE, NORMAL —
Sewage, industrial wastes, or other wastes, which show, by
analysis, the following characteristics:
B.O.D. (five-day): 2,090 pounds per million gallons (250
milligrams per liter), or less.
a.
Suspended Solids: 2,500 pounds per million gallons (300
milligrams per liter), or less.
b.
Phosphorus: 125 pounds per million gallons (15 milligrams per
liter), or less.
c.
Ammonia: 250 pounds per million gallons (30 milligrams per
liter), or less.
d.
Total Kjeldahl Nitrogen: 417 pounds per million gallons (50
milligrams per liter), or less.
e.
(1)
Sec. 27-41 CHARTER Sec. 27-41
C:689
SEWAGE, SANITARY — Liquid wastes from the sanitary conveniences
of dwellings (including apartment houses and hotels), office buildings,
factories, or institutions, and free from stormwater, surface water,
industrial, and other wastes. (See "domestic wastes.")
SEWAGE, UNUSUAL STRENGTH OR CHARACTER — Sewage which
has characteristics greater than those of normal sewage and/or which
contains substances of concern.
SEWER — A pipe or conduit for carrying sewage.
SEWER DISTRICT — Any area outside of the City's collection and
conveyance system, which discharges wastes into the City's system or
at the treatment plant in order to have the sewage generated in that
area treated.
SEWER, COMBINED — A sewer designed to receive and transport both
surface runoff and sewage.
SEWER, PUBLIC — A sewer in which all abutting property owners have
equal rights, and the use of which is controlled by the City of Olean.
SEWER, SANITARY — A sewer which carries sewage, and to which
storm, surface, and groundwaters are not intentionally admitted.
SEWER, STORM (STORM DRAIN) — A sewer which carries storm
and surface waters and drainage, but excludes sewage and industrial
wastewaters, other than cooling waters and other unpolluted waters.
SEWERAGE SURCHARGE — The demand payment for the use of a
public sewer and/or sewage treatment plant for the handling of any
sewage, industrial wastes, or other wastes accepted for admission
thereto in which the characteristics thereof exceed the maximum
values of such characteristics in normal sewage. (See "volume charge.")
SEWERAGE SYSTEM (also POTW) — All facilities for collecting,
regulating, pumping, and transporting wastewater to and away from
the POTW treatment plant.
SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER —
Chlorine Demand: 209 pounds per million gallons (25
milligrams per liter), or less.
f.
Chemical Oxygen Demand: 2,920 pounds per million gallons
(350 milligrams per liter), or less.
g.
Oil and Grease: 830 pounds per million gallons (100 milligrams
per liter), or less.
h.
In spite of satisfying one or more of these characteristics, if the
sewage also contains substances of concern, it may not be
considered normal sewage.
(2)
All industrial users subject to categorical pretreatment standards
under 40 CFR 403.6 and 40 CFR Chapter I, Subchapter N; and
(1)
Sec. 27-41 OLEAN CODE Sec. 27-41
C:690
SIGNIFICANT NONCOMPLIANCE — Any violation or group of
violations that meets one or more of the following criteria:
Any other industrial user that: discharges an average of 25,000
gallons per day or more of process wastewater to the POTW
(excluding sanitary, noncontact cooling and boiler blowdown
wastewater); contributes a process wastestream which makes up
5% or more of the average dry weather hydraulic or organic
capacity of the POTW treatment plant; or is designated as such by
the Control Authority as defined in 40 CFR 403.12 on the basis
that the industrial user has a reasonable potential for adversely
affecting the POTW's operation or for violating any pretreatment
standard or requirement [in accordance with 40 CFR 403.8(f)(6)].
(2)
Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined here as
those in which 66% or more of all of the measurements taken for
the same pollutant parameter during a six-month period exceed (by
any magnitude) a numeric pretreatment standard or requirement,
including instantaneous limits, as defined by 40 CFR 403.3(1);
(1)
Technical review criteria (TRC) violations, defined here as those in
which 33% or more of all of the measurements taken for the same
pollutant parameter during a six-month period equal or exceed
the product of the numeric pretreatment standard or requirement,
including instantaneous limits, as defined by 40 CFR 403.3(1),
multiplied by the applicable TRC (TRC = 1.4 for BOD, TSS, fats, oil,
and grease, and 1.2 for all other pollutants except pH);
(2)
Any other violation of a pretreatment standard or requirement as
defined by 40 CFR 403.3(1) (daily maximum, long-term average,
instantaneous limit, or narrative standard) that the POTW
determines has caused, alone or in combination with other
discharges, interference or pass-through (including endangering
the health of POTW personnel or the general public);
(3)
Any discharge of a pollutant that has caused imminent
endangerment to human health, welfare or to the environment or
has resulted in the POTW's exercise of its emergency authority to
halt or prevent such a discharge;
(4)
Failure to meet, within 90 days after the schedule date, a
compliance schedule milestone contained in a local control
mechanism or enforcement order for starting construction,
completing construction, or attaining final compliance;
(5)
Failure to provide, within 30 days after the due date, required
reports such as baseline monitoring reports, ninety-day compliance
reports, periodic self-monitoring reports, and reports on
compliance with compliance schedules;
(6)
(7) Failure to accurately report noncompliance;
Sec. 27-41 CHARTER Sec. 27-41
C:691
SLUG LOAD — Any discharge of water, sewage, or industrial waste
which occurs for any period longer than 15 minutes and exceeds more
than five times the average flow or concentration during normal
operating hours.
SPDES — The State Pollution Discharge Elimination System.
STANDARD INDUSTRIAL CLASSIFICATION (SIC) — A classification
pursuant to the Standard Industrial Classification Manual issued by the
Executive Office of the President, Office of Management and Budget,
1972, and subsequent revisions.
STANDARD METHODS — Procedures contained in the latest edition
of "Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater,"
published by the American Public Health Association, procedures
established by the Administrator, pursuant to Section 304(G) of the Act
and contained in 40 CFR, Part 136, and amendments thereto. (If 40
CFR, Part 136, does not include a sampling or analytical technique for
the pollutant in question, then procedures set forth in EPA publication,
"Sampling and Analysis Procedures for Screening of Industrial
Effluents for Priority Pollutants", April 1977, and amendments thereto,
shall be used.) Also any other procedure approved by the Administrator,
or any other procedure approved by the Superintendent, whichever is
the most conservative.
STATE — State of New York.
STATE BUILDING CONSTRUCTION CODE APPLICABLE TO
PLUMBING — The New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and
Building Code.
STATE'S WATERS — See "waters of the state."
STORM SEWER or STORM DRAIN — A pipe or conduit which carries
stormwater, surface waters, and drainage, but excludes sewage and
industrial wastes.
STORMWATER — Excess water which is derived from precipitation.
This would include surface runoff.
SUBSTANCES OF CONCERN — Those compounds which the New York
State Department of Environmental Conservation has determined may
be harmful to man or the environment.
SUMP PUMP — A mechanism used for removing water from a sump or
wet well.
SUPERINTENDENT — The Director of Public Works as nominated by
the Mayor of the City of Olean and confirmed by the City of Olean
Council as the Superintendent of Water and Wastewater. Such an
individual shall be licensed to practice engineering in the state, and
Any other violation or group of violations, which may include a
violation of best management practices, which the POTW
determines will adversely affect the operation or implementation of
the local pretreatment program.
(8)
Sec. 27-41 OLEAN CODE Sec. 27-41
C:692
otherwise qualified to oversee water treatment and distribution and
POTW operations. This definition shall also include his authorized
deputy, agent, or representative.
SUSPENDED SOLIDS — Solids that either float on the surface of, or
are in suspension in, water, sewage, or other liquids; and which are
removable by laboratory filtering.
TAP or TAP-IN — A connection between the public sewer and the
building sewer.
TOTAL KJELDAHL NITROGEN (TKN) — The result obtained, using an
approved laboratory procedure, to determine the quantity of ammonia
in a sample and released during the acid digestion of organic nitrogen
compounds, expressed as milligrams of nitrogen per liter.
TOTAL PHOSPHORUS — The result obtained using an approved
laboratory procedure to determine the total quantity of orthophosphate
in a sample of wastewater following the hydrolysis of phosphorus
compounds, expressed as milligrams of phosphorus per liter of sample.
TOXIC POLLUTANT — Those pollutants, or combinations of pollutants,
including disease-causing agents, which after discharge and upon
exposure, ingestion, inhalation or assimilation into any organism, either
directly from the environment or indirectly by ingestion through food
chains, are known to cause death, disease, behavioral abnormalities,
cancer, genetic mutations, physiological malfunctions (including
malfunctions in reproduction) or physical deformations, in such
organisms or their offspring. Toxic pollutants shall include, but not be
limited to, any pollutant identified pursuant to FWPCAA Section 307(a).
TOXIC SUBSTANCES — Any substance, whether gaseous, liquid, or
solid, that when discharged to a public sewer in sufficient quantities
may be hazardous to POTW operation and maintenance personnel,
tend to interfere with any biological sewage treatment process, or to
constitute a hazard to recreation in the receiving waters, due to the
effluent from a sewage treatment plant or overflow point. Any pollutant
or combination of pollutants listed as toxic in regulations promulgated
by the EPA under provisions of CWA 307(A), or other acts.
UNPOLLUTED WATER — Water which is free of any pollutant or waste.
USER — Any person who contributes, causes, or permits the
contribution of wastewater into the City's facilities.
USER, EXISTING — A discharger to the POTW who is discharging on
or before the effective date of this article.
USER, INDUSTRIAL — A discharger to the POTW who discharges
nondomestic wastewaters.
USER, NEW — A discharger to the POTW who initiates discharge after
the effective date of this article.
Sec. 27-41 CHARTER Sec. 27-41
C:693
USER, SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL (SIU) —
WASTEWATER — The liquid and water-carried industrial or domestic
wastewaters from dwellings, commercial establishments, industrial
facilities, and institutions, together with any groundwater, surface
water, and stormwater that may be present, whether treated or
untreated, which is contributed into or permitted to enter the POTW.
WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT — A permit as set forth in this
article.
WASTEWATER, UNUSUAL STRENGTH OR CHARACTER — See
"sewage, unusual strength or character."
WATERCOURSE — A channel in which a flow of water occurs, either
continuously or intermittently.
WATERS OF THE STATE (STATE'S WATERS) — All streams, lakes,
ponds, marshes, water courses, waterways, wells, springs, reservoirs,
aquifers, irrigation systems, drainage systems, and all other bodies or
accumulations of water, surface or underground, natural or artificial,
public or private, which are contained within, flow through, or border
upon the state or any portion thereof.
An industrial user of the City of Olean POTW who is:
Subject to National Categorical Pretreatment Standards
promulgated by the EPA;
a.
Having substantial impact, either singly or in combination with
other industries, on the operation of the treatment works;
b.
Using, on an annual basis, more than 10,000 pounds or 1,000
gallons of raw material containing priority pollutants and/or
substances of concern and discharging a measurable quantity
of these pollutants to the sewer system;
c.
Discharging more than 5% of the flow or load of conventional
pollutants received by the POTW treatment plant.
d.
(1)
Note: A user discharging a measurable quantity of a pollutant
may be classified as nonsignificant if, at the influent to the POTW
treatment plant, the pollutant is not detectable.
(2)
(b) Abbreviations. The following abbreviations shall have the designated
meanings:
(1) ANSI: American National Standards Institute.
(2) ASTM: American Society for Testing and Materials.
(3) AWWA: American Water Works Association.
(4) BOD: Biochemical oxygen demand.
(5) CFR: Code of Federal Regulations.
Sec. 27-41 OLEAN CODE Sec. 27-41
C:694
Sec. 27-42. Use of public sewers required.
(6) CPLR: Code of Public Law and Rules.
(7) COD: Chemical oxygen demand.
(8) EPA: Environmental Protection Agency.
(9) L: Liter.
(10) Mg: Milligram.
(11) Mg/l: Milligrams per liter.
(12) NCPI: National Clay Pipe Institute.
(13) NPDES: National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System.
(14) NYSDEC: New York State Department of Environmental
Conservation.
(15) NYSDOH: New York State Department of Health.
(16)NYSDOT: New York State Department of Transportation.
(17) P: Total phosphorus.
(18) PSI: Pounds per square inch.
(19)POTW: Publicly owned treatment works.
(20) PPM: Parts per million, weight basis.
(21) SIC: Standard Industrial Classification.
(22) SPDES: State Pollutant Discharge Elimination System.
(23) SWDA: Solid Waste Disposal Act, 42 U.S.C. § 690 L et seq.
(24)U.S.C.: United States Code of Laws.
(25)USEPA: United States Environmental Protection Agency.
(26) TSS: Total suspended solids.
(c) Undefined terms. Terms not defined in this article, or terms found to be
ambiguous or improperly defined in this article, shall be defined by the
Act, or regulations pursuant thereto.
(a) Connecting private sewage system to storm sewer unlawful. No person
shall connect a private sewage system so that sewage flows into a storm
sewer or into a drain intended exclusively for stormwater.
(b) Discharge of sewage into well prohibited. No person shall discharge
sewage into a well.
Sec. 27-41 CHARTER Sec. 27-42
C:695
Sec. 27-43. Inflow.
(c) Wastewater discharge unlawful. It shall be unlawful to discharge into
any natural outlet, within the City of Olean, or in any area under the
jurisdiction of the said municipality, any wastewater or other polluted
waters except where suitable treatment has been provided in
accordance with subsequent provisions of this article.
(d) Limitations on use of public sewers. The use of the City of Olean public
sewers shall be strictly limited and restricted to receive and accept the
discharge of sewage and other wastes, including industrial wastes
generated on or discharged from real property within the bounds of the
service area of the POTW.
(e) Wastewater from outside the POTW service area: intermunicipal
agreements.
(1) The City of Olean Council, on the recommendation of the
Superintendent, shall have the authority to enter into agreements
to accept sewage and other wastes, including industrial wastes,
generated by or discharged from persons outside the service area
of the POTW.
(2) If the person is a municipality, that municipality shall have enacted
a Sewer Use Law as restrictive on the discharge of sewage and
other wastes and the restrictions contained in this article.
(3) If the person is not a municipality, the acceptance shall be made
only with the expressed written consent of the Superintendent (the
issuance of a permit) setting forth the terms and conditions of such
an acceptance.
(f) Basis of sewer use requirement. All requirements, directives, and
orders calling for mandatory use of the sewers within the service area
of the POTW for the proper discharge of sewage and other wastes,
including industrial wastes, shall be established and given by the City of
Olean Common Council, NYSDEC, USEPA, and/or other such state or
federal agencies which have enforcement powers.
(a) New inflow sources prohibited. No connections shall be made to a
sanitary or to a combined sewer which connections are intended to
discharge inflow. Such prohibited connections include, but are not
limited to, footing drains, roof leaders, roof drains, cellar drains, sump
pumps, catch basins, uncontaminated cooling water discharges, or
other sources of inflow.
(b) Existing inflow sources disconnected. For properties where separate
storm sewers are available within 100 feet of the property line or
where, in the judgment of the Superintendent, sufficient natural
drainage is available, connections which contribute inflow to the
sanitary sewers must be disconnected in a fashion approved by the
Superintendent, prior to the sale of the property as outlined below.
Sec. 27-42 OLEAN CODE Sec. 27-43
C:696
Sec. 27-44. Enforcement, penalties and violation of article.
(1) Prior to the indexing and recording of a conveyance of real
property with the City Assessor, as required by Chapter C, Article
VI, Section 6.007 of the Charter of the City of Olean, the grantor
shall obtain from the Superintendent an inspection certificate
certifying that the property is free of inflow sources. In lieu of an
inspection by the Superintendent, the transferor may obtain an
inspection certificate from a plumber duly licensed by the City and
which dated within 30 days of the proposed transfer date certifying
that the property is free of inflow sources.
(2) The Superintendent may waive the disconnection requirement if,
after an inspection by the Superintendent or his designated
representative, he determines that both the property line is not
located within 100 feet of the storm sewer and in their opinion the
property lacks sufficient natural drainage so that the inability to
continue the inflow would result in damage to the property or an
adjoining property.
(3) Notwithstanding the above, this section shall only apply to bona
fide transfer of the property for value and shall not apply to
transfers between family members, spouses, in lieu of foreclosure,
or transfers where the grantee is an executor or administrator of an
estate and the grantee is taking title to the property through a
bequests under a last will and testament or through intestate
succession. For the purpose of this section, a referee's deed in
foreclosure shall constitute a bona fide transfer for value.
(c) Existing inflow sources disconnected when property sold. Upon notice
from the Tax Assessor, the Superintendent shall inspect any newly sold
property for the purpose of determining if storm sewers or natural
drainage is available, and, if so, if all connections which contribute
inflow have been disconnected.
(d) No reconnection of inflow source allowed. It shall be a willful violation
of this article for any person to reconnect any inflow source which has
been disconnected pursuant to this article.
(e) Charges for inflow. The Superintendent is enabled to take whatever
action is necessary to determine the amount of inflow including the
requirement for installation of a control manhole. The property from
which the inflow originated shall be billed for inflow according to
Division 5, Section 27-167; however, the City of Olean Council may
cause a surcharge at a rate not to exceed five times that for normal
sewage volume charge.
(a) Enforcement response plan. The Superintendent shall prepare an
Enforcement Response Plan. The Enforcement Response Plan, in a stepby-
step fashion, shall outline the procedures to be followed to identify,
document, and respond to violations by users of the POTW. All violations
Sec. 27-43 CHARTER Sec. 27-44
C:697
by users of the POTW shall be met with some type of enforcement
response. The response shall be comprehensive and effective.
(1) The Enforcement Response Plan shall:
a. Describe how the Superintendent will investigate instances of
noncompliance.
b. Describe the types of escalated enforcement actions that the
Superintendent will take in response to all anticipated types of
user violations and the time periods within which to initiate
and follow-up these actions.
c. Adequately reflect the City of Olean Council's responsibility to
enforce all applicable standards and requirements.
(2) The Enforcement Response Plan shall contain:
a. Criteria for scheduling periodic inspection and/or sampling
visits to POTW users.
b. Forms and guidelines for documenting compliance data in a
manner which will enable the information to be used as
evidence.
c. Systems to track due dates, compliance schedule milestones,
and pending enforcement actions.
d. Criteria, responsible personnel, and procedures to select and
initiate an enforcement action.
(3) The range of appropriate enforcement actions shall be based on the
nature and severity of the violation and other relevant factors, such
as:
a. Magnitude of the violation.
b. Duration of the violation.
c. Effect of the violation on the receiving water.
d. Effect of the violation on the POTW.
e. Effect of the violation on the health and safety of the POTW
employees.
f. Compliance history of the user.
g. Good faith of the user.
h. And shall promote consistent and timely use of enforcement
remedies.
Sec. 27-44 OLEAN CODE Sec. 27-44
C:698
(4) The City of Olean Council shall approve the Enforcement Response
Plan. The Enforcement Response Plan shall be reviewed at least
every five years.
(b) Administrative remedies.
(1) Notification of violation. Whenever the Superintendent finds that
any user has violated or is violating this article, or any wastewater
discharge permit, order, prohibition, limitation, or requirement
permitted by this article, the Superintendent may serve upon such
person a written notice stating the nature of the violation. Within
10 calendar days of the date the Superintendent mails the notice,
an explanation of the violation and a plan for the satisfactory
correction and prevention thereof shall be submitted to the
Superintendent by the user. The correction and prevention plan
shall include specific actions. Submission of this plan in no way
relieves the user of liability for any violations caused by the user
before or after receipt of the notice of violation.
(2) Consent orders. The Superintendent is hereby empowered to enter
into consent orders, assurances of voluntary compliance, or other
similar documents establishing an agreement with the user
responsible for the noncompliance. Such orders shall include
specific action to be taken by the user to correct the noncompliance
within a time period also specified by the order. Consent orders
shall have the same force and effect as an administrative order.
(3) Administrative or compliance orders.
a. When the Superintendent finds that a user has violated or
continues to violate this article or a permit or administrative
order issued thereunder, he may issue an administrative order
to the user responsible for the discharge directing that,
following a specified time period, sewer service shall be
discontinued, severed and abated unless the violation is
corrected and that there is no reoccurrence of the violation.
Administrative orders may also contain such other
requirements as might be reasonably necessary and
appropriate to address the noncompliance, including the
installation of pretreatment technology, additional selfmonitoring,
and management practices.
b. The user may, within 15 calendar days of receipt of such order,
petition the Superintendent to modify or suspend the order.
Such petition shall be in written form and shall be transmitted
to the Superintendent by registered mail. The Superintendent
shall then:
1. Reject any frivolous petitions;
2. Modify or suspend the order; or
Sec. 27-44 CHARTER Sec. 27-44
C:699
3. Order the petitioner to show cause in accordance with Sec.
27-44(b)(8) and may as part of the show-cause notice
request the user to supply additional information.
(4) Administrative fines.
a. Notwithstanding any other section of this article, any user who
is found to have violated any provision of this article, or a
wastewater discharge permit or administrative order issued
hereunder, shall be fined in an amount not to exceed $1,000
per violation. Each calendar day on which noncompliance shall
occur or continue shall be deemed a separate and distinct
violation.
b. The user may, within 15 calendar days of notification of the
Superintendent's notice of such fine, petition the
Superintendent to modify or suspend the order. Such petition
shall be in written form and shall be transmitted to the
Superintendent by registered mail. The Superintendent shall
then:
1. Reject any frivolous petitions;
2. Modify or suspend the fine; or
3. Order the petitioner to show cause in accordance with Sec.
27-44(b)(8) and may as part of the show-cause notice
request the user to supply additional information.
(5) Cease-and-desist orders.
a. When the Superintendent finds that a user has violated or
continues to violate this article or any permit or administrative
order issued hereunder, the Superintendent may issue an
administrative order to cease and desist all such violations and
direct those persons in noncompliance to:
1. Comply forthwith.
2. Take such appropriate remedial or preventive action as
may be needed to properly address a continuing or
threatened violation, including halting operations or
terminating the discharge.
b. The user may, within 15 calendar days of the date the
Superintendent mails notification of such order, petition the
Superintendent to modify or suspend the order. Such petition
shall be in written form and shall be transmitted to the
Superintendent by registered mail. The Superintendent shall
then:
1. Reject any frivolous petitions;
Sec. 27-44 OLEAN CODE Sec. 27-44
C:700
2. Modify or suspend the order;
3. Order the petitioner to show cause in accordance with Sec.
27-44(b)(8) and may as part of the show-cause notice
request the user to supply additional information.
(6) Termination of permit. Any user who violates the following
conditions of this article or a wastewater discharge permit or
administrative order, or any applicable or state and federal law, is
subject to permit termination: (1) violation of permit conditions or
conditions of an administrative order, (2) failure to accurately
report the wastewater constituents and characteristics of its
discharge, (3) failure to report significant changes in operations or
wastewater constituents and characteristics, (4) refusal of
reasonable access to the user's premises for the purpose of
inspection, monitoring, or sampling, or (5) failure to pay
administrative fines, fees or user charges. Noncompliant industrial
users will be notified, by registered mail, of the proposed
termination of their wastewater permit. The user may, within 15
calendar days of the date the Superintendent mails such
notification, petition the Superintendent to permit continued use of
the POTW by the user. Such petition shall be in written form and
shall be transmitted to the Superintendent by registered mail. The
Superintendent shall then:
a. Reject any frivolous petitions;
b. Order the petitioner to show cause in accordance with Sec.
27-44(b)(8) and may as part of the show-cause notice request
the user to supply additional information.
(7) Water supply severance. Whenever a user has violated or continues
to violate the provisions of this article or an order or permit issued
hereunder, water service to the user may be severed and service
will only recommence, at the user's expense, after it has
satisfactorily demonstrated its ability to comply. The user may,
within 15 calendar days of severance, petition the Superintendent
to reconnect water supply service. Such petition shall be in written
form and shall be transmitted to the Superintendent by registered
mail. The Superintendent shall then:
a. Reject any frivolous petitions;
b. Reconnect the water supply; or
c. Order the petitioner to show cause in accordance with Sec.
27-44(b)(8) and may as part of the show-cause notice request
the user to supply additional information.
(8) Show-cause hearing.
Sec. 27-44 CHARTER Sec. 27-44
C:701
a. The Superintendent may order any user appealing
administrative remedies for violations of this article to show
cause, before the City of Olean Council, why an enforcement
action, initiated by the Superintendent, should not be taken. A
notice shall be served on the user specifying the time and place
of a hearing to be held by the City of Olean Council regarding
the violation, the reasons why the action is to be taken, the
proposed enforcement action, and directing the user to show
cause before the City of Olean Council why the proposed
enforcement action should not be taken. The notice of the
hearing shall be served at least 10 calendar days before the
hearing in accordance with Sec. 27-44(b)(10) of this article.
Service shall be made on any principal or executive officer of a
user's establishment or to any partner in a user's
establishment. The notice of the hearing shall be served at
least 10 calendar days before the hearing, in accordance with
Sec. 27-44(b)(10). The City of Olean Council may itself conduct
the hearing, or may designate any of its members or any officer
or employee of the City of Olean to conduct the hearing:
1. Issue, in the name of the City of Olean Board, notices of
hearings requesting the attendance and testimony of
witnesses, and the production of evidence relevant to any
matter involved in such hearings;
2. Take the evidence;
3. Take sworn testimony;
4. Transmit a report of the evidence and hearing, including
transcripts and other evidence, together with
recommendations to the City of Olean Council for action
thereon.
b. After the City of Olean Council has reviewed the evidence and
testimony, it may order the user to comply with the
Superintendent's order or fine, modify the Superintendent's
order or fine, or vacate the Superintendent's order or fine.
(9) Failure of user to petition the superintendent. In the event the
Superintendent issues any administrative order, terminates the
user's permit, or makes any fine as set forth in this article, and the
user fails, within the designated period of time set forth, to petition
the Superintendent, as provided in appropriate sections of this
article, the user shall be deemed in default and its rights to contest
the administrative order or fine shall be deemed waived.
(10) Notice. The notices, orders, petitions, or other notification which
the user or Superintendent shall desire or be required to give
pursuant to any sections of this article shall be in writing and shall
be served personally or sent by certified mail or registered mail,
return receipt requested, postage prepaid, and the notice, order,
Sec. 27-44 OLEAN CODE Sec. 27-44
C:702
petition, or other communication shall be deemed given upon its
mailing as provided herein. Any notice, administrative order, or
communication mailed to the user pursuant to the sections of this
article shall be mailed to the user where the user's effluent is
discharged into transmission lines to the City of Olean's POTW.
Any notice, petition, or other communication mailed to the
Superintendent shall be addressed and mailed to the City of Olean
Hall of the City of Olean.
(11) Right to choose multiple remedies. The Superintendent shall have
the right, within the Superintendent's sole discretion, to utilize any
one or more appropriate administrative remedies set forth in this
article. The Superintendent may utilize more than one
administrative remedy established pursuant to this article, and the
Superintendent may hold one show-cause hearing combining more
than one enforcement action.
(c) Judicial remedies.
(1) Civil actions for penalties.
a. Any person who violates any of the provisions of or who fails to
perform any duty imposed by this article, or any administrative
order or determination of the Superintendent promulgated
under this article, or the terms of any permit issued hereunder,
shall be liable to the City of Olean for a civil penalty not to
exceed $1,000 for each such violation, to be assessed after a
hearing (unless the user waives the right to a hearing) held in
conformance with the procedures set forth in this article. Each
violation shall be separate and distinct violation, and in the
case of continuing violation, each day's continuance thereof
shall be deemed a separate and distinct violation. Such penalty
may be recovered in an action brought by the City of Olean
attorney, or his designated attorney, at the request of the
Superintendent in the name of the City of Olean, in any court of
competent jurisdiction giving preference to courts local to the
City of Olean. In addition to the above described penalty, the
Superintendent may recover all damages incurred by the City
of Olean from any persons or users who violate any provisions
of this article, or who fail to perform any duties imposed by this
article or any administrative order or determination of the
Superintendent promulgated under this article, or the terms of
any permit issued hereunder. In addition to the above
described damages, the Superintendent may recover all
reasonable attorney's fees incurred by the City of Olean in
enforcing the provisions of this article, including reasonable
attorney's fees incurred in any action to recover penalties and
damages, and the Superintendent may also recover court
costs, and other expenses associated with the enforcement
activities, including sampling and monitoring expenses.
Sec. 27-44 CHARTER Sec. 27-44
C:703
b. In determining the amount of civil penalty, the court shall take
into account all relative circumstances, including, but not
limited to the extent of harm caused by the violation, the
magnitude and duration, any economic benefit gained through
the user's violation, corrective actions by the user, the
compliance history of the user, and any other relative factors as
justice may require.
c. Such civil penalty may be released or compromised by the
Superintendent before the matter has been referred to the City
of Olean attorney, and where such matter has been referred to
the City of Olean attorney, any such penalty may be released or
compromised and any action commenced to recover the same
may be settled and discontinued by the City of Olean attorney,
with the consent of the Superintendent.
(2) Court orders.
a. In addition to the power to assess penalties as set forth in this
article, the Superintendent shall have the power, following the
hearing held in conformance with the procedures set forth in
this article, to seek an order:
1. Suspending, revoking, or modifying the violator's
wastewater discharge permit; or
2. Enjoining the violator from continuing the violation.
b. Any such court order shall be sought in an action brought by
the City of Olean attorney, at the request of the
Superintendent, in the name of the City of Olean, in any court
of competent jurisdiction giving precedence to courts local to
the City of Olean.
c. The City of Olean attorney, at the request of the
Superintendent, shall petition the Court to impose, assess, and
recover such sums imposed according to this article. In
determining amount of liability, the Court shall take into
account all relevant circumstances, including, but not limited
to, the extent of harm caused by the violation, the magnitude
and duration, any economic benefit gained through the user's
violation, corrective actions by the user, the compliance history
of the user, and any other factor as justice requires.
(3) Criminal penalties.
a. Any person who willfully violates any provision of this article or
any final determination or administrative order of the
Superintendent made in accordance with this article shall be
guilty of a Class A misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof,
shall be punished by a fine of not less than $500 nor more than
$1,000, or imprisonment not to exceed one year, or both. Each
Sec. 27-44 OLEAN CODE Sec. 27-44
C:704
offense shall be a separate and distinct offense, and, in the
case of a continuing offense, each day's continuance thereof
shall be deemed a separate and distinct offense.
b. Any user who knowingly makes any false statements,
representations, or certifications in any application, record,
report, plan or other document filed or required to be
maintained pursuant to this article, or wastewater permit, or
who falsifies, tampers with, or knowingly renders inaccurate
any monitoring device or method required under this article
shall be guilty of a Class A misdemeanor and, upon conviction,
shall be punished by a fine of not more than $1,000 per
violation per day or imprisonment for not more than one year
or both.
c. No prosecution under this section shall be instituted until after
final disposition of a show cause hearing, if any, was instituted.
(4) Additional injunctive relief. Whenever a user has violated or
continues to violate the provisions of this article or permit or order
issued hereunder, the Superintendent, through counsel, may
petition the Court, in the name of the City of Olean, for the issuance
of a preliminary or permanent injunction or both (as may be
appropriate) which restrains the violation of, or compels the
compliance with any order or determination thereunder by the
Superintendent.
(5) Summary abatement.
a. Notwithstanding any inconsistent provisions of this article,
whenever the Superintendent finds, after investigation, that
any user is causing, engaging in, or maintaining a condition or
activity which, in the judgment of the Superintendent, presents
an imminent danger to the public health, safety, or welfare, or
to the environment, or is likely to result in severe damage to
the POTW or the environment, and it therefore appears to be
prejudicial to the public interest to allow the condition or
activity to go unabated until notice and an opportunity for a
hearing can be provided, the Superintendent may, without
prior hearing, order such user by notice, in writing wherever
practicable or in such other form as practices are intended to
be proscribed, to discontinue, abate, or alleviate such
condition or activity, and thereupon such person shall
immediately discontinue, abate, or alleviate such condition or
activity; or where the giving of notice is impracticable, or in the
event of a user's failure to comply voluntarily with an
emergency order, the Superintendent may take all appropriate
action to abate the violating condition. As promptly as possible
thereafter, not to exceed 15 calendar days, the Superintendent
shall provide the user an opportunity to be heard, in
accordance with the provisions of this article.
Sec. 27-44 CHARTER Sec. 27-44
C:705
b. If the user is not within the geographic boundaries of the City
of Olean, the right of summary abatement to discontinue,
abate, or alleviate conditions or activities shall be those
prescribed in the intermunicipal agreement.
c. The Superintendent, acting upon the belief that an emergency
exists, shall be indemnified against any personal liability that
may arise in the performance of his duties to protect the public
health, safety, or welfare, or to preserve the POTW or the
environment.
(d) Miscellaneous.
(1) Delinquent payments.
a. If there shall be any payments which are due to the City of
Olean, or any department thereof, pursuant to any article or
section of this article, which shall remain due and unpaid, in
whole or in part, for a period of 20 calendar days from the date
of billing by the City of Olean, the same shall constitute a
default, and there shall be added to the entire amount of the
original bill, a penalty equal to 10% of the original bill.
b. In the event that there are any sewer taxes, water taxes,
assessments, or other service charges which shall have been
assessed within the previous calendar year as of February 15
of any year, the Superintendent shall report the names of the
defaulting persons to the City of Olean Mayor, the City of Olean
Clerk, the City of Olean Chief Assessor, and the City of Olean
Treasurer on or before March 1 of the same year. The City of
Olean Chief Assessor is hereby directed to add the entire
amount of the sewer tax, assessment, or other service charge
which shall be in default, plus penalty and interest, as provided
for in this article, to the real property taxes due and owing to
City of Olean in the next succeeding year, and the City of Olean
Chief Assessor is directed to collect the same in the same
manner as real property taxes due and owing to the City of
Olean are collected.
c. Where charges are delinquent and the violator is not a resident
of the City of Olean, or is located outside the geographical
boundaries of the City of Olean, then the City of Olean attorney
is authorized to seek recovery of charges, including punitive
damages, in a court of competent jurisdiction or make
arrangements with the appropriate county where the user is
located to add the amount of the sewer assessment or other
charges which shall be in default, plus penalty and interest, as
provided for in the law, to the real property taxes due to the
county in the next ensuing year.
(2) Performance bonds. The Superintendent may decline to reissue a
permit to any user which has failed to comply with the provisions of
Sec. 27-44 OLEAN CODE Sec. 27-44
C:706
this article or any order or previous permit issued hereunder unless
such user first files with it a satisfactory bond, payable to the
POTW, in a sum not to exceed a value determined by the
Superintendent to be necessary to achieve consistent compliance.
(3) Liability insurance. The Superintendent may decline to reissue a
permit to any user which has failed to comply with the provisions of
this article or any order or previous permit issued hereunder,
unless the user first submits proof that it has obtained financial
assurances sufficient to restore or repair POTW damage caused by
its discharge.
(4) Informant rewards. The Superintendent is authorized to pay up to
$500 for information leading to the discovery of noncompliance by
a user. In the event that the information provided results in an
administrative fine or civil penalty levied against the user, the
Superintendent is authorized to disperse up to 10% of the collected
fine or penalty to the informant. However, a single reward payment
may not exceed $10,000, including the discovery reward.
(5) Public notification. The Superintendent shall provide public
notification, in the daily newspaper with the largest circulation in
the City of Olean, of users which were in significant noncompliance
of local or federal pretreatment standards or requirements since
the last such notice. The frequency of such notices shall be at least
once per year.
(6) Contractor listings.
a. Users which have not achieved consistent compliance with
applicable pretreatment standards and requirements are not
eligible to receive a contractual award for the sale of goods or
services to the City of Olean.
b. Existing contracts for the sale of goods or services to the City
of Olean held by a user found to be in significant violation with
pretreatment standards may be terminated at the discretion of
the City of Olean Council.
(e) Violations of article.
(1) Any person found to be violating any provision of this article,
except Section 27-48, shall be served by the Control Authority,
through registered mail, a written notice stating the nature of the
violation and providing a reasonable time limit for the satisfactory
correction thereof. The offender shall, within the period of time
stated in such notice, permanently cease all violations.
(2) The Control Authority may request any user responsible for a
noncompliant discharge to the City collection or treatment facilities
to show cause why enforcement action should not be taken. A
notice shall be served on the user designating the time and place of
Sec. 27-44 CHARTER Sec. 27-44
C:707
the hearing to be held regarding the violations, the reasons why
the action is to be taken, the proposed enforcement action, and
requesting the user to show cause why the proposed enforcement
action should not be taken.
(3) The Control Authority may issue notice of such hearings requesting
the attendance and testimony of witnesses and the production of
evidence relevant to any matter involved in such hearings.
Testimony will be taken under oath, recorded, and kept on file for
inspection by the public or any interested party.
(4) After the Control Authority has reviewed the evidence, it may issue
a directive to the user responsible for the discharge specifying
corrective action to be taken and a schedule for completion of this
action.
(5) In addition to any fines or penalties under this article, the Control
Authority may seek temporary restraining orders, plug or
disconnect service or permanent injunctions if there is any
imminent danger to health, safety, or property as the result of the
violation. Any violation of this article of the Code of Ordinances and
any violation of directives and permits issued by the Control
Authority shall be the subject of the City's Enforcement Response
Plan as approved by the United States Environmental Protection
Agency and as may be changed from time to time.
(6) Any person who fails to comply with the provisions of this article
after the time period established in Subsection (a) and/or the
Enforcement Response Plan may be liable to monetary forfeitures.
If such fines are to be levied, the violator shall be notified in writing
through registered mail as to the nature of the violation and the
amount of the fine. The fine for significant noncompliance is $1,000
per day. In addition, the Control Authority, after proper notification
of violations and imposing of fines through registered mail, may
preside over and conduct a show-cause hearing. Depending upon
the outcome of the hearing, the Control Authority may revoke or
suspend the user's permit to discharge. The permit may be reissued
by the Control Authority after the user demonstrates that he is in
compliance with all provisions of this article.
(7) The continued violation of any provision of any section of this
article, other than those pertaining to the payment of charges for
services established herein, shall constitute a separate offense for
each and every day such violation of any provision hereof shall
continue.
(8) As an alternative, upon violation of this article, the proper
authorities of the City, in addition to other remedies, may institute
any appropriate action or proceedings, including an injunction to
prevent such unlawful use, construction or maintenance of
cesspools, septic tanks, sewage disposal systems, pipes or drains to
Sec. 27-44 OLEAN CODE Sec. 27-44
C:708
Sec. 27-45. Unlawful deposits on public or private property.
It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit, or permit to be
deposited in any unsanitary manner upon public or private property within
the City, or in any area under the jurisdiction of the City, any human
or animal excrement, garbage or other objectionable waste. Exceptions
may be granted by the Common Council to an owner or lessee acting in
the normal course of farm or garden operations but only after specific
application to the Director by such owner or lessee and upon such
conditions as the Common Council may impose.
Sec. 27-46. Unlawful discharge of polluted waters; pertinent laws
and requirements.
restrain, correct or abate such violation to prevent the occupancy
of any building, structure, or land where such violations of this
article are found.
(9) Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall
become liable to the City for any expense, loss or damage
occasioned the City by reason of such violation.
(10) Any person violating the terms of the provisions of this article that
pertain to FWPCAA shall be liable to civil and criminal penalties
and fines which will be levied in accordance with judicial
procedures.
(11) At least annually, the POTW will publish in the largest daily
newspaper in the City of Olean notification of industrial users that
were in significant noncompliance with applicable pretreatment
requirements during the previous 12 months.
(12) Any person who knowingly makes any false statements,
representation or certification in any application, record, report,
plan, or other document filed or required to be maintained
pursuant to this article, or permit to discharge, or who falsifies,
tampers with, or knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring
device or method required under this article, shall be liable to civil
and criminal penalties and fines which will be levied in accordance
with judicial procedures.
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge to any watercourse,
either directly or through any storm sewer, within the City, or in any
area under the jurisdiction of the City, any sewage, industrial wastes, or
other polluted waters. Use of separate storm sewers and sanitary
sewers is mandatory for all future construction in the City. No combined
sewers will be allowed to be constructed in the future.
(b) Disposal into the sewer system of any pollutant by any person is
unlawful except in compliance with federal standards promulgated
Sec. 27-44 CHARTER Sec. 27-46
C:709
pursuant to the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of
1977, and any more stringent state and local standards.
(c) Any new and existing industry discharging into any City-owned sewer
will be required to complete successfully a permit application and
receive a written permit to discharge issued by the IPP Administrator.
As a condition for this permit, the industrial applicant must provide
information describing wastewater constituents and characteristics,
and type of activity involved. The information to be submitted will be at
the direction of the IPP Administrator, who will indicate constituents
and characteristics to be tested and procedures for conducting such
tests. Permission to discharge will be for a period of three years. All
industry shall apply for permission to continue discharging a minimum
of 90 days prior to expiration of existing permit. The permit shall
include at a minimum the following five conditions: (1) a statement of
duration; (2) a statement of nontransferability; (3) applicable federal,
state, and local effluent limits; (4) self-monitoring, sampling, reporting,
notification, and record-keeping requirements; (5) a statement of
applicable civil and criminal penalties. During the effective period of a
permit to discharge, the IPP Administrator is authorized to modify any
condition(s) contained within that permit. The industry shall be
informed of any proposed changes at least 30 days prior to the effective
date of change. Any changes or new conditions shall include a
reasonable time schedule as set up by the IPP Administrator.
(1) A permit to discharge is issued to a specific industry, not a location,
and therefore is not transferable. Should any industry discharging
to the City's sewers modify any of its processes so as to increase or
decrease the flow or pollutant loading by greater than 20% of the
present industrial discharge, such industry shall seek written
permission for a permit to discharge from the IPP Administrator for
that modification prior to initiating this modification of discharge.
The IPP Administrator shall require from the industry the same
type of information that any existing or new industry initiating an
industrial discharge to City-owned sewers is required to provide.
The IPP Administrator is authorized to monitor all industrial
discharges and at his discretion shall order City monitoring or selfmonitoring
of the industrial discharges. Such monitoring will be
directed by the IPP Administrator.
(2) The industrial user shall be responsible for record retention and
shall retain and preserve for no less than three years any records,
books, documents, memoranda, reports, correspondence, and any
and all summaries thereof related to monitoring, sampling, and
chemical analyses made by or on behalf of the user in connection
with its discharge. All records that pertain to matters that are the
subject of special orders or any other enforcement or litigation
activity brought against the IU shall be retained and preserved by
the industrial users until all enforcement activities have concluded
Sec. 27-46 OLEAN CODE Sec. 27-46
C:710
Sec. 27-47. Right of entry to inspect, etc.; reports to City.
Sec. 27-48. Injuring, etc., City sewerage works prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to maliciously, willfully or negligently
break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any structure,
appurtenance or equipment, including control manholes, which is a part
of the City sewerage works. Any person violating this provision shall be
subject to immediate arrest under charge of disorderly conduct.
and all periods of limitation with respect to any and all appeals
have expired.
(d) The IPP Administrator is authorized to ensure compliance of industrial
users (as defined in 40 CFR 403) with federal, state, or local
pretreatment standards and any other applicable requirements
promulgated by EPA in accordance with Section 307 of FWPCAA. In
addition to any other remedy as provided by any law or rule, the IPP
Administrator is authorized to ensure compliance of industrial users as
defined in 40 CFR 403 by revocation of any permit issued pursuant to
this section for violation of any provision of this section.
(a) The inspector, the director and other duly authorized employees of the
City, NYSDEC, and EPA bearing proper credentials and identifications
shall be permitted to enter upon all properties of the industry, for the
purpose of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling and testing
in accordance with the provisions of this article. Wastewaters shall be
accessible, through such means as a control manhole, for purposes of
inspection, observation, measurement, sampling and testing. In
addition, the inspector, director or other duly authorized employees of
the City, NYSDEC, and EPA bearing proper credentials and
identifications shall be permitted to review and copy any existing
monitoring records of any industrial user to verify compliance or
violation.
(b) When the IPP Administrator has reason to believe an industry's
discharge should be monitored in order to ensure compliance with the
provisions of this article, then at his discretion the industry in question
will be required to file one or more reports on the constituents and
characteristics of its discharge. The industrial user shall construct a
sampling manhole, install monitoring equipment, and monitor if IPP
Administrator determines such sampling point and monitoring is
required. This information to be submitted, and the methods for
collecting data, shall be at the direction of the IPP Administrator. The
City may monitor and analyze or cause to be monitored or analyzed the
industrial waste streams of any industry if the IPP Administrator has
reason to believe an industry's discharge should be monitored in order
to insure compliance with the provisions of this article. The City can
also back-charge the industry for this monitoring and analysis.
Sec. 27-46 CHARTER Sec. 27-49
C:711
Sec. 27-49. Severability.
If any provision, paragraph, word, section or article of this article is
invalidated by any court of competent jurisdiction, the remaining
provisions, paragraph, words, sections, and chapters shall not be affected
and shall continue in full force and effect.
Sec. 27-50. Conflict.
All other ordinances and parts of other ordinances inconsistent or
conflicting with any part of this article are hereby repealed to the extent of
such inconsistency or conflict.
Sec. 27-51. Emergency suspensions.
The IPP Administrator may immediately suspend a user's discharge, after
informal notice to the user, whenever such suspension is necessary to stop
an actual or threatened discharge, which reasonably appears to present or
cause an imminent or substantial endangerment to the health or welfare
of persons. The IPP Administrator may also immediately suspend a user's
discharge, after notice and opportunity to respond, that threatens to
interfere with the operation of the POTW, or which presents, or may
present, an endangerment to the environment.
Sec. 27-52. through § 27-80. (Reserved)
(1) Any user notified of a suspension of its discharge shall immediately stop
or eliminate its contribution. In the event of a user's failure to
immediately comply voluntarily with the suspension order, the IPP
Administrator may take such steps as deemed necessary, including
immediate severance of the sewer connection, to prevent or minimize
damage to the POTW, its receiving stream, or endangerment to any
individuals. The IPP Administrator may allow the user to recommence
its discharge when the user has demonstrated to the satisfaction of the
IPP Administrator that the period of endangerment has passed, unless
the termination proceedings in Section 27-42(E.6) of this chapter are
initiated against the user.
(2) A user that is responsible, in whole or in part, for any discharge
presenting imminent endangerment shall submit a detailed written
statement, describing the causes of the harmful contribution and the
measures taken to prevent any future occurrence, to the IPP
Administrator prior to the date of any show-cause or termination
hearing under § 27-42(E.6) of this chapter.
Sec. 27-49 OLEAN CODE Sec. 27-52
C:712
DIVISION 2
CONTRACTORS
Subdivision I
General Provisions
Sec. 27-81. Contractors required to present certificate of insurance
before issuance of permit.
A contractor must present a certificate of insurance showing suitable
liability insurance before a permit will be issued for construction of building
sewers, sewer extensions, or private sewage disposal.
Sec. 27-82. through Sec. 27-98. (Reserved)
Subdivision II
License
Sec. 27-99. Certificate of competency from Examining Board of
Plumbers prerequisite to issuance of license to connect with City
sewers.
The Director of Public Works shall not issue a license to anyone to connect
with City sewers unless such person has obtained and produces a certificate
of competency from the Examining Board of Plumbers.
Sec. 27-100. through Sec. 27-115. (Reserved)
Sec. 27-81 CHARTER Sec. 27-100
C:713

DIVISION 3
EXTENSIONS
Sec. 27-116. Construction of sewer extensions by City; petition of
property owners.
Sewer extensions, including individual building sewers from the public
sewer to the property line, may be constructed by the City under public
contract if, in the opinion of the Common Council, the number of properties
to be served by such extension warrants its cost. Under this arrangement
the property owner shall pay for the building sewer from the public sewer
to his residence or place of business in accordance with the requirements
of this article. Property owners may propose sewer extensions within the
incorporated City by drafting a written petition, signed by a majority of the
benefiting property owners, and filing it with the Common Council. The cost
of such extensions may be assessed to the benefited property owners in any
manner determined by the Common Council.
Sec. 27-117. Construction of sewer extensions by property owners,
builders, or developers.
If the City does not elect to construct a sewer extension under public
contract, the property owner, builder, or developer may construct the
necessary sewer extension, if such extension is approved by the Common
Council in accordance with the requirements of Section 27-118. He or
they must pay for the entire installation, including all expenses incidental
thereto. Each building sewer must be installed and inspected as previously
required and the inspection fees shall be paid. Design of sewers shall
be as specified in Section 27-118. The installation of the sewer extension
must be subject to periodic inspection by the Director and expenses for
this inspection shall be paid for by the owner, builder, or developer. The
Director's decisions shall be final in matters of quality and methods of
construction. The sewer, as constructed, must pass the exfiltration test
required in Section 27-119 before it is to be used. The cost of sewer
extension thus made shall be absorbed by the developers or the property
owners, including all building sewers. Such extension, when built, shall
become a public sewer, subject to complete control and authority of the City.
Sec. 27-118. Design of sewer extensions; plans and specifications.
(a) All extensions to the sanitary sewer system owned and maintained by
the City shall be properly designed in accordance with and in strict
conformance with all requirements of the State Department of Health.
Plans and specifications for sewer extensions shall be submitted to and
approval obtained from the Director and the State Department of
Health before construction may proceed. The design of sewers must
anticipate and allow for flows from all possible future extensions or
developments within the immediate drainage area.
Sec. 27-116 CHARTER Sec. 27-118
C:715
(b) Sewer design shall be in accordance with the following provisions. Pipe
materials shall be either extra-strength vitrified clay conforming to
ASTM Specification C-200; or reinforced concrete conforming to ASTM
Specification C-76; or Plastic Truss Pipe ASTM D-1788-62T Type I or IV
ABS material in municipal sewer pipe quality. No standard strength clay
pipe or nonreinforced concrete pipe shall be used. Minimum internal
pipe diameter shall be eight inches. Joints for each kind of pipe shall be
designed and manufactured such that "O" ring gaskets of the "snap-on"
type are employed. Gaskets shall be continuous, solid, natural, or
synthetic rubber and shall provide a positive compression seal in the
assembled joint such that the requirements of Section 27-119 are met.
Joint preparation and assembly shall be in accordance with the
manufacturer's recommendations. Wye branch fittings shall be
installed for connection to building sewers in accordance with Section
27-138. Trench widths as measured just above the crown of the pipe
shall not exceed the following:
Pipe Diameter
(inches)
Trench Width
(feet, inches)
8 3,3
10 3,6
12 3,9
14 4,0
If the trench widths are found, during field inspection, to exceed the
limits in the table in Subsection (b) of this section, the sewer pipe
shall be encased with a minimum of six inches of concrete. Pipe shall
be firmly and evenly bedded on a minimum of three inches of 1A
or 1 crushed stone (NYSDPW Specification). Pipe thickness and field
strength shall be calculated on the following criteria:
(1) Safety factor: 1.5.
(2) Load factor: 1.5.
(3) Weight of soil: 120 pounds/cubic feet.
(4) Wheel loading: 16,000 pounds.
(c) Utilizing the above information, design shall then be made as outlined
in Chapter IX of the Water Pollution Control Federation Manual of
Practice No. 9, "Design and Construction of Sanitary and Storm
Sewers."
(d) Manholes shall be constructed at all changes in slope or alignment or at
intervals not exceeding 400 linear feet. The manholes shall be
constructed with a poured 3,000 psi concrete base 12 inches thick,
steel troweled concrete or mortar bench walls and inverts, and precast
four-foot diameter concrete manhole barrel sections with concentric
tapered top section, as specified by ASTM C-478. The manhole frame
Sec. 27-118 OLEAN CODE Sec. 27-118
C:716
Sec. 27-119. Requirements of final exfiltration test to be satisfied.
Sec. 27-120. To become property of City; guarantee.
All sewer extensions constructed at the property owner's, builder's, or
developer's expense, after final approval and acceptance by the Director,
shall become the property of the City and shall thereafter be maintained
by the City. Such sewers, after their acceptance by the City, shall be
guaranteed by the owner's builder or developer against defects in materials,
or workmanship for 18 months. The guarantee shall be in a form provided
and cover shall be the standard design of the City and shall be set
with no less than two courses of brick underneath to allow for later
adjustment in elevation. All joints shall be sealed against infiltration. No
manholes shall be constructed without steps or ladder rungs.
(a) All sewers shall satisfy requirements of a final exfiltration test before
they will be approved and sewage flow accepted from them by the City.
This test consists of filling the pipe with water to provide a head of at
least five feet above the top of the pipe or five feet above groundwater,
whichever is higher, at the highest point of the pipeline under test, and
then measuring the loss of water from the line by the amount which
must be added to maintain the original level. In this test, the line must
remain filled with water for at least 24 hours prior to the taking of
measurements. Exfiltration shall be measured by the drop of water level
in a standpipe with closed bottom end, or in one of the sewer manholes
available for convenient measuring.
(b) When a standpipe and plug arrangement is used in the upper manhole
of a line under test, there must be some positive method of releasing
entrapped air in the sewer prior to taking measurements. The test
length intervals for either type of test shall be as ordered or approved
but in no event shall they exceed 1,000 feet. In the case of sewers laid
on steep grades, the length of line to be tested by exfiltration at any one
time may be limited by the maximum allowable internal pressure on the
pipe and joints at the lower end of the line. The test period, wherein the
measurements are taken, shall not be less than two hours in either type
of test.
(c) The total leakage of any section tested shall not exceed the rate of 100
gallons per mile of pipe per 24 hours per inch of nominal pipe diameter.
For purposes of determining the maximum allowable leakage, manholes
shall be considered as sections of forty-eight-inch-diameter pipe, five
feet long. The equivalent leakage allowance shall be 4.5 gallons per
manhole per 24 hours, for forty-eight-inch-diameter manholes. If
leakage exceeds the specified amount, the necessary repairs or
replacements required shall be made to permanently reduce the
leakage to within the specified limit, and the test shall be repeated until
the leakage requirement is met.
Sec. 27-118 CHARTER Sec. 27-120
C:717
for by the City. At the sole discretion of the City, a completion bond or
certificate check may be demanded as part of the guarantee.
Sec. 27-121. through Sec. 27-135. (Reserved)
Sec. 27-120 OLEAN CODE Sec. 27-121
C:718
DIVISION 4
BUILDING SEWERS AND CONNECTIONS
Sec. 27-136. Building sewer permit — Required.
It shall be unlawful for any person to uncover, make any connections with or
opening into, use, alter, or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof
without first obtaining a written permit from the Director.
Sec. 27-137. Same — Classes; application; fees.
There shall be two classes of building sewer permits: for residential and
small commercial service, and for service to large commercial and
industrial establishments. In either case, the owner or his agent shall make
application on a special form furnished by the City. The permit application
shall be supplemented by any plans, specifications, or other information
considered pertinent in the judgment of the Director. In cases where the
building sewer will connect to an outlet sewer, a tap-in fee of $100 for a
residential and small commercial sewer permit shall be paid to the Director
or his designated representative at the time of application. For purposes of
this division, a small commercial service shall be a service not reasonably
expected to exceed 7,500 cubic feet per three months of discharge into
the sewer system. A maximum of four residential apartment units may
be connected to a single retention sewer. No fee shall be charged for
connection to a petition sewer. The tap-in fee to outlet sewers for large
commercial and industrial establishments shall be $350. The Director shall
determine the class of applicants.
Sec. 27-138. Separate and independent building sewers to be
provided.
A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every
building, except where one building stands at the rear of another on an
interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to the
rear building through an adjoining alley, court, yard, or driveway. In such
case, the building sewer from the front building may be extended to the rear
building and the whole considered as one building sewer. Where building
sewers are to serve multiple dwelling structures, there shall be provided at
least one separate building sewer for each group of four living units, the
size and capacity of the same to meet requirements of the New York State
Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code applicable to plumbing.
Sec. 27-139. Existing building sewers.
Existing building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only
when there are found, on examination and test by the inspector, to meet all
requirements of this division.
Sec. 27-136 CHARTER Sec. 27-140
C:719
Sec. 27-140. Tapping of public sewers.
No tapping of the public sewer shall be permitted except four-inch branch
into an eight-inch sewer and six-inch branch into a ten-inch or larger sewer,
and in each specific case only by permission of the Director. Making of the
tap shall be under the supervision of the Director.
Sec. 27-141. Building sewer pipe specifications.
The building sewer shall be schedule 40 or heavier plastic pipe (PVC or
ABS), service-weight cast iron pipe or extra-heavy cast iron pipe. Joints
shall be tight and waterproof. Building sewer pipe of cast iron shall have a
maximum length of 10 feet between joints, or shall meet requirements of
the State Building Construction Code applicable to plumbing.
Sec. 27-142. Size and slope of building sewers.
The size and slope of the building sewer shall be subject to the approval of
the inspector, but in no event shall the diameter be less than four inches,
nor shall the slope of the pipe be less than 1/4 inch per foot.
Sec. 27-143. Installation of building sewers.
Whenever possible the building sewer shall be brought to the building at
an elevation below the basement floor. No building sewer shall be laid
parallel to and within three feet of any bearing wall, which might thereby
be weakened. The depth shall be sufficient to afford protection from frost,
but in no event shall be less than three feet. The building sewer shall be
laid at uniform grade and in straight alignment insofar as possible. Changes
in direction shall be made only with properly curved pipe and fittings. The
ends of building sewers which are not connected to the building drain of
the structure for any reason shall be sealed against infiltration by a suitable
stopper, plug, or other approved means.
Sec. 27-144. Procedure where building drains are too low to permit
gravity flow to public sewers.
In all buildings in which any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow
to the public sewer, sewage or industrial wastes carried by such drain shall
be lifted by approved mechanical means and discharged to the building
sewer.
Sec. 27-145. Excavations.
(a) All excavations required for the installation of a building sewer shall be
open trench work unless otherwise approved by the inspector. Pipe
laying and backfill shall be performed in accordance with Sections 3
through 6 of ASTM Specification C12, except that the trench width
measured at the top of the installed pipe shall not exceed 24 inches. All
trench bottoms shall be shaped to cradle the pipe. Selected and
rammed backfill at sides of pipe and covering pipe shall be required.
Sec. 27-140 OLEAN CODE Sec. 27-145
C:720
Sec. 27-146. Joints and connections.
Sec. 27-147. Connection of building sewers into existing public
sewers; permit for street openings; owners to bear costs and
expense.
The connection of the building sewer into an existing public sewer shall be
made at the public sewer. Trench excavation proposed to be made in any
portion of the public street or City-controlled right-of-way, including areas
of sidewalk, "subway" or berm, roadway, paved or unpaved, shall not be
laid out, commenced nor performed in any degree until a specific permit for
street opening shall have been obtained from the Director. Persons, firms
or corporations having met the requirements of the City as to capability
to perform the work, filing of insurance bonds, proven responsibility, and
in good standing for payment of accounts due the City, will be eligible
for issuance of such permit. All regulations of the City in regard to street
openings shall apply. All costs and expenses incident to the installation and
connection of the entire length of building sewer shall be borne by the
owner. The owner shall indemnify the City from any loss or damage that
(b) All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately
guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from
hazards. Streets, sidewalks, parkways, and other public property
disturbed in the course of work shall be restored in a manner
satisfactory to the City.
(a) All joints and connections shall be made gastight and watertight. No
cement joints will be permitted.
(b) Cast iron pipe joints shall be firmly packed with oakum or hemp and
filled with molten lead not less than one-inch deep. Lead shall be run in
one pouring and caulked tight. No paint, varnish, or other coatings shall
be permitted on the jointing material until after the joint has been
tested and approved. The transition joint between cast iron pipe and
other pipe material shall be made with special adaptors and joint
materials approved by the inspector.
(c) Premolded gasket joints for hub and plain end cast iron pipe may be
used if approved by the inspector, and shall be a neoprene compressiontype
gasket which provides a positive double seal in the assembled
joint. The gasket shall be a premolded, one-piece unit, designed for
jointing the cast iron hub and plain end soil pipe and fittings. The
assembled joint shall be sealed by compression of the gasket between
the exterior surface of the spigot and the interior surface of the hub.
The joint shall be assembled following the manufacturer's
recommendations using acceptable lubricant and special pipe-coupling
tools designed for that purpose. The plain spigot end shall be forced
into the hub end of the pipe for the full depth of the hub itself. Lubricant
shall be a bland, flax-base, nontoxic material and shall not chemically
attack the gasket materials.
Sec. 27-145 CHARTER Sec. 27-147
C:721
may directly or indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the building
sewer. The method of connection of the building sewer to the public sewer
will be dependent upon the type of pipe material used and in all cases shall
be approved by the Plumbing and Building Inspector.
Sec. 27-148. Inspections.
Sec. 27-149. Procedure when frequent maintenance of building
sewers is anticipated.
When any building sewer is to serve a school, hospital, or similar institution
or public building, or is to serve a complex of industrial or commercial
buildings, or which, in the opinion of the inspector, will receive sewage or
industrial wastes of such volume or character that frequent maintenance
of such building sewer is anticipated, then such building sewer shall be
connected to the public sewer through a manhole. The inspector shall
determine if and where this type of connection to the public sewer is
required. Connections to existing manholes shall be made as directed by
the inspector. If required, a new manhole shall be installed in the public
sewer pursuant to Section 27-118, and the building sewer connection made
thereto as directed by the inspector.
Sec. 27-150. through Sec. 27-165. (Reserved)
(a) The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the inspector
when the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the
public sewer. The connection shall be made under the supervision of the
inspector or his representative.
(b) When trenches are opened for the laying of building sewer pipes, such
trenches shall be inspected by the inspector before the trenches are
filled. The person performing such work shall notify the inspector when
the installation of the building sewer is completed. The filling of a
trench before inspection is made will subject the person to whom a
permit is issued to a penalty of $25 for each offense.
Sec. 27-147 OLEAN CODE Sec. 27-150
C:722
DIVISION 5
RATES AND CHARGES
Sec. 27-166. Normal sewage service charges.
All persons discharging or depositing wastes into the public sewers shall
pay a sewer service charge proportional to the liquid volume of waste so
deposited, which charge shall be collected as a sewer rent.
Sec. 27-167. Surcharge for abnormal sewage.
All persons discharging or depositing wastes with concentrations in excess
of the pollutant concentrations in normal sewage and depositing inflow per
Sec. 27-43 shall pay a surcharge. This surcharge shall be 1.5 times the rate
set for normal sewage as set per Sec. 27-180.
Sec. 27-168. Segmenting the POTW.
The service area of the POTW may be segmented to assist in a fair
distribution of user charges, especially if there is a pump station serving a
segment.
Sec. 27-169. Measurement of flow.
The volume of flow to be used in computing sewer service charges and
abnormal sewage surcharges shall be based upon metered water
consumption as shown on the records of meter readings maintained by the
City of Olean Water Department. In the event that a person discharging
wastes into the POTW produces evidence to the Superintendent
demonstrating that a substantial portion of the total amount of metered
water does not reach the POTW, then the Superintendent shall either
establish a percentage of the total metered water to be used as a basis for
such computations, or direct the installation of appropriate flow measuring
(and totalizing) devices to measure and record the actual amount of flow
into the POTW. In the event that a person discharging wastes into the
POTW procures all or part of his water supply from unmetered sources,
the Superintendent shall either direct the installation of water meters on
the other sources of water supply, or direct the installation of appropriate
flow measuring devices to measure and record the actual amount of flow
into the POTW. Any water meters and/or flow measuring devices installed
pursuant to this section shall be of a type and design acceptable to the
Superintendent and shall be installed, maintained, and periodically tested
as required by the Superintendent, at the owner's expense. All such meters
and/or flow measuring devices shall be subject to periodic inspection,
testing, and reading by the Superintendent. Any person discharging wastes
into the POTW may install a flow measuring device at his option, of the type,
design, installation, and maintenance standards of the Superintendent, at
the owner's expense.
Sec. 27-166 CHARTER Sec. 27-170
C:723
Sec. 27-170. Billing period.
The billing period shall be monthly for industrial and nonindustrial users.
Sec. 27-171. Pretreatment program costs.
The additional charges and fees associated with the operation of the
pretreatment program shall be assessed the user, and include:
Sec. 27-172. Charges for trucked and hauled wastes.
The charge for treatment and disposal of trucked or hauled waste which
has been introduced into the POTW shall be as established by the City of
Olean Council. The manner of determining the volume dumped shall be at
the discretion of the Superintendent.
Sec. 27-173. Capital recovery.
The City of Olean may institute an equitable procedure for recovering the
costs of any capital improvements of those parts of the POTW which collect,
pump, treat, and dispose of industrial wastewaters from those persons
discharging such wastewaters into the POTW.
Sec. 27-174. Collection of charges.
Provisions of Sec. 27-44 of this article relating to the collection of penalties
shall apply to the collection of sewer service charges and abnormal sewage
service surcharges, unless where otherwise provided by application of the
Sewer Rent Law by City of Olean.
Sec. 27-175. Fiscal year for system.
The POTW shall be operated on the basis of a fiscal year commencing on
the first day of June and ending on the 31st day of May.
(1) Reimbursement of costs of setting up and operating the pretreatment
program.
(2) Issuing permits.
(3) Monitoring, inspections, and surveillance procedures.
(4) Costs of equipment and supplies.
(5) Reviewing accidental discharge procedures.
(6) Construction inspections.
(7) Filing appeals.
(8) Application for consistent removal status as outlined in 40 CFR 403.
(9) Other reasonable expenses to carry out the program to satisfy the
requirements of this article, the NYSDEC, and the federal government.
Sec. 27-170 OLEAN CODE Sec. 27-176
C:724
Sec. 27-176. Impact fees.
The City of Olean Council shall have the authority to impose impact fees on
new development, which development may:
Sec. 27-177. Use of revenues.
Revenues derived from user charges and associated penalties, and impact
fees, shall be credited to a special fund called the Sewer Fund of the City
of Olean. Monies in this fund shall be used exclusively for the following
functions:
Sec. 27-178. Records and accounts.
Sec. 27-179. Sewer rentals — Structure divisions.
(1) Cause enlargement of the service area of the POTW.
(2) Cause increased hydraulic and/or treatment demands on the POTW.
(1) For the payment of the operation and maintenance, including repair
and replacement costs of the City of Olean POTW;
(2) For the discovery and correction of inflow and infiltration;
(3) For the payment of interest on and the amortization of or payment of
indebtedness which has been or shall be incurred for the construction
or extension of the City of Olean POTW;
(4) For the extension, enlargement, replacement of, and/or additions to the
City of Olean POTW, including any necessary appurtenances.
(a) The City of Olean shall maintain and keep proper books of records and
accounts for the POTW, separate from all other records and accounts, in
which shall be made full and correct entries of all transactions relating
to the POTW. The City of Olean will cause an annual audit of such books
of record and account for the preceding fiscal year to be made by a
recognized independent certified public accountant, and will supply
such audit report to authorized officials, and the public, on request.
(b) In conjunction with the audit, there shall be an annual review of the
sewer charge system to determine if it is adequate to meet
expenditures for all programs for the coming year.
(c) Classification of old and new industrial users should also be reviewed
annually.
(d) The City of Olean shall maintain and carry insurance on all physical
properties of the POTW, of the kinds and in the amounts normally
carried by public utility companies and municipalities engaged in the
operation of sewage disposal systems. All moneys received for losses
under any such insurance policies shall be applied solely to the
replacement and restoration of the property damaged or destroyed.
Sec. 27-176 CHARTER Sec. 27-179
C:725
Sec. 27-180. Rates.
Sec. 27-181. Same — Billing and collection.
Sec. 27-182. through Sec. 27-185. (Reserved)
(a) There is hereby imposed a schedule of sewer rentals.
(b) For the purpose of fixing and imposing the collection of sewer rentals,
all structures using that part of the sewer system of the City located
within its boundaries are divided into three groups as follows:
(1) Group I shall consist of residence dwellings occupied by not more
than two family units. Group I shall also include all church
structures.
(2) Group II shall include all commercial and retail establishments and
all commercial establishments and structures wherein living
quarters are maintained in the same structure. Group II shall also
include all apartments consisting of more than two residence units
and all hospitals, schools and fraternal and social groups and public
buildings.
(3) Group III shall consist of all industrial and manufacturing
structures or units.
(a) For sewer rates provided within the boundaries of the City, the rates
shall from time to time be amended by the Common Council with the
establishment of a resolution: Prior to passage of any resolution
modifying sewer rates, the Council shall hold a public hearing.
(b) For sewer services provided outside the City of Olean, the rates shall
from time to time be amended by the Common Council with the
establishment of a resolution.
(a) The Department of Public Works is hereby authorized to continue the
monthly billing of all units included in Groups I, II and III.
(b) Sewer rents shall be billed and collected pursuant to the provisions of
the Olean Code of Local Laws, Ch. LL7, Art. III, Div. 3.
Sec. 27-179 OLEAN CODE Sec. 27-182
C:726
DIVISION 6
DISCHARGE LIMITATIONS
Sec. 27-186. Unlawful to discharge stormwater, etc., to sanitary
sewers.
Sec. 27-187. Discharge of certain waters and wastes to public
sewers prohibited.
(a) Stormwater and all others of unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to
such sewers as are specifically designated as storm sewers, and
approved by the Director. Industrial cooling water or unpolluted
process waters may be discharged, upon approval of the Director, to a
storm sewer but only in accordance with SPDES requirements and any
other state or federal regulation.
(b) No industry shall increase the discharge of clean process water,
noncontact water, or in any way dilute such industry's discharge as a
method of achieving compliance with any pollutant discharge limits.
Each existing or new industry shall take appropriate steps to provide
protection from any accidental discharge or slug discharge of
prohibited pollutants into the sewage works. Such appropriate steps
may include the development, submission, and approval of the IPP
Administrator of a detailed slug control plan. Any measure taken shall
be at the owner's expense.
(c) Plans, specifications, and any other pertinent information relating to
proposed facilities shall be submitted for the approval of the IPP
Administrator, and no construction of such facilities shall be
commenced until such approvals are obtained in writing. Such
approvals, however, shall not relieve the user of the responsibility of
meeting any required effluent limitations.
(d) In all cases of accidental or slug discharges, it is the responsibility of
the industry to immediately notify the POTW of the discharge. The
notification shall include location of discharge, type of waste,
concentration and volume and corrective actions. All employees shall
be aware of the need to inform the POTW and shall be advised of the
emergency notification procedures. Within one week following the
accidental discharge, the industry shall submit to the IPP Administrator
a detailed written report describing the cause of the discharge and
measures to be taken by the industry to prevent future occurrences.
(a) Generally. Except as provided in this division, it shall be unlawful for
any person to discharge, or cause to be discharged any of the following
described waters or wastes within the POTW.
(b) Prohibited.
(1) Any gasoline, benzine, naphtha, fuel oil or mineral oil, or other
flammable or explosive liquid, solid, or gas.
Sec. 27-186 CHARTER Sec. 27-187
C:727
(2) Any noxious or malodorous gas such as hydrogen sulfide, sulphur
dioxide, or nitrous oxide, or other substance, which either singly or
by interaction with other wastes, is capable of creating a public
nuisance or hazard to life or of preventing entry into sewers for
their maintenance and repair.
(3) Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. The installation
and operation of any garbage grinder equipped with a motor of 3/4
horsepower or greater shall be subject to the review and approval
of the inspector.
(4) Any ashes, cinder, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags,
feathers, tar, plastic, cardboard, wood, paunch manure, hair and
fleshings, entrails, lime slurry, lime, beer or distillery slops, whey,
chemical residues, paint residues, cannery waste, bulk solids or
any other substance, solid, viscous or in any other form, capable of
causing obstruction to the flow of the sewers, or other interference
with the proper operation of the sewage works.
(5) Any stormwater, roof drains, spring water, cistern or tank overflow,
or the contents of any privy vault, septic tank or cesspool, or the
discharge or effluent from any air conditioning machine or
refrigeration unit.
(6) Any waste considered as a hazardous waste under 40 CFR 261.
(7) Any 1, 1, 1-Trichloroethane above background concentrations; any
pollutant which creates a fire or explosion in the POTW, including,
but not limited to, waste streams with a closed-cup flashpoint of
less than 140° F. or 60° C. using the test method specified in 40
CFR 261.21; pollutants which result in the presence of toxic gases,
vapors or fumes within the POTW in a quantity that might cause
acute worker health and safety problems; petroleum oil,
nonbiodegradable cutting oil, or products of mineral oil origin in
amounts that will cause interference or pass through.
(8) Any trucked or hauled pollutants, except that discharge points
designated by the City; the discharge of any pollutant that causes
pass through; oxygen-demanding pollutants [such as biochemical
oxygen demand (BOD)], released in a discharge at a flow rate or
pollutant concentration that will cause interference.
(9) Solid or viscous pollutants in amounts which will cause obstruction
to the flow in the POTW resulting in interference.
(10) Any pollutant, including oxygen-demanding pollutants (BOD, etc.),
released in a discharge at a flow rate and/or pollutant
concentration which will cause interference with the POTW.
(11) Heat in amounts which will inhibit biological activity in the POTW
resulting in interference, but in no case heat in such quantities that
the temperature at the POTW treatment plant exceeds 40° C. (104°
Sec. 27-187 OLEAN CODE Sec. 27-187
C:728
F.) unless the approval authority, upon request of the POTW,
approves alternate temperature limits.
(12) Petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oil, or products of mineral
oil origin in amounts that will cause interference or pass-through.
(13) Any wastewater or similar by-product from high-volume fracking,
oil drilling, or natural gas drilling operations.
(c) Limited.
(1) Any waters or wastes, acid and alkaline in reaction, having
corrosive properties capable of causing damage or hazard to
structures, equipment and personnel of the sewage works. Free
acids and alkalies must be neutralized at all times within a
permissible pH range of 6.0 to 9.0.
(2) Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or concentration
as may exceed limits established by the IPP Administrator in
compliance with applicable state or federal regulations.
(3) Any liquid or vapor which would cause the influent to the treatment
plant to have a temperature higher than 104° F.
(4) Any waters or wastes which contain grease or oil or other
substance that will solidify or become discernibly viscous at
temperatures between 32° F. and 104° F.
(5) Any waters or wastes containing fats, wax, grease or oils, whether
emulsified or not, exceeding an average of 50 mg/l n-hexane
extractable soluble matter.
(6) No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any waters or
waste containing a toxic or poisonous substance, a high chlorine
demand or suspended solids in sufficient quantity to injure or
interfere with any sewage conveyance or treatment process,
constitute a hazard to humans or animals or create any hazard in
the receiving waters or the effluent of the sewage treatment plant.
Such toxic substances shall be limited to the average
concentrations listed hereinafter in the sewage as it is discharged
from the industry.
Limits of Toxic Substances in
Sewage
24-Hour Composite
(mg/l)
Chromium (hexavalent) 1.5
Chromium (total) 4.0
Copper (total) 2.1
Cadmium (total) 1.0
Cyanide (amenable) 0.2
Zinc (total) 3.5
Sec. 27-187 CHARTER Sec. 27-187
C:729
Sec. 27-188. Grease, oil and sand interceptors.
Limits of Toxic Substances in
Sewage
24-Hour Composite
(mg/l)
Nickel (total) 0.9
Arsenic (total) 0.02
Lead (total) 5.0
Mercury (total) 0.05
Silver (total) 5.0
Trichloroethylene 1.0
(7) Upon the promulgation of the Federal Categorical Pretreatment
Standards for a particular industrial subcategory, the federal
standard, if more stringent than limitations imposed under this
division for sources in that subcategory, shall immediately
supersede the limitations imposed under this division for that
particular industrial subcategory. The IPP Administrator shall
notify all affected users of the more stringent limits and applicable
reporting requirements. The national categorical pretreatment
standards, located in 40 CFR Chapter 1, Subchapter N, Parts
405-471, are hereby incorporated into this article by reference.
(8) Any pollutant which creates a fire or explosion in the City's sewage
treatment plant, including, but not limited to, waste streams with a
closed-cup flashpoint of less than 140° F. or 60° C. using the test
method specified in 40 CFR 261.21.
(9) Except where expressly authorized to do so by an applicable
pretreatment standard or requirement, no industrial user shall
ever increase the use of process water or in any other way attempt
to dilute a discharge as a partial or complete substitute for
adequate treatment to achieve compliance with a pretreatment
standard or requirement.
(a) Information regarding the City of Olean's Fats, Oil, and Grease (FOG)
Management Program can be obtained in the Office of the Department
of Public Works or can be found online at http://www.cityofolean.org/
dpw/pdf/CeaseTheGrease.pdf.
(b) Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided when the limits in
Section 27-187 for those substances are exceeded or when, in the
opinion of the IPP Administrator, they are necessary for the proper
handling of liquid wastes containing grease in excessive amounts, or
any flammable wastes, sand, and other harmful ingredients; except that
such interceptors shall not be required for private living quarters or
dwelling units. All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved
by the IPP Administrator, and shall be located as to be readily and easily
accessible for cleaning and inspection.
Sec. 27-187 OLEAN CODE Sec. 27-188
C:730
Sec. 27-189. Admission of waters or wastes into public sewers;
preliminary treatment facilities.
Sec. 27-189.1. Notification requirements.
All categorical and noncategorical industrial users shall notify the City
immediately of all discharges that could cause problems to the City of Olean
POTW treatment plant. These discharges shall include, but not be limited
to:
(c) Grease and oil interceptors shall be constructed of impervious
materials capable of withstanding abrupt and extreme changes in
temperatures. They shall be of substantial construction, watertight, and
equipped with easily removable covers which, when bolted in place,
shall be gastight and watertight.
(d) Where installed, all grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be
maintained by the owner, at his expense, in continuously efficient
operation at all times and shall be readily accessible and open to
inspection by the Plumbing and Building Inspector at any time.
(a) The admission into the public sewers of any waters or wastes having (1)
a five-day biochemical oxygen demand concentration greater than 250
mg/l or (2) containing more than 250 mg/l of suspended solids, shall be
subject to review by the IPP Administrator.
(b) Where necessary, in the opinion of the IPP Administrator, the owner
shall provide, at his expense, such preliminary treatment as may be
necessary to (1) reduce the chlorine requirements to 20 mg/l or (2)
reduce objectionable characteristics or constituents to within the
maximum limits provided for in Section 27-187, or (3) control the
quantities and rates of discharge of such waters or wastes. Plans,
specifications, and any other pertinent information relating to proposed
preliminary treatment facilities shall be submitted for the approval of
the IPP Administrator, and no construction of such facilities shall be
commenced until such approvals are obtained in writing. Failure to
comply with one or more of the remedial procedures as required by the
IPP Administrator will constitute a major violation of this section.
(c) Where preliminary treatment or flow-equalizing facilities are provided
for any waters or wastes, they shall be maintained continuously in
satisfactory and effective operation by the owner at his expense.
(1) Slug loadings.
(2) Pollutants which create a fire or explosion hazard in the POTW.
(3) Pollutants which will cause corrosive structural damage to the POTW,
but in no case discharges with pH lower than 6.0.
(4) Solid or viscous pollutants in amounts which will cause obstruction to
the flow in the POTW resulting in interference.
Sec. 27-188 CHARTER Sec. 27-189.1
C:731
Sec. 27-189.2. Notice of violation/resampling requirement.
If sampling by an industrial user indicates a violation, the user must notify
the IPP Administrator within 24 hours of becoming aware of the violation.
The user must also resample and submit results of this resampling to the
IPP Administrator within 30 days. [Reference 40 CFR 403.12(g).]
Sec. 27-189.3. Notice of hazardous wastes discharge.
All industrial users must notify in writing the IPP Administrator, the New
York State Department of Environmental Conservation, and the United
States Environmental Protection Agency of any discharge that would be
considered a hazardous waste if disposed of in a different manner.
[Reference 40 CFR 403.12(p).]
Sec. 27-190. Installation of control manholes.
When required by the IPP Administrator, the owner of any property served
by a building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable control
manhole in the building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling and
measurement of the wastes. Such manhole, when required, shall be
accessibly and safely located and shall be constructed in accordance with
plans approved by the IPP Administrator. The manhole shall be installed by
the owner at his expense, and shall be maintained by him so as to be safe
and accessible at all times.
Sec. 27-191. Measurements, tests and analyses of the
characteristics of waters and wastes.
All measurements, tests and analyses of the characteristics of waters and
wastes to which reference is made in Sections 27-187 and 27-189 shall be
determined in accordance with analytical methods as published in 40 CFR
Part 136, titled "Guidelines Establishing Test Procedures for the Analysis of
Pollutants," upon suitable samples taken at the control manhole provided
for in Section 27-190. In the event that no special manhole has been
required, the control manhole shall be considered to be the nearest
downstream manhole in the public sewer to the point at which the building
sewer is connected.
(5) Any pollutant, including oxygen demanding pollutants (BOD, etc.),
released in a discharge at a flow rate and/or pollutant concentration
which will cause interference with the POTW.
(6) Heat in amounts which will inhibit biological activity in the POTW
resulting in interference, but in no case heat in such quantities that the
temperature at the POTW treatment plant exceeds 40° C. (104° F.).
Sec. 27-189.1 OLEAN CODE Sec. 27-192
C:732
Sec. 27-192. Division prevents special agreements or arrangements
relative to acceptance of certain wastes for treatment.
No special agreement or arrangement between the City and any industrial
concern for treating an industrial waste of unusual strength or character
shall be allowed if the special agreement results in a violation of applicable
pretreatment standards or requirements.
Sec. 27-193. When standards apply; laboratory methods; alternate
methods; sampling, compliance schedules and reports.
(a) All of the preceding standards (noncategorical waste standards) in this
division are to apply at the point where the industrial wastes are
discharged into the POTW and any chemical or mechanical corrective
treatment required must be accomplished to practical completion
before the wastes reach that point. The laboratory methods used in the
examination of all industrial wastes shall be those set forth in the latest
edition of analytical methods as published in 40 CFR 136 titled
"Guidelines Establishing Test Procedures for the Analysis of Pollutants."
The frequency and duration of the sampling of any industrial waste
shall be determined by the IPP Administrator based upon the
contaminants with respect to its harmfulness to the treatment facility or
receiving stream but no less frequently than semiannually. The IPP
Administrator shall have authority to require monitoring in excess of 24
hours for the purpose of measuring flow. Variations from this schedule
would be at the discretion of the IPP Administrator. A report outlining
the nature and concentration of pollutants shall be submitted to the IPP
Administrator no more than 30 days after any required sampling is
completed. In the case of an industry which is or would be subject to a
categorical pretreatment standard, a baseline monitoring report shall
be submitted within 180 days after the effective date of the standard. In
the case of an industry that is not yet discharging categorical waste to
the POTW and is subject to a categorical pretreatment standard, a
baseline monitoring report will be submitted to the IPP Administrator at
least 90 days prior to the first discharge. This information shall at least
include identifying information, permits, description of operations, flow
measurements, pollutant measurements certification and a compliance
schedule if necessary. Baseline monitoring reports must contain a
statement reviewed by an authorized representative of the IU and
certified by a qualified professional about the user's compliance with
applicable categorical standards. A compliance schedule shall be
established by the IPP Administrator based upon the extent of
noncompliance. A series of status reports to the City will be outlined
and target dates established for stepwise compliance.
(b) Where such industrial waste stream monitoring has been required by
the IPP Administrator to demonstrate compliance with applicable
pretreatment standards or other standards, the industry shall submit
within 90 days following the date for final compliance (or, if a new
source, following the commencement of its discharge), to the IPP
Sec. 27-192 CHARTER Sec. 27-193
C:733
Administrator, a report that contains flow and pollutant measurements,
a certification of whether pretreatment standards are being consistent,
and, if not, a description of needed additional O&M or pretreatment.
Reports on compliance with categorical standards (ninety-day
compliance reports) must contain a statement reviewed by an
authorized representative of the IU and certified by a qualified
professional about the user's compliance with applicable categorical
standards and whether any pretreatment or operation and maintenance
(O&M) is required to attain compliance. If the industry is not meeting
the standards, the report shall outline additional pretreatment or
operations necessary to bring the industry into compliance. A
compliance schedule shall be established by the IPP Administrator
based upon the extent of noncompliance. A series of status reports
to the City will be outlined and target dates established for stepwise
compliance. Prior to any changes or construction, a review by the
IPP Administrator and written permit must be granted before any
construction is to begin. Baseline monitoring reports, ninety-day
compliance reports, and periodic compliance reports from categorical
industrial users must be signed by an appropriate official of the
categorical industrial users and shall contain such certification
statement as provided in 40 CFR 403.6(a)(2)(ii) attesting to the
integrity of the analytical data submitted.
(c) Information and data on industry obtained from reports,
questionnaires, permit applications, permits and monitoring programs
and from inspections shall be available to the public or other
governmental agency inspections without restriction unless the
industry specifically requests and is able to demonstrate to the
satisfaction of the City that the release of such information would
divulge information, processes or methods of production entitled to
protection as trade secrets of the industry. When requested by the
person furnishing a report, the portions of a report which might
disclose trade secrets or secret processes shall not be made available
for inspection by the public but shall be made available upon written
request to governmental agencies for uses related to this article, the
National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit,
State Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (SPDES) permit, and/or
the pretreatment programs; provided, however, that such portions of a
report shall be available for use by the state or any state agency in
judicial review or enforcement proceedings involving the person
furnishing the report. Wastewater constituents and characteristics will
not be recognized as confidential information. Status reports must be
submitted within 14 days of compliance milestones and upon the final
compliance date.
Sec. 27-193 OLEAN CODE Sec. 27-194
C:734
Sec. 27-194. Parameters of concern.
Class A - Halogenated Hydrocarbons
A01. Methyl Chloride
A02. Methylene Chloride
A03. Chloroform
A04. Carbon Tetrachloride
A05. Freon/Genatron
A06. Other Halomethanes
A07. 1,1,1-Trichloroethane
A08. Other Haloethanes
A09. Vinyl Fluoride
A10. Vinyl Chloride
A11. Dichloroethylene
A12. Trichloroethylene
A13. Tetrachloroethylene
A14. Chlorinated Propane
A15. Chlorinated Propene
A16. Hexachlorobutadiene
A17. Hexachlorocyclopentadiene
A18. Chlorinated Benzene
A19. Chlorinated Toluene
A20. Fluorinated Toluene
A21. Polychlorinated Biphenyl (PCB)
A22. Chlorinated Naphthalene
A23. Dechlorane (C10Cl12)
A24. Hexachlorocyclohexane (BHC)
A99. Halogenated Hydrocarbons Not Specified Above
Class B - Halogenated Organics (Other than Hydrocarbons)
B01. Phosgene
B02. Methyl Chloromethyl Ether
B03. Bis-Chloromethyl Ether
B04. Other Chloroalkyl Ethers
B05. Benzoyl Chloride
B06. Chlorothymol
B07. Chlorinated Phenol
B08. Chlorinated Cresols or Xylenols
Sec. 27-194 CHARTER Sec. 27-194
C:735
Class B - Halogenated Organics (Other than Hydrocarbons)
B09. Chlorendic Acid
B10. Chloroaryl Ethers
B11. Dichlorophene or Hexachlorophene
B12. Chlorinated Aniline (Including Methylene Bis)(2-Chloroaniline)
B13. Dichlorobenzidine
B14. Chlorinated Diphenyl Oxide
B15. Chlorinated Toluidine
B16. Kepone (C10Cl10O)
B17. Dichlorovinyl Sulfonyl Pyridine
B18. Chloropicrin
B19. Trichloromethyl Thio-Phthalimide
B20. Trichloro-Propylsulfonyl Pyridine
B21. Tetrachloro-Methysulfonyl Pyridine
B22. Tetrachloro-Isopthalonitrile
B99. Halogenated Organics Not Specified Above
Class C - Pesticides (Includes Herbicides, Algaecides, Biocides,
Slimicides and Mildewcides)
C01. Aldrin/Dieldrin
C02. Chlordane and Metabolites
C03. DDT and Metabolites
C04. Endosulfan/Thiodan and Metabolites
C05. Endrin and Metabolites
C06. Heptachlor and Metabolites
C07. Malathion
C08. Methoxychlor
C09. Parathion
C10. Toxaphene
C11. Sevin
C12. Kelthane
C13. Diazinon
C14. Dithane
C15. Carbaryl
C16. Silvex
C17. Dithiocarbamates
C18. Maneb
Sec. 27-194 OLEAN CODE Sec. 27-194
C:736
Class C - Pesticides (Includes Herbicides, Algaecides, Biocides,
Slimicides and Mildewcides)
C19. Dioxathion
C20. Tandex/Karbutilate
C21. Carbofurans
C22. Pentac
C23. Folpet
C24. Dichlone
C25. Rotenone
C26. Lindane/Isotox
C27. Simazine
C28. Methoprene
C99. Pesticides Not Specified Above
Class D - Aromatic Hydrocarbons
D01. Benzene
D02. Toluene
D03. Xylene
D04. Biphenyl
D05. Naphthalene
D06. Ethylbenzene
D07. Styrene
D08. Acenaphthene
D09. Fluoranthene
D99. Aromatic Hydrocarbons Not Specified Above
Class E - Tars
E01. Coal Tar
E02. Petroleum Tar
E99. Tars Not Specified Above
Class F - Substituted Aromatics (Other than Hydrocarbons and
Non-Haglogenated)
F01. Phenol, Cresol or Xylenol
F02. Catechol, Resorcinol, or Hydroquinone
F03. Nitrophenols
F04. Nitrobenzenes
F05. Nitrotoluenes
F06. Aniline
Sec. 27-194 CHARTER Sec. 27-194
C:737
Class F - Substituted Aromatics (Other than Hydrocarbons and
Non-Haglogenated)
F07. Toluidines
F08. Nitroanilines
F09. Nitroanisole
F10. Toluene Diisocyanate
F11. Dimethylaminoazobenzene
F12. Benzoic Acid (and Benzoate Salts)
F13. Phthalic, Isophthalic or Terephthalic Acid
F14. Phthalic Anhydride
F15. Phthalate Esters
F16. Phenoxyacetic Acid
F17. Phenylphenols
F18. Nitrobiphenyls
F19. Aminobiphenyls (Including Benzidine)
F20. Diphenylhydrazine
F21. Naphthylamines
F22. Carbazole
F23. Acetylaminofluorene
F24. Dyes and Organic Pigments
F25. Pyridine
F99. Substituted Aromatics Not Specified Above
Class G - Miscellaneous
G01. Asbestos
G02. Acrolein
G03. Acrylonitrile
G04. Isophorone
G05. Nitrosamines
G06. Ethyleneimine
G07. Propiolactone
G08. Nitrosodimethylamine
G09. Dimethylhydrazine
G10. Maleic Anhydride
G11. Methyl Isocyanate
G12. Epoxides
G13. Nitrofurans
Sec. 27-194 OLEAN CODE Sec. 27-194
C:738
Class G - Miscellaneous
G14. Cyanide
Class M - Metals and Their Compounds
M01. Antimony
M02. Arsenic
M03. Beryllium
M04. Cadmium
M05. Chromium
M06. Copper
M07. Lead
M08. Mercury
M09. Nickel
M10. Selenium
M11. Silver
M12. Thallium
M13. Zinc
M99. Metals Not Specified Above
Sec. 27-195. through Sec. 27-210. (Reserved)
Sec. 27-194 CHARTER Sec. 27-195
C:739

ARTICLE IV
CROSS-CONNECTION CONTROL
Sec. 27-211. Definitions. [Res. No. 129-92, § 2, 8-25-1992]
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:
ACCEPTABLE BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICE — An acceptable
reduced pressure zone device or double check valve assembly as used to
contain potential contamination within a facility. In order for the reduced
pressure zone device or the double check valve assembly to be acceptable,
it must be listed on the most current version of the state department of
health list of acceptable devices.
AESTHETICALLY OBJECTIONABLE FACILITY — A facility in which
substances are present which, if introduced into the public water supply
system, could be a nuisance to other water customers but would not
adversely affect human health. Typical examples of such substances are:
food-grade dyes, hot water, stagnant water from fire lines in which no
chemical additives are used, etc.
APPROVED — Accepted by the director of public works as meeting an
applicable specification stated or cited in this article, or as suitable for the
proposed use.
AUXILIARY WATER SUPPLY — Any water supply on or available to the
premises other than the approved public water supply. These auxiliary
waters may include water from another purveyor's public potable water
supply or any natural source such as a well, spring, river, stream, harbor,
etc., or used waters. These waters may be contaminated or they may be
objectionable and constitute an unacceptable water source over which the
water purveyor does not have sanitary control.
BACKFLOW — A flow condition induced by a differential in pressure that
causes the flow of water or other liquids and/or gases into the distribution
pipes of the supply system any source other than its intended source.
CERTIFIED TESTER — That individual or firm approved to accomplish the
necessary inspections and operational tests of backflow prevention devices.
CONTAMINATION — The presence in water of a substance that tends to
degrade its quality.
CUSTOMER — A water user served by the supply system.
CUSTOMER'S WATER SYSTEM — The piping used to convey water supplied
by the City supply system throughout a customer's facility. The customer's
water system shall include all those parts of the piping beyond the control
point of the customer's service. The control point is either the curb valve or
the main valve located in the public right-of-way that isolates the customer's
facilities from the city distribution system.
Sec. 27-211 CHARTER Sec. 27-211
C:741
DEGREE OF HAZARD — Whether a facility is rated as hazardous,
aesthetically objectionable or nonhazardous.
DIRECTOR — The director of public works.
DOUBLE CHECK VALVE ASSEMBLY, ACCEPTABLE — An assembly
composed of two single, independently acting check valves, including
tightly closing shutoff valves located at each end of the assembly and
suitable connections for testing the water tightness of each check valve.
HAZARDOUS FACILITY — Is one in which substances may be present which
if introduced into the public water system would or may endanger or have
an adverse effect on the health of other water customers. Typical examples
are laboratories, sewage treatment plants, chemical plants, hospitals and
mortuaries.
NONHAZARDOUS FACILITY — Is one which does not require the
installation of an acceptable backflow prevention device.
PUBLIC WATER SUPPLY SYSTEM — The city system including the source,
treatment works, transmission mains, distribution system and storage
facilities. This includes the distribution system up to its connection with the
customer's water system.
REDUCED PRESSURE ZONE DEVICE, ACCEPTABLE — A device containing
a minimum of two independently acting check valves, together with an
automatically operated pressure differential relief valve located between
two check valves. During the normal flow and at the cessation of normal
flow the pressure between these two checks shall be less than the upstream
(supply) pressure. In case of leakage of either check valve, the differential
relief valve, by discharging to the atmosphere, shall operate to maintain
the pressure. The unit must include tightly closing shutoff valves located at
each end of the device, and each device shall be fitted with properly located
test cocks.
Sec. 27-212. Purpose. [Res. No. 129-92, § 1, 8-25-1992]
The purpose of this article is to:
Sec. 27-213. Protection of distribution system from contamination;
responsibility of director of public works. [Res. No. 129-92, § 1.2,
8-25-1992]
The director of public works shall be responsible for the protection of
the city distribution system from contamination due to the backflow of
(1) Protect the public potable water supply of the city from the possibility
of contamination by isolating within its customers' internal distribution
systems or its customers' private water systems such contaminations or
pollutants which could backflow into the public water supply system;
and
(2) To comply with the requirements of the New York State Sanitary Code
§ 5-1.31.
Sec. 27-211 OLEAN CODE Sec. 27-213
C:742
contaminants through the water service connection. If, in the judgment
of the director, an acceptable backflow prevention device is required at
the city's water service connection to any customer's premises for the
safety of the water system, the director shall give notice in writing to
the customer to install such an acceptable backflow prevention device at
each service connection to the premises. The customer shall immediately
install such approved device or devices at the customer's own expense; and
failure, refusal or inability on the part of the customer to install the device
or devices immediately shall constitute a ground for discontinuing water
service to the premises until such device or devices have been properly
installed.
Sec. 27-214. Installation of backflow prevention devices. [Res. No.
129-92, § 3, 8-25-1992]
(a) The customer's water system shall be open for inspection at all
reasonable times to authorized representatives of the city.
(b) The director shall rate a customer's water system according to its
degree of hazard to the public water supply system.
(c) An acceptable backflow prevention device shall be installed on each
service line to a customer's water system at or near the property line or
immediately inside the building being served, but in all cases before the
first branch line leading off the service line, as follows:
(1) Whenever a customer's water system is rated hazardous, an
acceptable reduced pressure zone device shall be installed.
(2) Whenever a customer's water system is rated aesthetically
objectionable, as a minimum, an acceptable double check valve
assembly shall be installed.
(d) The design of the installation of an acceptable backflow prevention
device must be prepared in accordance with state laws and regulations.
The design must be approved by the director and all agencies required
by the applicable state laws and regulations.
(e) It shall be the duty of the customer at any premises where backflow
prevention devices are installed to have certified inspections and
operational tests made at least once a year. In those instances where
the director deems the hazard to be great enough, he may require
certified inspections at more frequent intervals. Certified inspections
and operational tests must also be made when any backflow prevention
device is to be installed, repaired, overhauled or replaced, in addition to
the requirement of an annual certified inspection and operational test.
All inspections and tests shall be at the expense of the customer and
shall be performed by the device manufacturer's representative, or by a
certified tester approved by the state department of health. It shall be
the duty of the director to see that certified inspections and operational
tests of the backflow prevention devices are made. These devices shall
Sec. 27-213 CHARTER Sec. 27-214
C:743
Sec. 27-215. Protection of potable water within customers'
premises. [Res. No. 129-92, § 4, 8-25-1992]
be repaired, overhauled or replaced at the expense of the customer
whenever the devices are found to be defective. Records of such test,
repairs and overhaul shall be kept and also made available to the
director. Copies of all testing and maintenance records shall be sent to
the director immediately after the work is performed.
(f) All presently installed prevention devices which do not meet the
requirements of this section but were approved devices for the
purposes described in this section at the time of installation and which
have been properly maintained, shall, except for the inspection and
maintenance requirements under subsection (e) of this section, be
excluded from the requirements of these rules so long as the director is
assured that they will satisfactorily protect the utility system. Whenever
the existing device is moved from the present location or requires more
than minimum maintenance, or the director deems it constitutes a
hazard to health, the unit shall be replaced by a backflow prevention
device meeting the requirements of this section.
(g) No water service connection to any customer's water system shall be
installed unless the water supply is protected as required by state laws
and regulations and this article. Service of water to any premises shall
be discontinued by the city if a backflow prevention device required by
this chapter is not installed, tested or maintained, or if it is found that a
backflow prevention device has been removed or bypassed. Service will
not be restored until such conditions or defects are corrected.
(a) In accordance with Sanitary Code § 5-1.31, all users of a public water
system shall prevent cross connections between the potable water
piping system and any other piping system within the customer's
premises. The plumbing inspector shall direct customers to make
necessary modifications to internal plumbing systems whenever
protection of potability of water within the premises against water
quality degradation is required.
(b) Where a residential customer maintains an auxiliary water supply in
addition to the public water supply, the two systems must not be
interconnected. Where the two systems are interconnected, the
following options will be deemed appropriate and within the
requirements of existing state laws and regulations and with this
article:
(1) Disconnection of the auxiliary water supply from the public water
supply. An inspection to determine compliance will be made
initially and at least every three years thereafter or whenever the
property is sold. The inspection may be made by the water supplier
or the local building codes inspector.
Sec. 27-214 OLEAN CODE Sec. 27-215
C:744
Sec. 27-216. Additional remedy. [Res. No. 129-92, § 6, 8-25-1992]
In addition to any other remedy provided by this article at law or in equity,
the director of public works may order disconnection of water service at the
service entrance for the affected premises.
Sec. 27-217. through Sec. 27-219. (Reserved)
(2) Installation of an acceptable reduced pressure zone (RPZ) device
on the public water supply connection.
(3) Proper abandonment of the auxiliary water supply.
(4) Sampling for the auxiliary water supply to determine quality in
accordance with New York State Sanitary Code §§ 5-1.50 and
5-1.51. Sampling frequency will be specified by the state or local
health department. Where water quality does not meet the
standards, one of the first three alternatives would apply.
Sec. 27-215 CHARTER Sec. 27-217
C:745

ARTICLE V
PLUMBING
DIVISION 1
ADMINISTRATION
Sec. 27-220. Applicability of Code. [Res. No. 40-95, 6-27-1995; Res.
No. 69-06, 6-13-2006]
The provisions of this code shall apply to plumbing, including the trade or
business of plumbing and the practices, materials and fixtures used in and
for piping, appliances and appurtenances in connection with any of the of
the following: sanitary drainage, venting systems and the public or private
water systems within, or adjacent to, any building or other structure. This
article shall apply to all work done in the city rights-of-way or when making
any connection or repair to a connection to city water, sanitary sewer lines
and storm sewers. Specifically exempt from the provisions of Division 2 of
this article are the following:
(1) A homeowner doing plumbing work in his or her owner-occupied oneand
two-family dwelling;
(2) Minor repairs to plumbing systems done by owners or bona fide
employees of owners;
(3) Work by City of Olean employees in the streets of the city. If there be
any inconsistency between this plumbing code and the Uniform Fire
Prevention and Building Code as from time to time stated, the more
stringent and restrictive standard shall govern.
Sec. 27-220 CHARTER Sec. 27-220
C:747

DIVISION 2
QUALIFICATION OF THE PLUMBING TRADE OF THE CITY OF
OLEAN
Sec. 27-221. License required. [Res. No. 40-95, 6-27-1995]
Sec. 27-222. Corporate rights. [Res. No. 40-95, 6-27-1995; Res. No.
45-96, 5-14-1996]
A domestic corporation desiring or intending to conduct the trade, business,
or calling of a plumber as an employing or master plumber, may do so
provided one or more officers of such corporation separately or in the
aggregate actually owns at least 50% of the issued and outstanding capital
stock of said corporation, and provided that each of such officers holding
such percentage of the stock is the holder of a certificate of competency of
the City of Olean. In case one or more officers of a corporation engaged in
such business shall die, the corporation may continue the business during
the time necessarily required for the administration for the estate of such
deceased officer, not exceeding two years from the granting of letters,
provided one or more surviving officers of the corporation is the holder of
a certificate of competency. Each and every member of said corporation
holding a certificate of competency shall comply with all the rules and
regulations applicable to master or employing plumbers in the City.
Each such corporation engaged in the trade business or calling of plumbing
shall register with the clerk of the City annually as a firm of employing or
master plumbers and pay such fees as may from time to time be established
by the Common Council by resolution.
Sec. 27-223. Application for license. [Res. No. 40-95, 6-27-1995]
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of plumbing or
to install, alter or repair any plumbing system, (except repair of system in
the personal residence of person doing the work) in the City, or to display
a sign or give other notice setting forth or intending to imply that he/
she is engaged in the business of plumbing, unless he/she has obtained a
certificate of competency as a master plumber after examination, and has
duly registered said certificate and received a certificate or registry and
metal sign from the City.
Sec. 27-224. Examination requirements. [Res. No. 17-99,
2-23-1999; Res. No. 91-02, 9-10-1902; Res. No. 44-08, 5-27-2008]
(a) No person shall engage in the business of plumbing in the City unless
licensed as a master plumber under the provisions of this Code.
(b) No person employed as an apprentice or journeyman plumber shall
work as a plumber in the City unless being certified as provided by this
article.
Sec. 27-221 CHARTER Sec. 27-224
C:749
Sec. 27-225. (Reserved)
Editor's note: Res. No. 17-99, adopted Feb. 23, 1999, repealed in its
entirety § 27-225. Formerly, § 27-225 pertained to master plumber
examination. See the Code Comparative Table.
Sec. 27-226. Master plumber certification. [Res. No. 40-95,
6-27-1995]
Before issuing a certificate to engage in the business of master or employing
plumber, the board shall inquire into the applicant's fitness and
qualifications for conducting such business and may require the applicant
to submit under oath such evidence. The examining board of plumbers
shall issue, upon payment of the required license certificate fee, a master
plumber's license certificate to those applicants who meet the qualifications
and pass the examination. Such license certificates shall be issued in the
name of the examining board of plumbers.
Sec. 27-227. Annual master plumber license fee. [Res. No. 40-95,
6-27-1995]
The annual fee for a master plumber license in the City shall be as provided
by the Common Council from time to time. The fees will be received by the
City clerk's office processed through the code enforcement division. A new
identification photograph must be furnished by applicant every year at the
time or renewal for the license.
Sec. 27-228. through Sec. 27-229. (Reserved)
Editor's note: Res. No. 17-99, adopted Feb. 23, 1999, repealed in their
entirety §§ 27-228 and 27-229. Formerly, § 27-228 pertained to journeyman
plumber—certificate of competency examination requirements. Further,
(a) An applicant for a master plumber's license certificate shall file written
application to the office of the plumbing inspector, on the form provided
by the examining board of plumbers. The examining board of plumber's
shall approve the application if:
(1) The applicant shall have had a minimum of eight years of practical
plumbing experience consisting of at least 1,500 hours per year
and is able to furnish satisfactory evidence of such facts. A two-year
degree in plumbing, sanitary engineering or plumbing engineering
from a recognized collage or university shall count as two years'
experience and a four-year degree as four years' experience.
(b) If the application is approved, the board shall notify the applicant in
writing of such approval stating the place and time of the examination.
If the application is disapproved, the examining board of plumbers shall
notify the applicant in writing of such disapproval stating the reasons
for disapproval.
Sec. 27-224 OLEAN CODE Sec. 27-228
C:750
§ 27-229 pertained to material similar to aforementioned section as it
relates to examination. See the Code Comparative Table.
Sec. 27-230. Same—Certification. [Res. No. 40-95, 6-27-1995]
The examining board of plumbers shall issue journeyman plumber's license
certificates to those applicants who pass the examination upon payment
of the required license fee. Such license certificates shall be issued in the
name of the examining board of plumbers.
Sec. 27-231. Same—Annual license fee. [Res. No. 40-95, 6-27-1995]
The annual fee for a journeyman plumber license in the City shall be
as provided by the Common Council from time to time. The fees will be
received by the City clerk's office, processed through the code enforcement
division. A new identification photograph must be furnished by applicant
every year at the time of renewal of the license.
Sec. 27-232. Apprenticeship. [Res. No. 40-95, 6-27-1995]
No person shall engage as a plumbing apprentice in the City unless so
registered in the code enforcement division. The annual registration fee
shall be as provided by the common council from time to time. It shall be the
duty of the apprentice to certify annually as to the place(s) and time(s) of
employment by each firm employing the apprentice during the proceeding
year.
Sec. 27-233. Out-of-town contractors. [Res. No. 40-95, 6-27-1995]
Out-of-town plumbers wishing to engage in the work of an employing or
master plumber within the city must take the master plumber examination
unless:
Sec. 27-234. Failure of tests; journeymen and master plumbers.
[Res. No. 40-95, 6-27-1995]
An applicant who fails to pass the examination for a plumber's license shall
not be permitted to apply for another examination until after the expiration
of six months following the date of such examination.
(a) There is reciprocity agreement for city plumbers from the community of
applicant and payment of the fee as may be established by the common
council from time to time.
(b) Applicant shall meet the requirements for a temporary permit for a
single site as may be established by the examination board of plumbers
and the payment of a fee as may be established from time to time by the
common council.
Sec. 27-228 CHARTER Sec. 27-235
C:751
Sec. 27-235. Apprenticeship, journeyman, master plumber;
automatic suspension; renewal/reinstatement requirements. [Res.
No. 40-95, 6-27-1995]
All plumber's license certificates shall expire in January following the date
of issuance. License certificates may be renewed for a period of one year
each succeeding January upon payment during the month of January of the
required license fee to the city clerk. A license certificate which has expired
due to failure to pay the annual fee, will be deemed suspended without
hearing and the licensee shall not be permitted to perform plumbing work.
Reinstatement fees as provided at section 27-240 shall be collected prior to
reinstatement. After April 30 an additional penalty of $100 shall be affixed
to the fee to reinstate the license of a master plumber. After July 31 and a
new test must be taken for reinstatement unless the plumber has requested
and has been granted a waiver by the plumbing board of appeals. Waiver
shall be granted only for good cause shown. Upon application for a waiver,
an unconditional, non-refundable waiver fee of the amount of $50 paid. No
waiver shall be granted after the passage of five years.
Sec. 27-236. Reinstatement; journeyman and master plumber
military service. [Res. No. 40-95, 6-27-1995]
The examining board of plumbers shall reinstate a license certificate which
expires while a license is in the active military service upon payment of the
annual license certificate fee and submission and evidence of such military
service. Such license certificate shall be reinstated without re-examination
and without payment of lapsed renewal fee.
Sec. 27-237. Grounds for revocation or suspension; journeyman and
master plumber. [Res. No. 40-95, 6-27-1995]
The examining board of plumbers shall revoke or suspend a license
certificate after a hearing before the examining board of plumbers when the
findings show one or more of the following:
(1) That the licensee obtained or conspired with others to obtain a license
certificate by inducing the issuance thereof in consideration of the
payment of money or delivery of any other thing of value or by and
through a willful misrepresentation of facts to the examining board of
plumbers or the code enforcement division.
(2) That the licensee willfully violated any plumbing ordinance or
resolution of the city, or any law of this state regulating plumbing or
plumbers.
(3) That the licensee has been guilty of negligence or incompetence in the
performance of plumbing or in supervision of plumbing performed by
apprentice or journeyman employed by a master plumber.
(4) That the licensee has been convicted of a felony.
Sec. 27-235 OLEAN CODE Sec. 27-237
C:752
Sec. 27-238. Discipline proceedings; journeyman and master
plumber. [Res. No. 40-95, 6-27-1995]
No license certificate shall be subject to discipline (except suspension for
non-renewal) until a written complaint is filed with the examining board
of plumbers stating facts which, if proved, would constitute grounds for
suspension or revocation of a license certificate as provided in this article
and until an impartial hearing is held before the board.
When a written complaint is filed, the examining board of plumbers shall set
a date for a hearing which shall be held in the Municipal Building, Olean,
New York. The board shall send to the licensee charged in the complaint,
by personal delivery or certified mail, a correct copy of the complaint and a
notice stating when and where a hearing will be held. Such notice shall be
served at least 20 days before the date set for the hearing.
If a license certificate is suspended or revoked, the license certificate shall
be surrendered to the examining board of plumbers, but it shall be returned
to the license upon reinstatement.
Sec. 27-239. Reinstatement of revoked license certificate;
journeyman and master plumber. [Res. No. 40-95, 6-27-1995]
The examining board of plumbers may, in its discretion, reinstate a
plumber's license certificate not less than three months, and not more than
three years, after such license certificate has been revoked. Reinstatement
by the examining board of plumbers may only be ordered after a hearing
before the examining board of plumbers on the petition of the person whose
license certificate has been revoked. Whenever a petition for reinstatement
is filed with the examining board of plumbers together with such fee as
may be established by the common council from time to time, it shall serve
a copy of the petition and notice on all parties of record. The notice by
the board shall state when the license certificate in question was revoked,
and when and where the hearing will be held. Such notice shall be served
at least 20 days before the date set for the hearing. The examining board
of plumbers shall hear all material evidence in support of or against the
petition and shall allow or deny the petition for reinstatement of the license
(5) That the licensee has willfully loaned or in any manner transferred his
license certificate to another person, to permit such person to engage
illegally in plumbing contrary to this article.
(6) That the licensee has willfully engaged in conduct not in accord with
generally accepted standards of professional conduct for the trade,
workmanship or business.
(7) That licensee has worked as a plumber while his/her license is
suspended.
(8) That a master plumber has allowed a journeyman/apprentice to work in
violation of the registration provisions of this article.
Sec. 27-237 CHARTER Sec. 27-239
C:753
certificate. The decision of the examining board of plumbers shall be given
to the petitioner and to all parties of record either by personal delivery or
certified mail.
If the petition for reinstatement is denied the petitioner may file his petition
for rehearing within 20 days after receipt of the examining board of
plumbers order, whereupon the examining board of plumbers will then
order either a denial or allowance of the petition or rehearing. If such
petition for rehearing is granted, the entire record shall be referred to the
board and a hearing held not less than 20 days after notice of the time and
place of the rehearing, the examining board shall either grant or deny the
petition for reinstatement.
No more than one rehearing on the same petition for reinstatement shall
be allowed; and not more than one petition for reinstatement of the same
license certificate shall be considered or heard within one year. If the
petition for reinstatement is granted by the examining board of plumbers it
shall issue a plumber's license certificate to the petitioner upon payment of
the required annual licenses certificate fee.
Sec. 27-240. Fees. [Res. No. 40-95, 6-27-1995; Res. No. 91-02,
9-10-2002]
Sec. 27-241. Responsibilites of employing master plumbers. [Res.
No. 40-95, 6-27-1995]
It shall be the responsibility of an employing master plumber to employ only
those apprentices or journeymen licensed with the city and to verify the
employee's credentials.
An employing master plumber shall be responsible for all work performed
by apprentices or journeymen employed by them.
(a) The annual master plumber's license certificate fee shall be $200.
(b) The fee for reinstatement of master plumber's license certificates shall
be $100 plus the annual fee.
(c) The annual journeyman plumber's license certificate fee shall be $35
per year.
(d) The fee for reinstatement of a journeyman plumber's license certificate
shall be $5 plus the annual fee.
(e) The annual registration fee for an apprentionship shall be $5.
(f) The fee for a temporary permit for out-of-town master plumbers shall be
$300 per job.
(g) The examination fee for journeyman and/or master plumber's license
shall be $100.
Sec. 27-239 OLEAN CODE Sec. 27-242
C:754
Sec. 27-242. Insurance. [Res. No. 40-95, 6-27-1995]
Liability insurance. All master plumbers shall procure and maintain at
their own expense and without expense to the city, insurance for liability
for damage imposed by law, of the kinds and in the amounts hereinafter
provided. Insurance shall be procured through insurance companies
authorized to do such business in the State of New York covering all
operations under their contracts whether performed by them or employees
before receiving a master plumber certificate of competency and every
year thereafter at the time of renewal of the master plumber license,
a certificate or certificates of insurance in forms satisfactory to the city
showing compliance with this paragraph, shall be furnished to the city,
to be kept on file in the department of code enforcement division, which
certificate or certificates shall provide that the policy shall not be changed
or canceled until 10 days written notice has been given to the city. This
requirement shall apply to active master plumber license holders; those
with inactive status are waived. The kinds and amounts of insurance are as
follows:
Workman's compensation insurance. A policy covering the obligations of the
master plumber in accordance with workman's compensation law covering
all operations.
Public liability and property damage insurances. The master plumber shall
[have] public general liability and property damage insurance as shall
insure and protect him/her, any employees and any subcontractor
performing work for him/her, from claims for damages for personal injury,
including accidental death, as well as from claims for property damages
which may arise from his operations in an amount of at least $500,000.
Sec. 27-242 CHARTER Sec. 27-242
C:755

DIVISION 3
REQUIREMENTS; EXAMINING BOARD
Sec. 27-243. Examining board of plumbers. [Res. No. 40-95,
6-27-1995]
The examining board of plumbers for the city is continued and shall be
known as the examining board of plumbers. The examining board of
plumbers in the city shall consist of five persons to be appointed by the
mayor of whom two shall be employing master plumbers of not less than
10 years experience in the business of plumbing, and one shall be a
journeyman plumber of like experience, and the other members of the board
shall be the plumbing inspector of the city or qualified officer performing
the duties as such inspector, and the director of public works.
Sec. 27-244. Term of office; vacancies. [Res. No. 40-95, 6-27-1995]
The term of office of each member of such board shall be three years, from
the first day of January following the appointment. Vacancies occurring by
expiration of a term shall be filled by the mayor for a full term. The mayor
shall appoint board members for the unexpired term when vacancies occur
as a removal from the city of any member. The plumbing inspector and
the director of public works or the officers holding equivalent positions or
acting in like capacities designated or appointed by the mayor as herein
provided, shall be ex-officio members of such examining board, and when
they shall cease to hold their offices by reason or on account of which they
were so designated or appointed, their successors shall act on the board in
the stead.
Sec. 27-245. Compensation of members of board. [Res. No. 40-95,
6-27-1995]
The master and journeyman plumbers serving as members of the examining
board of plumbers shall receive compensation for their services as shall be
determined by the city common council.
Sec. 27-246. Qualifications. [Res. No. 40-95, 6-27-1995]
All members of such board shall be United States citizens and residents of
the City of Olean.
Sec. 27-247. Powers and duties. [Res. No. 40-95, 6-27-1995]
The examining board of plumbers shall have power and it shall be its duty:
(1) To meet at stated intervals; they shall also meet whenever the director
of the department of public works or the fire chief of the city or the
mayor thereof shall in writing direct them to do so.
(2) To have jurisdiction over and to examine all persons desiring or
intending to engage in the trade, business or calling of plumbing as
Sec. 27-243 CHARTER Sec. 27-247
C:757
employing plumbers in the city which board shall be appointed with the
power of examining persons applying for certificates of competency as
such employing or master plumbers or as inspectors of plumbing, to
determine their fitness and qualifications for conducting the business
of master plumbers or to act as inspector of plumbing, and to issue
certificates of competency to all such persons who shall have passed
a satisfactory examination before such board and shall be by it
determined to be qualified for conducting the business of employing or
master plumbers or competent to act as inspectors of plumbers.
(3) To formulate in conjunction with the department of public works of the
city for recommendation to the mayor and common council for approval
regulations concerning plumbing in this city, including the materials,
workmanship and manner of executing such work and from time to time
to add to, amend or alter the same.
(4) To charge and collect from each person applying for the examination
the sum dictated by the board and all monies so collected shall be paid
over to the treasury of the city.
Sec. 27-247 OLEAN CODE Sec. 27-247
C:758
DIVISION 4
PLUMBING INSPECTION
Sec. 27-248. Plumbing inspector. [Res. No. 40-95, 6-27-1995]
To provide for the administration and enforcement of this article, the
position of plumbing inspector is hereby continued. The plumbing inspector
shall be a code enforcement officer of the city assigned to the code
enforcement office of the city and supervised by the chief of the fire
department.
Sec. 27-249. Plumbing inspector qualifications. [Res. No. 40-95,
6-27-1995]
The plumbing inspector shall be a master plumber and a resident of the city
and shall comply with provisions as set forth in section 48 of the General
City Law.
Sec. 27-250. Duties of the plumbing inspector. [Res. No. 40-95,
6-27-1995]
The plumbing inspector shall maintain public office hours necessary to
efficiently administer the provisions of the code and amendments thereto
and shall perform the following powers and duties:
(1) Require submission of, examine and check plans and specifications,
drawings, descriptions and/or diagrams necessary to show clearly the
character, kind and extent of plumbing work covered by applications for
a permit applied for.
(2) Access all fees for permits issued or inspections conducted as provided
by this Code, issue receipts therefore, and a duplicate copy of which
shall be maintained as a record.
(3) Inspect all plumbing and drainage work authorized by any permits, or
unauthorized installations, to assure compliance with provisions of this
Code or amendments thereto, approving or condemning said work in
whole or in part as conditions require.
(4) Issue a certificate of approval for any work approved by the plumbing
inspector.
(5) Condemn and reject all work done or being done or materials used or
being used, which do not lie in all respects comply with the provisions
of this Code and amendments thereto.
(6) Order changes in workmanship and/or materials essential to obtain
compliance with all provisions of this Code.
(7) Investigate any construction or work regulated by this Code and issue
such notices and orders provided for elsewhere in this article.
Sec. 27-248 CHARTER Sec. 27-250
C:759
Sec. 27-251. Right of entry. [Res. No. 40-95, 6-27-1995]
The plumbing inspector shall be a code enforcement officer of the city and
upon proper identification have the right of entry during usual business
hours, or at reasonable times, to inspect any and all buildings and premises
within the jurisdiction of this Code in the performance of his/her duties.
(8) Keep a complete record of all the transactions of the plumbing
inspector.
(9) Maintain an official register of all persons, firms or corporations
lawfully entitled to carry on or engage in the business of plumbing or to
work at the trade of plumbing to whom a plumber's license certificate
has been issued in accordance with the provisions set forth elsewhere
in this article.
Sec. 27-250 OLEAN CODE Sec. 27-251
C:760
DIVISION 5
MISCELLANEOUS MATTERS
Sec. 27-252. Dangerous and/or unsanitary conditions. [Res. No.
40-95, 6-27-1995]
Sec. 27-253. Violations and penalties. [Res. No. 40-95, 6-27-1995]
Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this Code
shall be deemed guilty of an unclassified misdemeanor and upon conviction
thereof shall be punishable by fine or by imprisonment or by both such fine
and imprisonment. Each separate date or any portion thereof during which
any violation of this Code occurs or continues shall be deemed to constitute
a separate offense and upon conviction thereof shall be punishable as herein
provided.
(a) Dangerous or unsanitary plumbing conditions as defined elsewhere in
this Code is hereby declared to be a nuisance.
(b) In the event that any unsanitary conditions exist or any construction or
work regulated by this Code is dangerous, unsafe, unsanitary, a
nuisance or a menace to life, health or property or otherwise in
violation of this Code, the fire chief or his designee may require an
investigation and upon determining such information to be fact, shall
order any person, firm or corporation using or maintaining any such
condition or responsible for the use or maintenance thereof to
discontinue the use or maintenance thereof to discontinue the use or
demolish the same as he may consider necessary for the proper
protection of life, health or property. In the space of potable water
piping or potable water using appliance or device, where a cross
connection is found to exist between the potable water and
contaminated water and/or waste the director of public works shall
order any person, firm or corporation supplying potable water to such
system, to discontinue supplying potable water thereto until such cross
connection is removed and the system is made safe to life, health and/or
property.
(c) Refusal, failure or neglect to comply with any order in connection with a
dangerous or unsanitary condition shall be considered a violation of this
Code.
(d) When any plumbing system is maintained in violation of this Code or in
violation of any notice issued pursuant to the provisions of this Code or
where a nuisance exists in any building or on a lot on which a building is
situated, the fire chief shall institute any appropriate action or
proceeding in any court of competent jurisdiction to prevent, restrain,
correct or abate the violation or nuisance.
Sec. 27-252 CHARTER Sec. 27-254
C:761
Sec. 27-254. Special installations. [Res. No. 40-95, 6-27-1995]
The plumbing inspector may authorize with the consent of the fire chief
that special permission be granted for the installation of plumbing work in
a manner different from the provisions of this Code, when, in the judgment
of the plumbing inspector or fire chief it is necessary to do so due to the
circumstances of construction provided a letter from the owner or his agent
is received requesting his permission.
Sec. 27-255. Plumbing inspector's license fee. [Res. No. 40-95,
6-27-1995]
The plumbing inspector shall have the master plumber's license fee waived
until such time as the inspector is no longer employed by the city.
Sec. 27-256. Plumbing inspection fee. [Res. No. 40-95, 6-27-1995;
Res. No. 109-97, 11-25-1997; Res. No. 54-02, 5-28-2002]
Sec. 27-257. Unlawful approval. [Res. No. 40-95, 6-27-1995]
The issuance of a permit authorizing plans or specifications shall not
prevent the plumbing inspector from thereafter requiring the correction of
errors in said plans and/or specifications or from rejecting the plumbing
work or drainage work when there is a violation of this Code, any other
ordinance of the city or any law of the State of New York pertaining to
plumbing or plumbers, applicable in the city.
(a) There are hereby established the following fees for inspections
conducted by the plumbing inspector pursuant to this Code:
$1.50 per unit fixture value as established by and based upon the
Plumbing Code (IPC) of the New York Uniform Fire Prevention and
Building Code Section 709, Table 709.1.
(b) Plumbing inspection fee covers:
Four rough inspections on-site;
One final inspection on-site;
$50 for any additional inspection requiring a trip to site.
Master plumber shall be required to be on-site for inspection unless
presence is waived by plumbing inspector.
(c) Exemptions from inspection fees: The following are exempt from the
fees established pursuant to this section:
(1) One-family residences.
(2) Two-family residences.
Sec. 27-254 OLEAN CODE Sec. 27-258
C:762
Sec. 27-258. Liability of city official or employee. [Res. No. 40-95,
6-27-1995]
This article shall not be constructed as imposing upon the city, any liability
or responsibility for damage resulting from defective plumbing or drainage
systems, or the installation thereof, nor shall the city or any official or
employee thereof be held as assuming any such liability or responsibility by
reasons or inspection authorized hereunder.
Sec. 27-259. Administration. [Res. No. 40-95, 6-27-1995]
Sec. 27-260. Fire protection system. [Res. No. 40-95, 5-27-1995]
Sec. 27-261. Adoption by reference. [Res. No. 40-95, 6-27-1995;
Res. No. 91-02, 9-10-2002]
The Plumbing Code of New York State and the provisions of Article 4 of
General City Law shall be adopted as reference. Should there be any other
matters not covered by the City of Olean Plumbing Code, all inquiries and
decisions shall be made by the chief of the fire department. (Plumbing Code
of New York State)
(a) Administration of this Code shall be the responsibility of the
department of fire, buildings and emergency medical services.
(b) The department of fire, buildings and emergency medical services shall
develop rules and regulations to establish licensing procedures and
administration of this Code.
(a) Except in an emergency after notice to the fire dispatcher of the fire
department, no person whether licensed or unlicensed may work on any
sprinkler system unless a permit is obtained from the department of
fire, buildings and emergency medical services.
(b) No person may disconnect a sprinkler system without notifying the fire
dispatcher.
(1) There are hereby established the following fees for inspections
conducted by the plumbing inspector pursuant to this Code:
$1.50 per unit fixture value as established by and based upon the
Plumbing Code (IPC) of the New York Uniform Fire Prevention and
Building Code Section 709, Table 709.1.
Sec. 27-258 CHARTER Sec. 27-261
C:763
Chapter 28
ZONING
CROSS REFERENCES
Signs, § 3-21 et seq.
Buildings, building regulations and fire
prevention, ch. 6.
Flood damage prevention, ch. 9.
Historic preservation, ch. 11.
Junkyards, § 13-201 et seq.
Planning and development, ch. 18.
Subdivision regulations, ch. 22.
Sec. 27-261 OLEAN CODE Sec. 27-261
C:764
ARTICLE 1
TITLE, PURPOSE, AUTHORITY
Sec. 1.0. Short title.
This law shall be known and may be cited as the "zoning law of the City of
Olean, NY."
Sec. 1.1. Authority.
Pursuant to the authority and power granted under Section 20(24) of the
General City Law and Section 10 of the Municipal Home Rule Law of the
State of New York, and all amendments thereto, the Common Council of the
City of Olean, County of Cattaraugus, State of New York, hereby ordains,
enacts and publishes as follows.
Sec. 1.2. Long title.
A law establishing a comprehensive zoning plan for the City of Olean
by dividing the territory thereof into certain zoning use districts and
prescribing regulations and standards for buildings and other structures
and the use of land therein.
Sec. 1.3. Purpose.
The zoning regulations and districts herein set forth and as identified
upon the Zoning Map of the City of Olean are made for the purpose of
promoting public health, safety, and general welfare and prescribing the
most desirable use for which the land in each district may be adapted
and those uses to be subjected to special regulations, while conserving the
value of land throughout the city. The height, bulk and location of buildings
and other structures, the area of yards, courts, setbacks and other open
spaces, the density of population and intensity of use of buildings and
land, the use, conservation and development of unique water front areas,
and the use of structures and land for residential, industrial, commercial,
institutional or other purposes, are hereby restricted and regulated as
hereinafter provided.
Such regulations have been designed to preserve open space; lessen
congestion in the streets; secure safety from fire, flood, and other dangers;
provide adequate light, air, and convenience of access; and facilitate the
adequate provision of transportation, water, sewage, schools, parks and
other public services. They have been made with reasonable regard, among
other things, to the character of each district and its suitability for
particular uses as well as the value of buildings, land, and uses to promote
the most appropriate use of land throughout the city.
The regulations contained in this law have been made in accordance with
the City of Olean Comprehensive Development Plan 1990 — 2010 as
adopted by the planning board of the city by resolution dated August 30,
Sec. 1.0 CHARTER Sec. 1.3
C:765
1990 and certified as being the Official Comprehensive Development Plan
of the City of Olean on December 10, 1990.
Sec. 1.3 OLEAN CODE Sec. 1.3
C:766
ARTICLE 2
INTERPRETATION
Sec. 2.0. Interpretation, separability and conflict.
Sec. 2.1. Definitions. [L.L. No. 6-00, § 1, 12-12-1900; L.L. No. 2-05,
8-9-2005]
The following words or phrases as used in this law are defined as follows:
2.0.1 The following rules of construction of language shall apply to the text
of this law:
1. Words used in the present tense include the future tense.
2. Words used in the singular include the plural, and words used in
the plural include the singular.
3. Words used in the masculine form shall also include the feminine.
4. The word "lot" includes the word "plot" or "parcel".
5. The word "person" includes an individual, firm or corporation.
6. The word "shall" is always mandatory; the word "may" is always
permissive.
7. The words "used" or "occupied" as applied to any land or building
shall be interpreted to include the words "intended, arranged or
designed to be used or occupied".
8. A "building" or "structure" includes any part thereof.
9. The phrases, "to erect", "to construct", and "to build" a building
each have the same meaning and include to excavate for a building
and to relocate a building by moving it from one location to another.
2.0.2 If any section, paragraph, subdivision, or provision of this law shall be
held invalid, such invalidity shall apply only to the section, paragraph,
subdivision, or provision judged invalid, and the rest of this Law shall
remain valid and effective.
2.0.3 Wherever possible this law shall be interpreted in such a way that the
meaning of the words and phrases and sections herein shall make them
valid and legal in their effect.
2.0.4 This law is not intended to abrogate or annul any easement, covenant,
or any other private agreement. Such private agreements shall not
allow what the law prohibits.
2.0.5 Whenever the requirements of this law are at variance with the
requirements of other fully adopted rules, regulations or laws, the law
with the most restrictive provisions or those imposing the higher
standards shall govern.
Sec. 2.0 CHARTER Sec. 2.1
C:767
ABANDONMENT — To cease or discontinue a use or activity without intent
to resume it.
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE — A structure subordinate to a principal
structure on the same lot and used for purposes customarily incidental
to those of the principal structure. Accessory structures include but are
not limited to, portable, demountable or permanent enclosures, shade
structures, carports, swimming pools, garages and storage sheds.
ACCESSORY USE — A use customarily incidental and subordinate to the
principal use or occupancy of a building and located on the same lot with
such principal use or building.
ADULT CARE FACILITY — A family-type home for individuals which
provides temporary or long-term residential services to individuals who by
reason of physical or other limitations associated with either age, physical
disability or mental impairment, are substantially unable to live
independently. "Adult care facility" is deemed not to include those facilities
established under authority of the Public Health Law or Mental Hygiene
Law of the State of New York and subject to the requirements of Part II
Olean Code of Local Laws Chapter LL4.[Amended 10-13-2015 by L.L.
No. 5-2015]
ADULT USES — That whenever used in this local law, the words "adult use"
or "adult uses" apply to the following types of establishments:
a) ADULT BOOKSTORES — An establishment which has as a substantial
or significant portion of its stock in trade, books, pamphlets,
magazines and other periodicals, sculptures, photographs, pictures,
slides, videotapes, films, or sound recordings and which establishment
excludes any minor by reason of age.
b) ADULT ENTERTAINMENT CABARET — A public or private night club,
bar restaurant or similar establishment which presents topless or
bottomless dancers, go-go dancers, strippers, male or female
impersonators, exotic dancers, or other similar entertainment, and
which establishment excludes any minor by reason of age.
c) ADULT VIDEO STORE — An establishment having a substantial or
significant portion of its stock in trade, videotapes or films for sale
viewing on premises by use of motion picture devices, video
equipment or other coin operated means, and which establishment
excludes any minor by reason of age.
d) PEEP SHOW — A theater which presents material in the form of live
shows, films, or videotapes viewed from an enclosure for which a fee
is charged and which excludes any minor by reason of age.
Sec. 2.1 OLEAN CODE Sec. 2.1
C:768
e) MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT — Any establishment having a fixed
place of business where massages are administered for pay, including
but not limited to massage parlors, sauna baths and steam baths. This
definition shall not be construed to include a hospital, nursing home,
medical clinic, or the office of a physician, surgeon, chiropractor,
osteopath, or duly licensed physical therapist or duly licensed massage
therapist, or barber shops or beauty salons in which massages are
administered only to the scalp, face, neck, or shoulders. This definition
shall also exclude health clubs which have facilities for physical
exercise such as tennis courts, racquetball courts or exercise rooms,
and which do not receive their primary source of revenue through the
administration of massages.
f) ADULT MOTEL — A motel which excludes minors by reason of age, or
which make available to its patrons in their rooms films, slide shows,
or videotapes, which if presented in a public movie theater would
exclude any minor by reason of age.
g) ADULT THEATER — A theater that customarily presents motion
pictures, films, videotapes, or slide shows and that excludes any minor
by reason of age.
h) BODY PAINTING STUDIO — An establishment or business which
provides the service of applying paint or other substance whether
transparent or non-transparent to or on the human body and which
excludes any minor by reason of age
i) ADULT MODEL STUDIO — Any establishment where, for any form of
consideration or gratuity, figure models are provided to be observed,
sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured, photographed, or similarly
depicted by persons other than the proprietor, paying such
consideration or gratuity and which excludes any minor by reason
of age. This provision shall not apply to any school of art which is
operated by an individual, firm, association, partnership, corporation
or institution, which meets the requirement established in the New
York State Education Law for the issuance of conferring of, and is in
fact authorized to issue and confer a diploma.
AGRICULTURAL USE — The raising of agricultural products including
livestock, poultry, dairy products, farm crops, fruit, vegetables and nursery
stock whether for gain or otherwise.
ALLEY — A narrow supplementary thoroughfare for the public use of
vehicles affording access to abutting property.
ALTERATION — As applied to a building or structure, a change or
rearrangement in the structural parts or in exit facilities of such building or
structure, or any enlargement thereof, whether by extension on any side or
by any increase in height, or the moving of such building or structure from
one location to another.
AMUSEMENT GAME CENTER — A continuous commercial use in which
four or more mechanical, electrical or electronic machines or devices used
or designed to be operated for entertainment or as a game, and either
Sec. 2.1 CHARTER Sec. 2.1
C:769
activated by the insertion of a coin, token, etc. or use for which a charge is
made.
APARTMENT — See dwelling unit.
APPROVED — Approved by the city code enforcement officer under the
regulations of this law, or approved by an authority designated by this law.
AREA, BUILDING — The total of areas taken on a horizontal plane at
the main grade level of the principal building and all accessory buildings
exclusive of terraces and uncovered steps. All dimensions shall be measured
between the exterior faces of walls.
AREA, LOT — The total area within the lot boundary lines excluding any
area included in a public street right-of-way.
ATTIC — That space of building which is between the top of the uppermost
floor construction immediately below and wholly or partly within the roof
framing and that is not finished as habitable space (See also: Story, half).
AUTO-BODY REPAIR/METAL FINISHING SHOP — A building or premises
used to repair, refinish, clean or paint motor vehicles, boats, machinery or
equipment that uses flammable or combustible liquids that are vented to
the outside air. A junk yard or auto salvage yard is not to be the same as an
auto-body repair/metal finishing shop.
BAR — A business establishment licensed by the State of New York to serve
alcoholic beverages and which establishment is designed primarily for the
consumption of such alcoholic beverages on the premises, irrespective of
whether or not food and/or entertainment are also provided as accessory
uses.
BAR — A business establishment licensed by the State of New York to serve
alcoholic beverages and which establishment is designed primarily for the
consumption of such alcoholic beverages on the premises, irrespective of
whether or not food and/or entertainment are also provided as accessory
uses.
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION AND BASE FLOOD — Base flood elevation is
that height, or elevation, in relation to mean sea level, which is expected
to be reached by the waters of the base flood at pertinent points in the
flood plains of coastal and riverine areas. The base flood, in accordance with
the regulations established by the Federal Emergency Management Agency
(FEMA) for the national flood insurance program (NFIP), is the flood having
a 1% chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. The term
base flood has the same meaning as the one-hundred-year-flood under the
regulations of the NFIP.
BASEMENT — Any space of a building which is partly below finished grade,
but having more than 1/2 of its height measured from floor to ceiling above
average finished grade (See also: Cellar).
BED AND BREAKFAST — A building containing a single dwelling unit in
which at least one, but not more than four, sleeping rooms are provided by
Sec. 2.1 OLEAN CODE Sec. 2.1
C:770
the owner/occupant as overnight lodging facilities for the accommodation
of transient guests.
BOARDING HOUSE — A building, other than a hotel, containing a general
kitchen and a general dining room, in which at least three, but no more
than six, sleeping rooms are offered for rent, with or without meals to nontransient
guests. A lodging house, or rooming house shall be deemed a
boarding house.
BUFFER YARDS — An area of land forming a visual and/or physical
separation or barrier between two uses. In the case of a visual barrier
the land shall be covered with natural plantings or manmade material to
provide a continuous physical screen preventing visual access and reducing
noise.
BUILDING — Any structure which is wholly or partially enclosed within
exterior walls, is permanently affixed to the land, has one or more floors
and a roof, and is intended for the shelter, housing or enclosure of persons,
animals or chattel.
BUILDING, ACCESSORY — See: Accessory structure.
BUILDING, DETACHED — A building surrounded by open space on the
same lot.
BUILDING HEIGHT — The vertical distance measured from the average
elevation of the proposed or existing finished grade to the highest point of
the roof for flat roofs, to the deck of mansard roofs, and to the mean height
between eaves and ridge for gable, hip and gambrel roofs.
BUILDING, PRINCIPAL — A building in which is conducted the main or
principal use of the lot on which said building is situated.
BUILDING, SEMI-DETACHED — A building attached by a party wall to
another building normally of the same type on another lot, but having one
side yard.
BUILDING GROUP — A group of two or more principal buildings and any
buildings accessory thereto, occupying a lot in one ownership and having
any yard in common.
BUILDING LINE — The line, established by statute, local law or ordinance,
beyond which the exterior surface of a building on any side shall not extend.
In the instance of a cantilevered section of a building or projected roof or
porch, said line shall coincide with the most projected surface.
BULK — A term to describe the size, volume, area, and shape of buildings
and structures, and the physical relationship of their exterior walls or their
location to lot lines, other buildings and structures, or other walls of the
same building; and all open spaces required in connection with a building,
other structure, or tract of land.
CAR WASH — A building, premises or portions thereof where automobiles
and other vehicles are washed either by the patron or others either by hand
or using machinery and mechanical devices specifically designed for this
purpose.
Sec. 2.1 CHARTER Sec. 2.1
C:771
CELLAR — Any space in a building the structural ceiling level of which is
less than four feet above average finished grade where such grade meets
the exterior walls of the building (See also: Basement).
CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE — A certificate issued by the code
enforcement officer upon completion of construction, alteration or change
in occupancy or use of a building. Said certificate shall acknowledge
compliance with all the requirements of this law and such adjustments
thereto granted by the zoning board of appeals.
CHILD CARE FACILITY — Any licensed building or structure operated for
the purpose of providing daytime care and instruction for two or more
children on a regular schedule and also known as a day care center. (See
also: Day care)
CHURCH OR PLACE OF WORSHIP — A building or premises used for
regular public worship by members or representatives of a religious sect or
organization as defined by state statute.
CIVIC FACILITY — Buildings, structures, and uses owned and operated by
the city and regularly used for neighborhood meetings and other forms of
public assembly.
CLUB, MEMBERSHIP — An organization catering exclusively to members
and their guests, or premises and buildings for recreational or athletic
purposes, which are not conducted primarily for gain, providing there are
not conducted any vending stands, merchandising or commercial activities
except as required generally for the membership and purposes of such club.
CLUSTERED PROJECTS OR DWELLING GROUPS — Projects or dwelling
groups carried out pursuant to the authority granted to the city by Section
20(24) of the City Law of the State of New York, whereby the planning
board of the city is authorized to encourage or require the modification
of certain density requirements of this zoning law. The modifications must
occur at the same time that the plat or plats are approved in accordance
with the requirements of the subdivision regulations of the City of Olean.
Such modifications to the density standards of this zoning law are subject to
reasonable conditions set forth by the City of Olean Common Council. The
purposes of such authorization shall be to enable and encourage flexibility
of design and development of land in order to promote the most appropriate
use of land, facilitate the adequate and economical provision of streets and
utilities and preserve the natural and scenic qualities of open lands.
COMMERCIAL VEHICLE — A vehicle of more than one-ton capacity used
for the transportation of persons or goods primarily for gain.
COMMUNICATIONS ANTENNA(S) — Any device used for the transmission
or reception of radio, television, wireless telephone, pager, commercial
mobile radio service or any other wireless communication signals, including
without limitation omnidirectional or whip antennas and directional or
panel antennas, owned or operated by any person or entity required to be
licensed by the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) to operate such
device. This definition shall not include private-residence-mounted satellite
dishes or television antennas or amateur radio equipment including without
Sec. 2.1 OLEAN CODE Sec. 2.1
C:772
limitation ham or citizen band radio antennas.[Added 6-24-2015 by L.L.
No. 4-2015]
COMMUNICATIONS TOWER — A tower, monopole, pole or similar
structure which supports a telecommunications antenna operated above
ground in a fixed location, freestanding, guyed, or on a building or other
structure. An amateur radio tower is not a "communications tower" under
this section.[Added 6-24-2015 by L.L. No. 4-2015]
CONDOMINIUM — A building or group of buildings, in which residential,
commercial or industrial units are owned individually while the structure,
common areas and facilities are owned jointly by all the owners on a
proportional basis.
CONSTRUCTION YARD — Any space, whether inside or outside a building,
used for the storage, sale or keeping of construction materials, machinery
or vehicles, which are in active use by a construction contractor or a
construction supply company.
CONTIGUOUS PARCEL — A tract of land under the control of the applicant
or its agent that is not divided by any natural or manmade barriers such as
existing streets and highways, public rights-of-way identified on the official
map and is not bisected by waterbodies.
CONTRACTOR'S YARD — Any space, whether inside or outside a building,
used for the storage, sale or keeping of keeping of heavy equipment such
as cranes, boons, bulldozers, tractor trailers, or similar equipment, or
machinery or parts thereof, which are intended for use by the construction
industry.
CONVALESCENT HOME — See: Nursing home.
CONVENIENCE/MINI-MARKET — A commercial retail use which combines
the sale of beverages, dairy and baked goods, snack foods, prepackaged
grocery items and daily household items and which may also be
accompanied by the sale of motor vehicle fuel and accessory substances for
automobiles.
COVERAGE — That lot area or percentage of lot area covered by buildings
or structures, including accessory buildings and structures.
CREMATION — A heating process that incinerates deceased human beings.
CREMATORIES/CREMATORIUM — A facility in which the remains of
deceased human beings are processed by cremation.
DAY CARE CENTER — Any licensed building or structure operated for the
purpose of providing daytime care for two or more adults or children on a
regular schedule. (See also: Child care facility and adult care facility).
DISTRICT OR ZONE — That portion of the city within which specific uses
are permitted according to the designation applied thereto in Article 3 and
in conformity with the provisions of this law.
DRIVE-IN USE — Any commercial or business activity which incorporates
as a principal or accessory feature a service window, booth or other like
Sec. 2.1 CHARTER Sec. 2.1
C:773
arrangement on the exterior of the building or structure designed primarily
for drive-through or carry-out service.
DUMP — A lot or land used primarily for the disposal by abandonment,
burial, burning or any other means and for whatever purpose, of garbage,
sewage, trash, refuse, junk, discarded machinery, vehicles or parts thereof,
or waste materials of any kind.
DWELLING — A building designed or used principally as the living quarters
for one or more families in one or more dwelling units.
DWELLING, ONE-FAMILY — A building containing one dwelling unit only.
This term shall not be deemed to include motel, hotel, rooming house or
other accommodations used for more or less transient occupancy.
DWELLING, ONE-FAMILY DETACHED — A building containing one
dwelling unit and having two side yards. This term shall not be deemed to
include motel, hotel, rooming house or other accommodations used for more
or less transient occupancy.
DWELLING, ONE-FAMILY SEMI-DETACHED — A building containing one
dwelling unit and having one party wall and one side yard. This term
shall not be deemed to include motel, hotel, rooming house or other
accommodations used for more or less transient occupancy.
DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY — A building containing two dwelling units. This
term shall not be deemed to include motel, hotel, rooming house or other
accommodations used for more or less transient occupancy.
DWELLING, MULTIPLE-FAMILY — A building containing three or more
dwelling units with shared or individual entrances and/or other essential
facilities and services. This term shall not be deemed to include motel, hotel,
rooming house or other accommodations used for more or less transient
occupancy.
DWELLING GROUP — See: Clustered projects.
DWELLING UNIT — One room or rooms connected together, consisting of
a separate, independent housekeeping establishment for owner occupancy,
rental or lease, and containing independent cooking, living, sanitary and
sleeping facilities.
FACTORY MANUFACTURED HOME — A dwelling unit constructed offsite,
consisting of one or more segments and designed to be permanently
anchored to and supported by a foundation, to become a fixed part of the
real estate. Such dwelling unit shall bear an insignia of approval issued by
the State of New York.
FAMILY MEANS —
One of the following:
(a) One, two or three persons occupying a dwelling unit; or
1.
Sec. 2.1 OLEAN CODE Sec. 2.1
C:774
FENCE — An artificially constructed barrier of wood, masonry, stone, metal
or any other permitted manufactured material or combination of materials
erected for the enclosure of yard areas.
FINISHED GRADE — The elevation at which the finished surface of the
surrounding lot intersects the walls or supports of a building or other
structure. If the line of intersection is not reasonably horizontal, the finished
Four or more persons occupying a dwelling unit and living together
as a traditional family or the functional equivalent of a traditional
family.
(b)
It shall be presumptive evidence that four or more persons living in a
single dwelling unit who are not related by blood, marriage or legal
adoption do not constitute the functional equivalent of a traditional
family.
2.
In determining whether individuals are living together as the functional
equivalent of a traditional family, the following criteria must be present:
The group is one which in theory, size, appearance, structure and
function resembles a traditional family unit;
(a)
The occupants must share the entire dwelling unit and live and
cook together as a single housekeeping unit. A unit in which the
various occupants act as separate roomers may not be deemed to
be occupied by the functional equivalent of a traditional family;
(b)
The group shares expenses for food, rent or ownership costs,
utilities and other household expenses;
(c)
The group is permanent and stable. Evidence of such permanency
and stability may include:
The presence of minor dependent children regularly residing
in the household who are enrolled in local schools;
(1)
Members of the household have the same address for purposes
of voter's registration, driver's license, motor vehicle
registration and filing of taxes;
(2)
(3) Members of the household are employed in the area;
The household has been living together as a unit for a year or
more, whether in the current dwelling unit or other dwelling
units;
(4)
There is common ownership of furniture and appliances among
the members of the household; and
(5)
(6) The group is not transient or temporary in nature.
(d)
Any other factor reasonably related to whether or not the group is
the functional equivalent of a family.
(e)
3.
Sec. 2.1 CHARTER Sec. 2.1
C:775
grade in computing height of buildings and other structures or for other
purposes shall be the average elevation of all finished grade elevations
around the periphery of the building.
FLOODPLAIN — The low lands adjoining the channel of a river, stream or
watercourse, lake or other body of standing water, which have been or may
be inundated by flood water. The channel of a stream or watercourse is
a part of the flood plain in accordance with the national flood insurance
program (NFIP) as administered by the Federal Emergency Management
Agency (FEMA).
FLOODWAY — The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent
land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood
without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a
designated height, in accordance with the national flood insurance program
(NFIP) as administered by the Federal Emergency Management Agency
(FEMA). Also referred to as regulatory floodway.
FLOOR AREA — The aggregate sum of the gross horizontal area of the
several floors of the building or buildings, measured from the exterior walls
or from the centerlines of walls separating the buildings. In particular, the
"floor area" of a building or buildings shall include:
FUNERAL HOME — A building or part thereof used for human funeral
services, including chapels, embalming, autopsies, storage of caskets,
funeral urns and other related funeral supplies, and the storage of funeral
vehicles, but does not include facilities for cremation.
GARAGE, SERVICE/REPAIR — A building or premises used for the repair of
motor vehicles. A junk yard or auto salvage yard is not to be construed to
mean or be the same as a garage.
GASOLINE FILLING STATION — An area of land, including structures
thereon, or any building or part thereof, that is used primarily for the
sale and direct delivery to the motor vehicle of gasoline or any other
motor vehicle fuel or oil and other lubricating substances, which may
include as accessory uses sale of motor vehicle accessories, and which
1. Basement space.
2. Elevator shafts and stairwells at each floor.
Floor space for mechanical equipment, with structural headroom of
seven feet six inches or more.
3.
4. Penthouses.
Attic space (whether or not a floor has actually been laid) providing
there is structural headroom of not less than seven feet six inches.
5.
6. Interior balconies and mezzanines.
7. Enclosed porches.
8. Accessory uses, not including space for accessory off-street parking.
Sec. 2.1 OLEAN CODE Sec. 2.1
C:776
may or may not include facilities for lubricating, washing, (which does not
require mechanical equipment) or otherwise servicing motor vehicles, but
not including auto body work, welding, or painting.
GENERAL BUSINESS OFFICE — A non-retail service-oriented office or
agency such as insurance brokers, insurance or real estate agents, travel
agents, computer programming, consulting organizations, or similar uses.
HABITABLE ROOM — Any room that meets adopted building code
requirements for a habitable room, including minimum room proportions,
minimum egress requirements, and minimum standards for lighting,
heating, ventilation, and electricity.[Added 10-13-2015 by L.L. No.
5-2015]
HISTORIC RESOURCE — Any historic building, structure, facility, sire or
district, or prehistoric site that is listed on the state and/or national
registers of historic places. Any historic building, structure, facility, sire
or district, or prehistoric site that has been proposed by the New York
Board of Historic Preservation for a recommendation to the state historic
preservation officer for nomination for inclusion on the national register
of historic places. Any locally significant historic resource designated
pursuant to Article 5-K of the New York State General Municipal Law.
HOME OCCUPATION — An accessory use which is clearly incidental to or
secondary to the principal residential use of a dwelling unit and does not
change the character thereof, and is carried on wholly within the enclosed
walls of a dwelling unit or accessory building by the resident of such
dwelling unit and in which not more than one person not residing in such
dwelling is employed.
HOSPITAL — An institution for the care and treatment of the sick and
injured, equipped with technical facilities, medical, nursing and other
professional and technical personnel necessary for diagnosis and treatment
of persons suffering from sickness or injury which require bed care, outpatient
care or emergency room care.
HOTEL — A building, or any part thereof, which contains living and sleeping
accommodations for transient occupancy, has a common exterior entrance
or entrances and which may or may not include dining facilities. This term
shall not be deemed to include an inn, bed and breakfast, boarding house,
or other such accommodations.
HOUSE OF WORSHIP — An institution that people regularly attend or
reside in to participate in or hold religious services, meetings, or other
activities. A house of worship includes churches, synagogues, temples,
monasteries, and convents.
INDUSTRIAL/BUSINESS PARK — A planned, coordinated development of
a tract of land with two or more separate parcels or lots for industrial,
business or mixed industrial/business development. Such development is
planned, designed, constructed and managed on an integrated and
coordinated basis with special attention given to site planning and layout,
attractive appearance, entrance signage, general landscaping, vehicular
circulation, service and delivery, parking, utility needs, building design and
Sec. 2.1 CHARTER Sec. 2.1
C:777
orientation, equipment storage, refuse disposal and open space. Typically,
an industrial/business park is developed or controlled by one proprietary
interest and has an enforceable master plan and/or covenants, conditions,
and restrictions.
INDUSTRIAL USE — Any activity conducted in connection with the
manufacture, assembly, disassembly, fabrication, resource recovery, storage
or processing of materials or products, all or any part of which is marketed
off the premises or marketed to other than the ultimate consumer.
INN — A building containing a single dwelling unit in which more than four
and less than 15 sleeping rooms are provided by the owner/occupant for
compensation, for the accommodation of transient guests, with or without
meals.
INSTITUTION SIGNS — A sign which directs attention to a private and/or
public school and/or college located within the city, except as otherwise set
forth herein.
JUNK YARD — An area of land with or without buildings used for or
occupied by the storage, keeping, abandonment or the salvage of junk
material, including processing such as sorting, baling, packing,
disassembly, exchange and/or purchase and sale of materials, and including
scrap metals or other scrap, used or salvaged building materials, or the
dismantling, demolition, or abandonment of automobiles or other vehicles,
machinery or parts thereof. A lot on which any motor vehicle, that is
not licensed and/or incapable of meeting minimum NYS Motor Vehicle
Inspection Standards, is stored for a period of 30 days or more shall be
considered to meet this definition.
KENNEL — Any place at which there are kept four or more domestic
animals or any number of dogs that are kept for the primarily commercial
purpose of sale or for the boarding, care or breeding for which a fee is
charged or paid.
LAND USE ACTIVITY — Any construction or other activity which changes
the use or appearance of land or a structure or the intensity of use of
land or a structure. "Land use activity" shall explicitly include, but not be
limited to, the following: New structures, expansions to existing structures,
new uses, changes in or expansions of existing uses, roads, driveways, and
excavations for the purpose of extracting soil or mineral deposits.
LODGING HOUSE — See: Boarding house.
LOT — A contiguous parcel of land considered as a unit, devoted to a
specific use or occupied by a building or a group of buildings that are united
by a common interest, use or ownership, and the customary accessories and
open spaces belonging to the same and which abuts and is accessible from
a private or public street.
LOT, CORNER — A lot situated at the junction of and adjacent to two or
more intersecting streets when the interior angle of intersection does not
exceed 135°.
Sec. 2.1 OLEAN CODE Sec. 2.1
C:778
LOT, DEPTH OF — The mean distance from the front street line of a lot to
its rear line.
LOT, THROUGH — Lot which faces on two streets at opposite ends of the
lot and which is not a corner lot.
LOT COVERAGE — See: Coverage.
LOT FRONTAGE — A lot line which is coincident with the right-of-way line
of a public road or which is measured 20 feet from the center line of a
private road.
LOT LINES — The lines bounding a lot as defined herein.
LOT WIDTH — The width of a lot measured between the side lot lines along
the rear line of the required front yard.
MAJOR SOLAR COLLECTION SYSTEM OR SOLAR FARM — An area of
land or other area used for a solar collection system principally used to
capture solar energy and concert it to electrical energy to transfer to
the public electric grid in order to sell electricity to or receive a credit
from a public utility entity, but also may be for on-site use. Solar farm
facilities consist of one or more freestanding ground- or roof-mounted solar
collector devices, solar-related equipment and other accessory structures
and buildings, including light reflectors, concentrators, and heat
exchangers, substations, electrical infrastructure, transmission lines and
other appurtenant structures and facilities.[Added 6-9-2015 by L.L. No.
3-2015]
MANUFACTURED HOUSING — A factory-built, single-family structure that
is manufactured under the authority of 42 U.S.C. Sec. 5401, the National
Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974, is
transportable in one or more sections, is built on a permanent chassis, and
is used as a place of human habitation; but which is not constructed with
a permanent hitch or other device allowing transport of the unit other than
for the purpose of delivery to a permanent site, and which does not have
wheels or axles permanently attached to its body or frame. (See also: Mobile
home).
MEDICAL CLINIC — A place where medical or dental care is furnished to
persons on an outpatient basis by five or more physicians who have common
offices in a building which shall also offer laboratory and diagnostic
facilities to patients on an out-patient basis and not just in conjunction with
normal professional services.
MINOR SOLAR COLLECTION SYSTEM — A solar voltaic cell, panel, or
array, or solar hot air or water collector device, which relies upon solar
radiation as an energy source for collection, inversion, storage and
distribution of solar energy for electricity generation or transfer of stored
heat, secondary to the use of the premises for other lawful purposes, with
the total surface area of all solar collectors on the lot not to exceed 4,000
square feet.[Added 6-9-2015 by L.L. No. 3-2015]
MOBILE HOME — A transportable, factory-built home, designed to be
used as a year-round residential dwelling that is manufactured under the
Sec. 2.1 CHARTER Sec. 2.1
C:779
authority of the 42 U.S.C. Sec 5401, the National Manufactured Housing
Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974. A mobile home is not
constructed with a permanent chassis and may be transported on its own
wheels or those of another vehicle. The definition of mobile home includes
all additions made subsequent to installation. This definition does not
include manufactured housing placed on a permanent foundation or a travel
trailer. (See also: Manufactured housing).
MOBILE HOME PARK — A parcel of land under single ownership on which
two or more mobile homes are occupied as a residence or which is planned
and improved for the placement of two or more mobile homes for nontransient
residential use, or for the sale or rental of two or more mobile
home lots.
MOTEL — A building or group of buildings containing individual living and
sleeping accommodations for hire, each of which is provided with a separate
exterior entrance and a parking space, and is offered for rental and use
principally by motor vehicle travelers. The term "motel" includes, but is
not limited to, every type of similar establishment known variously as an
auto court, motor hotel, motor court, motor inn, motor lodge, tourist court,
tourist cabins, or roadside hotel.
NON-CONFORMING BULK — That part of a building, other structure or
tract of land which does not conform to one or more of the applicable bulk
regulations of this zoning law, either following its effective date or as a
result of subsequent amendment thereto.
NON-CONFORMING USE — Any use of a building, other structure, or tract
of land which does not conform to the use regulations for the district in
which such use is located, either at the effective date of this zoning law or
as a result of subsequent amendment thereto.
NON-RESIDENTIAL PLANNED DEVELOPMENT — One or more
commercial uses proposed as a unit, or one or more Industrial uses
proposed as a unit, in conformance with Article 8.
NURSING HOME — A building containing accommodations for persons
where nursing and convalescent services including meals are furnished.
NURSERY SCHOOL — Any place, however designated, operated for the
purpose of providing both daytime care and instruction for two or more
children from two to five years of age inclusive, and operated on a regular
basis, including kindergartens, day nurseries, and day care centers.
OPEN SPACE — An area which is not developed with principal or accessory
structures and which is intended to provide light and air, and is designed
for either environmental, scenic or recreational purposes. Open space may
include, but is not limited to, decorative planting, preservation of existing
natural areas, walkways, active and passive recreation areas and
playgrounds. Open space shall not be deemed to include driveways,
roadways or parking areas.
PARK — Any public or private land available for recreational, educational,
cultural, or aesthetic use.
Sec. 2.1 OLEAN CODE Sec. 2.1
C:780
PARKING LOT, COMMERCIAL — Any tract of privately-owned land which
is used for the storage of motor vehicles and is not accessory to any other
use on the same or any other lot, and contains parking space rented to the
general public or reserved for a group of individuals by the hour, day, week,
month or year.
PARKING LOT, PRIVATE — Any tract of privately-owned land which is used
for storage of motor vehicles and is accessory to a use on the same parcel
or lot or on another parcel or lot, and contains parking spaces reserved
or leased in some manner for that principal use and not available to the
general public.
PARKING LOT, PUBLIC — An off-street parking area where motor vehicles
may be stored by the general public, with or without a fee, for temporary,
daily or overnight parking.
PARKING SPACE — An off-street space available for the parking of one
motor vehicle and having an area of not less than 180 square feet exclusive
of passageways and driveways appurtenant thereto and giving access
thereto, and having direct access to a street or alley.
PARKING STRUCTURE (GARAGE, DECK) — Any structure in which motor
vehicles may be parked or stored that is not accessory to any other use on
the same lot, and contains parking spaces rented to the general public or
reserved for a group of individuals by the hour, day, week, month or year.
PERSONAL SERVICE ESTABLISHMENT — A commercial operation, office,
store or other place of business catering to the personal needs of a
customer, such as normally conducted by a beautician, tailor or dressmaker.
PREMISES — A lot together with all the buildings and uses thereon.
PROFESSIONAL OFFICE — An office principally occupied by a licensed
professional such as a physician, dentist, lawyer, engineer, architect,
accountant, or similar occupation.
RECREATION USES, COMMERCIAL — Uses designed as recreational
activities operated by private businesses for profit, including privately
operated amusement parks or rides, games, miniature golf courses and
similar uses.
REFLECTOR, SOLAR — A device for which the sole purpose is to increase
the solar radiation received by a solar collector.
REPAIR SHOP, PERSONAL SERVICE — A store or other place of business
at which is conducted the repair of personal customer items, such as shoes,
clothing, jewelry, etc.
RESIDENCES, RESIDENTIAL — A building or any part of a building, which
contains dwelling units for permanent occupancy. Residence, therefore,
includes all one-family, and multifamily, boarding, fraternity and sorority
houses. However, "residences" shall not include the following:[Amended
10-13-2015 by L.L. No. 5-2015]
Transient accommodations, such as hotels, motels, hospitals and
shelters; or
1.
Sec. 2.1 CHARTER Sec. 2.1
C:781
RESTAURANT, FAST FOOD — An establishment where food and/or
beverages are sold in a form ready for consumption and where, by design
or packaging techniques, all or a significant portion of the consumption can
or does take place outside the confines of the building.
RESTAURANT, STANDARD — Any establishment, however designated,
whose primary use is preparation and sale of food for consumption to
patrons seated within an enclosed building or on the premises. However
a snack bar or refreshment stand at a public or quasi-public community
swimming pool, playground, playfield or park, which is operated by an
approved sponsoring group, agency or vendor for the convenience of the
patrons of the facility shall not be deemed to be a restaurant.
RETAIL USE — Business or commercial use or activity involving primarily
the sale of merchandise or stock-in-trade to the public.
RIGHT-OF-WAY — The property under public ownership or easement
normally used for movement of vehicles, and or persons, including, but not
restricted to, any pavement area.
ROADSIDE STAND — A light structure with a roof, either attached to the
ground or movable, not for year-round use and at which produce is offered
for sale to the general public.
ROOMING HOUSE — See: Boarding house.
SATELLITE TELEVISION ANTENNA — An antenna the purpose of which is
to receive television and/or radio signals from orbiting satellites and which
is located external to or attached to the exterior of any structure.
SCENIC RESOURCE — Any road, highway, lane district, or corridor
designated pursuant to Article 49 of the New York State Environmental
Conservation Law. Any area designated a scenic area of statewide
significance pursuant to New York States's Coastal Management Program
(19 NYCRR 602.5).
SCHOOL — A facility, either public or private that provides a curriculum
of elementary and/or secondary academic instruction, including
kindergartens, elementary schools, junior high schools, and or senior high
schools.
SENIOR CITIZEN HOUSING — A building or group of buildings where
occupancy is restricted to persons 55 years or older. In the case of double
occupancy of a unit, only one resident is required to be at least 55 years of
age.
SETBACK — The required distance in feet from:
That part of a building containing both residences and other uses
which is used for any nonresidential uses, except accessory uses for
residences.
2.
1. Any survey boundary forming a lot or contiguous parcel;
2. The right-of-way of a public street; or
Sec. 2.1 OLEAN CODE Sec. 2.1
C:782
SHELTER[Added 10-13-2015 by L.L. No. 5-2015] —
SHOPPING CENTER — A building or group of buildings containing a
combination of three or more separate shops, stores or offices on a single
lot providing primarily retail services with supporting service and office
establishments.
SIGN — Any structure or part thereof, or any device attached to a structure
or painted or represented on a structure which shall display or include any
lettering, wording, model, drawing, picture, banner, flag, insignia, device,
marking, or representation used as, or which is in the nature of, an
announcement, direction or advertisement. A "sign" includes a billboard,
but does not include the flag or insignia of any nation or of any
governmental agency or of any political, educational, charitable,
philanthropic, civic, eleemosynary, professional, religious or similar
organization, or of any campaign, drive, movement, or event which is
temporary in nature.
SIGN, ADVERTISING — A sign which directs attention to a business
commodity, service or entertainment conducted, sold or offered elsewhere
than on the same lot. This shall include billboards.
SIGN, BUSINESS — A sign which directs attention to a business or
profession conducted or to products sold on the same lot. A "For Sale" sign
relating to the lot on which it is displayed should be deemed a business sign.
SIGN, IDENTIFICATION OR PROFESSIONAL — A sign showing the name
and profession, occupation or pursuit conducted on the premises.
SINGLE OWNERSHIP — Possession of land under single or unified control,
whether by sole, joint, common or other ownership or by a lease having a
term of not less than 10 years, regardless of any division of such land into
parcels for the purpose of financing.
SITE PLAN — Maps and supporting information required under Article 9 of
this law.
SOLAR COLLECTOR — A device, or combination of devices, structure
or part of a device or structure that transforms direct solar energy into
thermal, chemical or electrical energy, and that contributes to a structure's
energy supply, together with any components for containing and supporting
such device.
A distance measured 20 feet from the centerline of private road to any
building on such lot.
3.
A building containing at least one habitable room provided with
minimal supportive services and which is intended to provide housing
for homeless persons, domestic violence victims or other transient
individuals on a temporary basis for any reason.
1.
A shelter is not to be interpreted as any of the following: boarding
house; dwelling; dwelling, one-family; dwelling, one-family detached;
dwelling, one-family semidetached; dwelling, two-family; dwelling,
multiple-family; dwelling unit; hotel; inn or motel.
2.
Sec. 2.1 CHARTER Sec. 2.1
C:783
SOLAR COLLECTOR, DETACHED — A solar collector, as defined herein
which is physically detached from the structure for which solar energy is to
be supplied.
SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM — A complete design or assembly consisting of
a solar energy collector (herein called a solar collector), an energy storage
facility (where used), and components for the distribution of transformed
energy (to the extent that they cannot be used jointly with a conventional
energy system), including passive solar energy systems.
STORY — The part of a building comprised between a floor and the floor or
roof next above it. A basement shall be considered a story. A cellar shall not
be considered a story.
STORY, HALF — That portion of a building situated above a full story and
having at least two opposite exterior walls meeting a sloping roof at a level
not higher above the floor than a distance equal to 1/2 the floor-to-ceiling
height of the story below. An attic with a finished floor shall be considered a
half story. Half stories have structural headroom of less than seven feet six
inches and shall not be included within the definition of floor area for the
purposes of this zoning law. (See: Floor area).
STREET — An existing public or private way which affords principal means
of access to abutting properties and is suitably improved; or a proposed way
shown on the official map and recorded in the office of the county clerk.
STREET, LOCAL — A street or road designed primarily to provide access to
abutting properties.
STREET, MARGINAL ACCESS — Those streets which are parallel to and
adjacent to arterial streets and highways, and which provide access to
abutting properties and protection from through traffic.
STREET, PRIMARY — A street which serves or is designed to serve heavy
flows of traffic and which is used primarily as a route for traffic between
communities and/or other heavy traffic areas.
STREET, PRIVATE — A drive that services or is designed to serve no more
than two principal uses and is built to city specifications that remains
in the ownership of and is maintained by the developer or development
association and is not dedicated to the city.
STREET, PUBLIC — A road or street that serves three or more principal
uses, that is built to city specifications and is dedicated to the city for
maintenance.
STREET, SECONDARY — A public street which serves or is designed to
serve as a traffic way for a neighborhood or as a feeder to a primary street.
STRUCTURE — A static construction of building materials, framed of
component structural parts for occupancy or use, including buildings,
stadiums, platforms, towers, sheds, display stands, storage bins, signs,
fences, reviewing stands, gasoline pumps, mobile dwellings, and the like.
SWIMMING POOL — An artificial pool of water having a depth at any point
of more than 30 inches and a surface area of greater than 100 square feet,
Sec. 2.1 OLEAN CODE Sec. 2.1
C:784
designed or intended for the purpose of bathing or swimming and including
all appurtenant equipment.
SWIMMING POOL, PRIVATE — A swimming pool operated as an accessory
use to a residential dwelling unit or units and located on an individual
residential lot or site.
SWIMMING POOL, PUBLIC — A public or privately-owned pool open to
the general public or to individuals on a membership basis and having
appropriate dressing room facilities, recreation and off-street parking area.
TOPSOIL — A surface layer of the soil containing more or less organic
matter to a depth usually plowed in cultivation. The "A" horizon of the soil
solum.
TOWNHOUSE — A building consisting of three or more attached singlefamily
dwelling units each having separate entrances and common vertical
party walls. (See also: Building, semidetached).
TRAILER — A non-motorized wheeled vehicle designed to be transportable
when towed by a motorized vehicle and which has been designed for
human occupancy as a dwelling unit. A trailer does not meet the standards
established by 42 U.S.C. Sec. 5401, the National Manufactured Housing
Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974.
TRAILER, UTILITY — A non-motorized wheeled vehicle designed to be
transportable when towed by a motorized vehicle and which has been
designed for the storage of tools and/or equipment.
TRAVEL TRAILER — A registered vehicle which is used or designed to be
used, for seasonal and/or temporary living or sleeping purposes, and which
is customarily standing on wheels or rigid supports. A recreational vehicle
(RV) is also considered a travel trailer.
TRUCKING TERMINALS — A building or part of a building or premises for
the storage and/or transfer of goods, wares and merchandise for the owner
or others by truck transport.
USE — This term is employed in referring to:
USE, PRINCIPAL — The main or primary purpose for which a building,
other structure and/or lot is designed, arranged or intended or for which it
may be used, occupied or maintained under this law.
VEHICLE SALES AREA — A premises, including open areas, other than a
street or way, and enclosed showrooms for the display and sale of new or
used automobiles, trucks, trailers, motorcycles, boats, and/or recreational
vehicles.
The purpose for which any buildings, other structures, or land may be
arranged, designed, intended, maintained, or occupied;
1.
Any occupation, business activity, or operation conducted in a building
or other structure, or on land.
2.
Sec. 2.1 CHARTER Sec. 2.1
C:785
VETERINARY HOSPITAL — A building for the treatment of animal illness
including facilities for boarding animals receiving treatment.
WAREHOUSE — A building or premises, for storing of goods, wares and
merchandise, whether for the owner or for others, whether publicly or
privately owned or used.
WAY — A thoroughfare, street, alley, way or right-of-way, however
designated, permanently established for passage of persons or vehicles.
WHOLESALE (STORE, BUSINESS, ESTABLISHMENT) — A business
establishment engaged in selling to retailers or jobbers rather than directly
to consumers.
WIND ENERGY CONVERSION SYSTEM (WINDMILL) — Any mechanical
device designed for the purpose of converting wind energy into electrical or
mechanical power.
YARD, FRONT — An open area extending the full width of the lot between
the street right-of-way and the building line projected to the side lot lines.
YARD, REAR — An open area extending the full width of the rear lot line
situated between the rear lot line and the building line projected to the side
lot lines.
YARD, REQUIRED — That portion of the open area of a lot extending open
and unobstructed from the ground upward, along a lot line for a setback
depth or width as specified by the bulk regulations of the district in which
the lot is located. No part of such yard shall be included as part of a yard or
other open space similarly required for buildings on another lot.
YARD, SIDE — An open area extending between the building line and the
side line of a lot and extending from the front yard rear line (or from the
front lot line, if there is no required front yard) to the rear yard front line
(or to the rear lot line if there is no required rear yard).
Sec. 2.1 OLEAN CODE Sec. 2.1
C:786
ARTICLE 3
ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICTS
Sec. 3.0. Application of regulations.
No building or land shall hereafter be used or occupied, and no building
or structure or part thereof shall be erected, moved, or altered, unless in
conformity with the regulations herein specified for the district in which it
is located, except as hereinafter provided.
Sec. 3.1. General regulations.
Sec. 3.2. Zoning districts.
In order to fulfill the purpose of this zoning law, the city establishes the
following districts:
3.1.1No building or structure shall hereafter be erected or altered to
exceed the height, to accommodate or house a greater number of
dwelling units, to occupy a greater percentage of lot area, or to have
narrower or smaller rear yards, front yards or side yards, than is
specified herein for the district in which such building or structure is
located.
3.1.2No part of a required yard or other open space about any building
required for the purpose of complying with the provisions of this Law
shall be included as part of a yard or other open space similarly
required for another building.
3.1.3No lot shall be so reduced in size that its area or any of its dimensions
or open spaces shall be smaller than those required by this law.
3.1.4 In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this zoning
law shall be held to be minimum requirements adopted for the
promotion of the public health, safety and general welfare.
3.1.5 Any uses not specifically permitted shall be deemed to be prohibited.
3.1.6 Regardless of any other provisions of this law, or chapter, any use that
is noxious or offensive by reason of emission of odor, dust, noise,
vibration, smoke, gas, fumes or radiation or which presents a hazard to
public health or safety, is prohibited, in accordance with the standards
of Article 10 of this law.
1. Single-family Residential (R1).
2. Single-family/General Residential (R2).
3. General Residential (R3).
4. Residential Transition (RT).
5. City Center (CC).
Sec. 3.0 CHARTER Sec. 3.2
C:787
Sec. 3.3. Zoning map of the City of Olean.
The location and boundaries of said zoning use districts are hereby
established on a scaled map designated "Zoning Map of the City of Olean"
which is kept on file and will be available for public viewing in the office of
the city clerk, and such map is hereby declared to be part of this zoning law.
Sec. 3.4. Interpretation of district boundaries.
Where uncertainty exists with respect to the boundaries of any of the
aforesaid districts as shown on the zoning map, the following rules shall
apply:
6. General Commercial (GC).
7. Waterfront Conservation (WC).
8. Industrial (I).
9. General Industrial (I2).
10. General Industrial (I3).
11. Planned Residential (PR).
12. Planned Business (PB).
3.4.1 Centerlines and right-of-way lines. Where district boundaries are
indicated as approximately following the centerlines or right-of-way
lines of streets, highways, public utility easements, or watercourses,
said boundaries shall be constructed to be coincident with such lines.
Such boundaries shall be deemed to be automatically moved if a
centerline or right-of-way of such street, highway, public utility or
watercourse is moved not more than 20 feet.
3.4.2 Lot or boundary lines. Where district boundaries are indicated as
approximately following the city boundary line, property lines, lot lines,
or projections thereof, said boundaries shall be construed to be
coincident with such lines or projections thereof.
3.4.3 Parallel to lot or boundary lines. Where district boundaries are so
indicated that they are approximately parallel to the city boundary line,
property lines, lot lines, right-of-way lines, or projections thereof, said
boundaries shall be construed as being parallel thereto and at such
distances therefrom as indicated on the zoning map or as shall be
determined by the use of the scale shown on the zoning map.
3.4.4 District boundaries shall be determined by use of an accurate scale
which shall be shown on the zoning map. In no instances shall a district
boundary be set at less than the minimum lot depth required in section
6.1, entitled "Density control schedule", of this law.
Sec. 3.2 OLEAN CODE Sec. 3.4
C:788
3.4.5 In the event of a questionable district boundary, the questionable
boundary shall be referred to the zoning board of appeals, and they
shall, to the best of their ability, establish the exact boundary.
3.4.6 The copy of the zoning map showing any such determinations under
this section shall be on file at the office of the city clerk.
3.4.7 Precise zone boundary determinations made by the zoning board of
appeals in accordance with the above rules shall be considered final
and conclusive, and may only be altered by amendment of the zoning
map by the common council of the city.
3.4.8 Lots divided by zoning district lines. Where a lot is divided by a district
boundary line, the regulations for each respective district shall apply
except:
1. In all cases where a lot in one ownership, other than a through lot,
is divided by a district boundary so that 50% or more of such lot lies
in the less restricted district, the regulations prescribed for such
less restricted district shall apply to the more restricted portion of
said lot for a distance of 30 feet from the zoning district boundary.
For purposes of this law, the more restricted district shall be
deemed that district which is subject to regulations which prohibit
the particular use intended to be made of said lot or which
regulations set higher standards with respect to setback, coverage,
yards, screening, landscaping and similar requirements.
2. In all cases where a district boundary line is located not farther
than 15 feet away from a lot line of record, the regulations
applicable to the greater part of the lot shall be deemed to apply to
the entire lot.
3.4.9 Buildings divided by zoning district lines. Where a district boundary
line divides a building existing on the effective date of this law, so that
50% or more of such building lies within the less restricted district, the
regulations prescribed by this law for such less restricted district (as
defined in subsection 3.4.8(1) above) shall apply to the entire building.
Such provisions shall apply only if, and as long as, the building is in
single ownership and its structural characteristics prevent its use in
conformity with the requirements of each district.
Sec. 3.4 CHARTER Sec. 3.4
C:789

ARTICLE 4
ZONING USE DISTRICTS
Sec. 4.0. Single-Family Residential Use District (R1).
4.0.1 Intent. The intent of the R1 Single-family Residential Use District is to
delineate those areas where predominantly single-family detached, lowdensity
residential development has occurred or is likely to occur in the
future. It is to protect the integrity of these residential areas by
prohibiting the intrusion of any use which is not compatible with this
predominant type and intensity of use. The R1 District recognizes the
value of such other permissible uses as churches, schools, libraries and
other educational buildings, and playgrounds.
4.0.2 Permitted uses. Within the R1 District, permitted principal, special and
accessory uses shall be as specified in the following sections. Permitted
uses in the R1 District are further identified in section 4.14 of this
article, entitled "Use regulation table".
4.0.2.a Permitted principal uses.
1. Detached single-family dwellings.
2. Governmental uses.
3. Public or private schools.
4. Public parks and recreational uses.
5. Senior citizen housing.
4.0.2.b Permitted accessory uses, buildings and structures.
1. Accessory uses and structures customarily incident to any of
the uses mentioned for this use district, and on the same lot.
2. Antennas.
4.0.2.c Special permitted uses. The following uses may be permitted in
the R1 Residential Use District Consistent with the provisions of
this law and provided that a special use permit is approved by the
planning board:
1. Adult care facilities.
2. Churches or places of worship.
3. Libraries.
4. Museums.
5. Private parking lots.
Sec. 4.0 CHARTER Sec. 4.0
C:791
Sec. 4.1. Single-family/General Residential Use District (R2).
The following use may be permitted in the R1 Residential Use
District consistent with the provisions of this law and provided
that this special use permit is permitted by the zoning board
of appeals.
1. Home occupations.
4.0.3 Dimensional requirements. The dimensional requirements for this
district are specified in section 6.1, entitled "City of Olean zoning law
density control schedule," which is part of this law.
4.0.4Off-street parking requirements and loading requirements. The offstreet
parking and loading regulations are specified in article 10,
sections 10.3 and 10.4, of this law.
4.0.5 Signage. Signs are permitted as listed in article 11, section 11.1 of this
law.
4.0.6 Site plan review. Site plan review and approval shall be secured as
required in article 9 of this law.
4.1.1 Intent. The intent of the R2 Single-family/General Residential Use
District is to delineate those areas where there are generally lot sizes
somewhat smaller than those in the R1 District but which are
predominantly single-family detached, low-density residential in
character and where such development is likely to continue to occur in
the future. It is to protect the integrity of these residential areas by
prohibiting the intrusion of any use which is not compatible with this
predominant type and intensity of use. The R2 District recognizes the
value of such other permissible uses as churches, schools, libraries and
other educational buildings, and playgrounds.
4.1.2 Permitted uses. Within the R2 District, permitted principal, special and
accessory uses shall be as specified in the following sections. Permitted
uses in the R2 District are further identified in section 4.14 of this
article, entitled "Use regulation table".
4.1.2.a Permitted principal uses.
1. Detached single-family dwellings.
2. Governmental uses.
3. Public or private schools.
4. Public parks and recreational uses.
5. Senior citizen housing.
4.1.2.b Permitted accessory uses, buildings and structures.
Sec. 4.0 OLEAN CODE Sec. 4.1
C:792
Sec. 4.2. General Residential Use District (R3). [L.L. No. 7-02, § 1,
11-26-2002]
1. Accessory uses and structures customarily incident to any of
the uses mentioned for this use district, and on the same lot.
2. Antennas.
4.1.2.c Special permitted uses. The following uses may be permitted in
the R2 Residential Use District consistent with the provisions of
this law and provided that a special use permit is approved by the
planning board:
1. Adult care facilities.
2. Churches or places of worship.
3. Libraries.
4. Museums.
5. Private golf courses.
6. Private parking lots.
The following use may be permitted in the R2 Residential Use
District consistent with the provisions of the law and provided
that this special use permit is permitted by the zoning board
of appeals.
1. Home occupations.
4.1.3 Dimensional requirements. The dimensional requirements for this
district are specified in section 6.1, entitled "City of Olean zoning law
density control schedule", which is part of this law.
4.1.4Off-street parking requirements and loading requirements. The offstreet
parking and loading regulations are specified in article 10,
sections 10.3 and 10.4, of this chapter.
4.1.5 Signage. Signs are permitted as listed in article 11, section 11.1 of this
chapter.
4.1.6 Site plan review. Site plan review and approval shall be secured as
required in article 9 of this chapter.
4.2.1 Intent. The intent of the R3 General Residential Use District is to
delineate those areas where predominantly detached single-family,
moderate density residential development and some two-family
residential development has occurred or is likely to occur, to allow in
special instances in accordance with site plan review, multiple-family
dwellings and dwelling groups and to protect the integrity of these
residential areas by controlling the type and intensity of uses so that the
overall character and density of the neighborhood is preserved. The R3
Sec. 4.1 CHARTER Sec. 4.2
C:793
District recognizes the value of such other permissible uses as
churches, schools, libraries and other educational buildings,
playgrounds, and general hospitals under the conditions set forth in this
law.
4.2.2 Permitted uses. Within the R3 District, permitted principal, special and
accessory uses shall be as specified in the following sections. Permitted
uses in the R3 District are further identified in section 4.14 of this
article, entitled "Use regulation table".
4.2.2.a Permitted principal uses.
1. Adult care facilities.
2. Agricultural uses.
3. Churches or places of worship.
4. Detached single-family dwellings.
5. Governmental uses.
6. Libraries.
7. Multi-family dwellings.
8. Nursery schools.
9. Public or private schools.
10. Public parks and recreational uses.
11. Semi-detached single-family dwellings.
12. Senior citizen housing.
13. Two-family dwellings.
4.2.2.b Permitted accessory uses, buildings and structures.
1. Accessory uses and structures customarily incident to any of
the uses mentioned for this use district, and on the same lot.
2. Antennas.
4.2.2.c Special permitted uses. The following uses may be permitted in
the R3 General Residential Use District consistent with the
provisions of this law and provided that a special use permit is
approved by the planning board:
1. Bed and breakfasts.
2. Clustered projects.
3. Colleges and institutions of higher education.
Sec. 4.2 OLEAN CODE Sec. 4.2
C:794
Sec. 4.3. Residential Transition Use District (RT).
4. Day care centers.
5. Hospitals.
6. Medical clinics.
7. Museums.
8. Non-profit clubs, membership.
9. Nursing (and convalescent) homes.
10. Private parking lots.
11. Townhouses.
12. Accessory uses and structures customarily incident to any of
the uses mentioned herein, and not on the same lot.
The following use may be permitted in the R3 Residential Use
District consistent with the provisions of this law and provided
that this special use permit is permitted by the zoning board
of appeals.
1. Home occupation uses.
4.2.3 Dimensional requirements. The dimensional requirements for this
district are specified in section 6.1, entitled "Law density control
schedule", which is part of this chapter.
4.2.4Off-street parking requirements and loading requirements. The offstreet
parking and loading regulations are specified in article 10,
sections 10.3 and 10.4, of this chapter.
4.2.5 Signage. Signs are permitted as listed in article 11, section 11.1 of this
chapter.
4.2.6 Site plan review. Site plan review and approval shall be secured as
required in article 9 of this chapter.
4.3.1 Intent. The intent of the RT Residential Transition Use District is to
delineate those areas adjacent to the central commercial and business
districts which currently contain a mixture of residential and business
uses, to allow in specific instances in accordance with site plan review
multiple family dwellings and clustering (dwelling groups), and to
promote the continuation of these compatible mixtures of uses as
desirable areas and as buffers between intensive commercial and
residential use districts.
4.3.2 Permitted uses. Within the RT District, permitted principal, special
and accessory uses shall be as specified in the following sections.
Sec. 4.2 CHARTER Sec. 4.3
C:795
Permitted uses in the RT District are further identified in section 4.14
of this article, entitled "Use regulation table".
4.3.2.a Permitted principal uses.
1. Adult care facilities.
2. Antique and craft shops.
3. Art galleries.
4. Banks and financial institutions.
5. Barber and beauty shops.
6. Bed and breakfasts.
7. Churches or places of worship.
8. Day care centers.
9. Detached single-family dwellings.
10. Dwelling units above first floor businesses.
11. General business offices.
12. Government uses.
13. Hotels and motels.
14. Inns.
15. Libraries.
16. Multi-family dwellings.
17. Museums.
18. Newspaper and publishing facilities.
19. Non-profit membership clubs.
20. Nursery schools.
21. Nursing and convalescent homes.
22. Personal service establishments.
23. Photographic studios.
24. Private or public schools.
25. Professional offices.
26. Professional office buildings.
27. Public parks and recreational uses.
Sec. 4.3 OLEAN CODE Sec. 4.3
C:796
28. Recreation, commercial.
29. Restaurant, standard.
30. Semi-detached single-family dwellings.
31. Senior citizen housing.
32. Townhouses.
33. Two-family dwellings.
4.3.2.b Permitted accessory uses, buildings and structures.
1. Accessory uses and structures customarily incident to any of
the uses mentioned for this use district, and on the same lot.
2. Antennas.
3. Home occupation uses.
4. Private parking lots.
4.3.2.c Special permitted uses. The following uses may be permitted in
the RT Residential Transition Use District consistent with the
provisions of this law and provided that a special use permit is
approved by the planning board:
1. Bars and night clubs.
2. Colleges and institutions of higher education.
3. Commercial parking lots.
4. Drive-in uses.
5. Dry cleaning businesses.
6. Funeral homes.
7. Public utilities or transportation uses.
8. Recreation, commercial.
9. Retail businesses and commercial uses other than those
specified above.
10. Self-service laundries.
11. Theaters.
12. Veterinary hospitals.
4.3.3 Dimensional requirements. The dimensional requirements for this
district are specified in section 6.1, entitled "Law density control
schedule", which is part of this law.
Sec. 4.3 CHARTER Sec. 4.3
C:797
Sec. 4.4. City Center Use District (CC).
4.3.4Off-street parking requirements and loading requirements. The offstreet
parking and loading regulations are specified in article 10,
sections 10.3 and 10.4, of this law.
4.3.5 Signage. Signs are permitted as listed in article 11, section 11.1 of this
law.
4.3.6 Site plan review. Site plan review and approval shall be secured as
required in article 9 of this chapter.
4.4.1 Intent. The intent of the CC City Center Use District is to delineate the
city center area which is primarily utilized and is appropriate for a more
intensive mixture of interactive retail, cultural, conference and
meeting, lodging, business and personal service, financial, institutional,
office, residential and governmental uses and to provide and promote a
full range of city center uses that serve the needs of the surrounding
city and county populations and to ensure that any use permitted is
compatible with the character of the district and its permitted types and
intensities of use. The purpose of the CC District is also to recognize the
unique historical character of the city center as a part of the heritage of
the City of Olean and Cattaraugus County.
4.4.2 Permitted uses. Within the CC Use District, permitted principal,
special and accessory uses shall be as specified in the following
sections. Permitted uses in the CC Use District are further identified in
section 4.14 of this article, entitled "Use regulation table."
4.4.2.a Permitted principal uses.
1. Adult care facilities.
2. Antique and craft shops.
3. Art galleries.
4. Banks and financial institutions.
5. Barber and beauty shops.
6. Bars and night clubs.
7. Bed and breakfasts.
8. Bowling alleys.
9. Churches or places of worship.
10. Colleges and institutions of higher education.
11. Commercial parking lots.
12. Day care centers.
Sec. 4.3 OLEAN CODE Sec. 4.4
C:798
13. Dry cleaning businesses.
14. Dwelling units above first floor businesses.
15. Garage service and repair uses.
16. General business office uses.
17. Governmental uses.
18. Hotels and motels.
19. Inns.
20. Libraries.
21. Medical clinics.
22. Multi-family dwellings.
23. Museums.
24. Newspaper and publishing facilities.
25. Non-profit membership clubs.
26. Non-vehicle repair shops.
27. Nursery schools.
28. Parking structures.
29. Personal service establishments.
30. Photographic studios.
31. Professional offices.
32. Professional office buildings.
33. Public and private schools.
34. Public parks and recreational uses.
35. Public utilities or transportation uses.
36. Recreation, commercial.
37. Research laboratories.
38. Retail businesses and commercial uses other than those listed
above.
39. Self-service laundries.
40. Senior citizen housing.
41. Standard and fast food restaurants.
Sec. 4.4 CHARTER Sec. 4.4
C:799
Sec. 4.5. General Commercial Use District (GC).
42. Theaters.
43. Townhouses.
44. Vehicle sales and/or repair uses.
45. Warehousing and wholesale and retail distribution centers
including offices and showrooms.
4.4.2.b Permitted accessory uses, buildings and structures.
1. Accessory uses and structures customarily incident to any of
the uses mentioned for this use district, and on the same lot.
2. Antennas.
3. Private parking lots.
4.4.2.c Special permitted uses. The following uses may be permitted in
the CC City Center Use District consistent with the provisions of
this law and provided that a special use permit is approved by the
planning board:
1. Amusement game centers.
2. Drive-in uses.
3. Funeral homes.
4.4.3 Dimensional requirements. The dimensional requirements for this
district are specified in section 6-1, entitled "Law density control
schedule", which is part of this law.
4.4.4Off-street parking requirements and loading requirements. The offstreet
parking and loading regulations are specified in article 10,
sections 10.3 and 10.4, of this law.
4.4.5 Signage. Signs are permitted as listed in article 11, section 11.2 of this
law.
4.4.6 Site plan review. Site plan review and approval shall be secured as
required in article 9 of this chapter.
4.5.1 Intent. The intent of the GC General Commercial Use District is to
delineate areas in the city which are currently used or are appropriate
for general commercial or business uses which provide a range of retail
and personal services in order to fulfill recurring needs of residents and
visitors and which by the nature or scale of the operations permitted
and careful site planning are compatible with adjoining commercial and
residential areas.
4.5.2 Permitted uses. Within the GC District, permitted principal, special
and accessory uses shall be as specified in the following sections.
Sec. 4.4 OLEAN CODE Sec. 4.5
C:800
Permitted uses in the GC District are further identified in section 4.14
of this article, entitled "Use regulation table".
4.5.2.a Permitted principal uses.
1. Adult care facilities.
2. Amusement game centers.
3. Antique and craft shops.
4. Art galleries.
5. Banks and financial institutions.
6. Barber and beauty shops.
7. Bars and night clubs.
8. Bed and breakfasts.
9. Bowling alleys.
10. Car washes.
11. Churches or places of worship.
12. Clustered projects.
13. Colleges and institutions of higher education.
14. Commercial parking lots.
15. Day care centers.
16. Drive-in uses.
17. Dry cleaning businesses.
18. Dwelling units above first floor businesses.
19. Garage service and repair uses.
20. Gasoline filling stations.
21. Gasoline/grocery service marts.
22. General business office uses.
23. Government uses.
24. Hotels and motels.
25. Inns.
26. Libraries.
27. Medical clinics.
Sec. 4.5 CHARTER Sec. 4.5
C:801
28. Multi-family dwellings.
29. Museums.
30. Newspaper and publishing facilities.
31. Non-profit membership clubs.
32. Non-vehicle repair shops.
33. Nursery schools.
34. Nursing and convalescent homes.
35. Parking structures.
36. Personal service establishments.
37. Photographic studios.
38. Professional offices.
39. Professional office buildings.
40. Public and private schools.
41. Public parks and recreational uses.
42. Public utilities or transportation uses.
43. Research laboratories.
44. Recreation, commercial.
45. Retail businesses and commercial uses other than those listed
above.
46. Standard and fast food restaurants.
47. Self-service laundries.
48. Senior citizen housing.
49. Theaters.
50. Vehicle sales and/or repair uses.
51. Veterinary hospitals.
52. Warehousing and wholesale and retail distribution centers
including offices and showrooms.
4.5.2.b Permitted accessory uses, buildings and structures.
1. Accessory uses and structures customarily incident to any of
the uses mentioned for this use district, and not on the same
lot.
Sec. 4.5 OLEAN CODE Sec. 4.5
C:802
Sec. 4.6. Waterfront Conservation Use District (WC).
2. Accessory uses and structures customarily incident to any of
the uses mentioned for this use district, and on the same lot.
3. Antennas.
4. Home occupations.
5. Private parking lots.
4.5.2.c Special permitted uses. The following uses may be permitted in
the GC General Commercial Use District consistent with the
provisions of this law and provided that a special use permit is
approved by the Planning Board: [Added 6-9-2015 by L.L. No.
3-2015]
1. Funeral homes.
2. Private golf courses.
3. Solar energy production facility.
4. Shelters. [Added 12-22-2015 by L.L. No. 7-2015]
4.5.3 Dimensional requirements. The dimensional requirements for this
district are specified in section 6.1, entitled "Law density control
schedule", which is part of this law.
4.5.4Off-street parking requirements and loading requirements. The offstreet
parking and loading regulations are specified in article 10,
sections 10.3 and 10.4, of this law.
4.5.5 Signage. Signs are permitted as listed in article 11, section 11.2 of this
law.
4.5.6 Site plan review. Site plan review and approval shall be secured as
required in article 9 of this law.
4.6.1 Intent. The intent of the Waterfront Conservation use district
established in this section is to recognize the unique role which the
Allegheny River and Olean Creek and their waterfront areas have
played in the formation, growth and life of the City of Olean. All
construction within this use district is required to conform with the
provisions of chapter 9 of part II of the Code of Ordinances of the City of
Olean, entitled "Flood Prevention". The objectives of this district are:
1. To provide for a compatible mixture of waterfront-related uses,
including recreational, park, open space and boating uses, as well
as limited waterfront enhanced uses such as waterfront-related
residential and commercial uses;
2. To encourage appropriate land development, including the
utilization of land and buildings and the adaptive reuse of existing
Sec. 4.5 CHARTER Sec. 4.6
C:803
structures, which is in harmony with the conservation of the
district's general recreational and open space character and the
historic environmental areas adjacent to the creek and river;
3. To recognize the sensitivity of the unique waterfront environment
in this area and reinforce appropriate safeguards to protect the
area from periodic flooding, soil erosion, sedimentation and slope
failure due to unregulated construction, removal of vegetation,
dredging, filling, damming or channelization;
4. To further protect scenic views of the creek, river, open space areas
and mountains;
5. To provide for a mix of land uses and developments as well as active
and passive recreational areas and opportunities that take
advantage of the unique location and characteristics of the
waterfront area;
6. To promote the maintenance and/or extension of public access to
the river and creek, when practical and feasible, and where such
access relates to and is compatible with the primary purpose of the
proposed development or activity.
7. To provide for a variety of activities in a planned, controlled
environment in a manner blending all uses into a functionally and
aesthetically complementary whole.
4.6.2 Permitted uses. Within the Waterfront Conservation Use District,
permitted principal, special and accessory uses shall be as specified in
the following sections. Permitted uses in the WC Use District are
further identified in section 4.14 of this article, entitled "Use regulation
table".
4.6.2.a Permitted principal uses.
1. Adult care facilities.
2. Antique and craft shops.
3. Art galleries.
4. Banks and financial institutions.
5. Bars and night clubs.
6. Barber and beauty shops.
7. Bed and breakfasts.
8. Churches or places of worship.
9. Clustered projects.
10. Commercial parking lots.
Sec. 4.6 OLEAN CODE Sec. 4.6
C:804
11. Detached single-family dwellings.
12. Dwelling units above first floor businesses.
13. Government uses.
14. Hotels and motels.
15. Inns.
16. Libraries.
17. Multi-family dwellings.
18. Museums.
19. Non-profit clubs, membership.
20. Personal service establishments.
21. Photographic studios.
22. Public parks and recreational uses.
23. Public utilities or transportation uses.
24. Semi-detached one-family dwelling units.
25. Theaters.
26. Townhouses.
27. Two-family dwellings.
4.6.2.b Permitted accessory uses, buildings and structures.
1. Accessory uses and structures customarily incident to any of
the uses mentioned for this use district, and not on the same
lot.
2. Accessory uses and structures customarily incident to any of
the uses mentioned for this use district, and on the same lot.
3. Antennas.
4. Home occupations.
5. Private parking lots.
4.6.2.c Special permitted uses. The following uses may be permitted in
the WC Waterfront Conservation Use District consistent with the
provisions of this chapter and provided that a special use permit is
approved by the Planning Board: [Amended 6-9-2015 by L.L. No.
3-2015; 6-24-2015 by L.L. No. 4-2015]
1. Colleges and institutions of higher education.
Sec. 4.6 CHARTER Sec. 4.6
C:805
2. Mobile home parks.
3. Recreation uses, commercial.
4. Solar energy production facility.
5. Standard and fast food restaurants.
6. Telecommunications towers.
4.6.3 Dimensional requirements. The dimensional requirements for this
district are specified in section 4.6.6. below.
4.6.4Off-street parking requirements and loading requirements. The offstreet
parking and loading regulations are specified in article 10,
sections 10.3 and 10.4, of this law.
4.6.5 Signage. Signs are permitted as listed in article 11, section 11.3 of this
law.
4.6.6 Site plan review. Site plan review and approval shall be required for all
uses permitted within the WC District. In addition to the general
requirements for site plan review and approval as specified in article 9
of this law, the following standards shall apply to site plan review within
the WC Use District:
4.6.6.a A maximum of 40% of the gross land area in the proposed
development parcel may be devoted to a building development.
Said maximum shall include the land area devoted to all principal
and accessory structures but shall exclude any space devoted to
required yards, open space and recreation uses and streets and
required off-street parking within the parcel as defined in the
regulations for this use district.
4.6.6.b A minimum of 30% of the gross land area shall be devoted to
open space as defined in this zoning chapter. This open space area
shall not include area devoted to streets, roads, or required offstreet
parking within the development parcel.
4.6.6.c Setbacks from dikes or base floodline. No building shall be
located closer than 35 feet to a dike, if a dike exists in the area, or
to the base flood elevation line as established by the Federal
Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) as part of the national
flood insurance program (NFIP), if no dike exists in the area. No
structures are permitted to be developed within the floodway as
defined by the Federal Emergency Management Agency and
depicted on the most current FEMA flood insurance rate map for
the City of Olean except in accordance with the regulations of
FEMA.
4.6.6.d Height limitation. No buildings shall exceed a maximum height
of 35 feet in this use district.
Sec. 4.6 OLEAN CODE Sec. 4.6
C:806
Sec. 4.7. Industrial Use District (I).
4.6.6.e Minimum lot area. No lot shall be less than 4,000 square feet in
area.
4.6.6.f Minimum yard requirements. No front yard shall be less than 15
feet in depth. No side yard shall be less than four feet in depth. No
rear yard shall be less than 10 feet in depth.
4.6.6.g Separation between buildings on the same lot. No two buildings
located on the same lot shall be separated from each other by a
distance of less than five feet.
4.7.1 Intent. The intent of the I Industrial Use District is to delineate areas
within the city which are used for and are appropriately suited to
manufacturing, distribution, major wholesaling, research and testing,
warehousing, processing or other industrial uses which contribute jobs
and tax base to the economy of the region, are consistent with the
standards described in article 10 and do not create serious problems of
compatibility with other land uses and to regulate such industrial
development so that it will be of benefit to the city and its citizens.
4.7.2 Permitted uses. Within the I District, permitted principal, special and
accessory uses shall be as specified in the following sections. Permitted
uses in the I District are further identified in section 4.14 of this article,
entitled "Use regulation Table".
4.7.2.a Permitted principal uses.
1. Auto-body repair/metal finishing shop.
2. Adult care facilities.
3. Cemeteries.
4. Colleges and institutions of higher education.
5. Contractor yards and equipment.
6. Crematories/crematoriums.
7. Dry cleaning businesses.
8. Funeral homes.
9. Garage service and repair uses.
10. General business office uses.
11. Governmental uses.
12. Hotels and motels.
13. Manufacture, fabrication, extraction, assembly, and other
handling of material, including offices and show-rooms.
Sec. 4.6 CHARTER Sec. 4.7
C:807
14. Newspaper and publishing facilities.
15. Parking lots, commercial.
16. Parking structures.
17. Professional offices.
18. Professional office buildings.
19. Public parks and recreational uses.
20. Public utilities or transportation uses.
21. Recreation uses, commercial.
22. Research laboratories.
23. Trucking terminals.
24. Vehicle sales and/or repair uses.
25. Warehousing and wholesale and retail distribution centers
including offices and showrooms.
4.7.2.b Permitted accessory uses, buildings and structures.
1. Accessory uses and structures customarily incident to any of
the uses mentioned for this use district, and not on the same
lot.
2. Accessory uses and structures customarily incident to any of
the uses mentioned for this use district, and on the same lot.
3. Antennas.
4. Private parking lots.
4.7.2.c Special permitted uses. [Amended 6-9-2015 by L.L. No.
3-2015; 6-24-2015 by L.L. No. 4-2015]
1. Banks and financial institutions.
2. Bars and night clubs.
3. Day-care centers.
4. Drive-in uses.
5. Gasoline filling stations.
6. Gasoline/grocery service marts.
7. Nonvehicle repair shops.
8. Retail businesses and commercial uses other than those listed
above.
Sec. 4.7 OLEAN CODE Sec. 4.7
C:808
Sec. 4.8. General Industrial District (I2).
9. Solar energy production facility.
10. Standard and fast food restaurants.
11. Telecommunications towers.
12. Veterinary hospitals.
13. Shelters. [Added 12-22-2015 by L.L. No. 7-2015]
4.7.3 Dimensional requirements. The dimensional requirements for this
district are specified in section 6.1, entitled "Law density control
schedule", which is part of this law.
4.7.4Off-street parking requirements and loading requirements. The offstreet
parking and loading regulations are specified in article 10,
sections 10.3 and 10.4, of this law.
4.7.5 Signage. Signs are permitted as listed in article 11, section 11.3 of this
law.
4.7.6 Site plan review. Site plan review and approval shall be secured as
required in article 9 of this law.
4.8.1 Intent. The intent of the I2 General Industrial Use District is to
delineate areas within the city which are used for and are appropriately
suited to manufacturing, distribution, major wholesaling, research and
testing, warehousing, processing or other industrial uses which
contribute jobs and tax base to the economy of the region and
commercial uses, providing that such industrial and commercial uses
are consistent with the standards described in article X and do not
create serious problems of compatibility with other land uses and to
regulate such development so that it will be of benefit to the city and its
citizens.
4.8.2 Permitted uses. Within the I2 District, permitted principal, special and
accessory uses shall be as specified in the following sections. Permitted
uses in the I2 District are further identified in section 4.14 of this
article, entitled "Use regulation table".
4.8.2.a Permitted principal uses.
1. Includes all permitted principal uses allowed in section
28-83(b)(1) of this chapter.
4.8.2.b Permitted accessory uses, buildings and structures.
1. Includes all permitted accessory uses, buildings and structures
allowed in section 4.7.2.b. of this law.
4.8.2.c Special permitted uses.
Sec. 4.7 CHARTER Sec. 4.8
C:809
Sec. 4.9. Special Industrial District (I3).
1. Includes all special permitted uses allowed in section 4.7.2.c of
this law.
2. Adult uses.
4.8.3 Dimensional requirements. The dimensional requirements for this
district are specified in section 6.1, entitled "Law density control
schedule", which is part of this law.
4.8.4Off-street parking requirements and loading requirements. The offstreet
parking and loading regulations are specified in article 10,
sections 10.3 and 10.4, of this law.
4.8.5 Signage. Signs are permitted as listed in article 11, section 11.3 of this
law.
4.8.6 Site plan review. Site plan review and approval shall be secured as
required in article 9 of this law.
4.9.1 Intent. The intent of the I3 Special Industrial Use District is to
delineate areas within the city which are used for and are appropriately
suited to manufacturing, distribution, major wholesaling, research and
testing, warehousing, processing or other industrial uses which
contribute jobs and tax base to the economy of the region and
commercial uses, providing that such industrial and commercial uses
are consistent with the standards described in article 10 and do not
create serious problems of compatibility with other land uses and to
regulate such development so that it will be of benefit to the city and its
citizens.
4.9.2 Permitted uses. Within the I3 District, permitted principal, special and
accessory uses shall be as specified in the following sections. Permitted
uses in the I3 District are further identified in section 14.4 of this
article, entitled "Use regulation table".
4.9.2.a Permitted principal uses.
1. Includes all permitted principal uses allowed in section 4.7.2.a
of this law.
4.9.2.b Permitted accessory uses, buildings and structures.
1. Includes all permitted accessory uses, buildings and structures
allowed in section 4.7.2.b of this law.
4.9.2.c Special permitted uses.
1. Includes all special permitted uses, buildings and structures
allowed in section 4.7.2.c of this law.
2. Adult uses so long as they conform to the following
requirements:
Sec. 4.8 OLEAN CODE Sec. 4.9
C:810
Sec. 4.10. through Sec. 4.13. Reserved.
Sec. 4.14. Use regulation table.31
a) An adult use shall not be located within a three-hundredfoot
radius of any property currently in residential use.
b) No adult use shall be located within a six-hundred-foot
radius for another adult use.
c) No adult use shall be located within a five-hundred-foot
radius of any house of worship, school, day care center,
park or playground, civic facility, or historic resource.
d) No more than one adult use shall be located on any lot.
e) No adult use shall be located in any building that is used in
whole or part for residential uses.
f) All building opening, including doors and windows shall be
located, covered or screened in such a manner as to
prevent a view into the establishment from any public
street, sidewalk or parking area.
g) As a condition of approval of any adult use, there shall be
restriction that there shall be no outdoor, sign, display or
advertising of any kind other than one identification sign
limited to only the name of the establishment. Such a sign
shall be reviewed by the planning board in conjunction
with the conditional use application and shall conform to
all signage requirements of said this local law as per
section 11-1 "Signs".
h) No loudspeaker or sound equipment shall be used by adult
uses that can be heard by the public from outside the
establishment.
4.9.3 Dimensional requirements. The dimensional requirements for this
district are specified in section 6.1 entitled "Law density control
schedule", which is part of this law.
4.9.4Off-street parking requirements and loading requirements. The offstreet
parking and loading regulations are specified in article 10,
sections 10.3 and 10.4, of this law.
4.9.5 Signage. Signs are permitted as listed in article 11, section 11.3 of this
law.
4.9.6 Site plan review. Site plan review and approval shall be secured as
required in article 9 of this law.
[Sections 4.10 through 4.13 reserved for future use.]
Sec. 4.9 CHARTER Sec. 4.15
C:811
Sec. 4.15. Activities prohibited in all districts.
4.15.1No effluent or matter of any kind shall be discharged into any stream
or body of water which violates established stream standards of the
New York State Department of Environmental Conservation or
otherwise causes objectionable odors or fumes or which is poisonous or
injurious to human, plant or animal life.
4.15.2No person, firm or corporation shall strip, excavate or otherwise
remove top soil for sale, or for use other than on the premises from
which the same shall be taken except in connection with the
construction or alteration of a building in such premises and excavation
or grading incidental thereto.
4.15.3No use shall be permitted which will produce corrosive, toxic or
noxious fumes, glare, fire, explosion, electromagnetic disturbance,
radiation, smoke, cinders, odors, obnoxious dust or waste, undue noise
or vibration or other objectionable features so as to be detrimental to
the public health, safety, or general welfare unless conducted under
proper and adequate standards.
4.15.4 Dumping or storage of material in a manner that facilitates the
breeding of vermin or endangers health in any way shall not be
permitted.
31.Editor's note: This table is included as an attachment to this chapter.
Sec. 4.15 OLEAN CODE Sec. 4.15
C:812
ARTICLE 5
INCENTIVE ZONING
Sec. 5.0. Intent.
The purpose and intent of these provisions is to offer incentives to
applicants who provide amenities that assist the city in implementing the
specific physical, cultural, economic development and social policies of the
Comprehensive Development Plan of the City of Olean as supplemented
by the local laws and ordinances adopted by the common council, all in
accordance with Section 81-b of the General City Law of the State of New
York.
Sec. 5.1. Applicable to the Industrial (I), General Industrial (12)
and City Center (CC) Use Districts.
For this purpose the Industrial (I), General Industrial (12) and City Center
(CC) Use Districts are designated as eligible for zoning incentives.
Incentives may be offered to applicants who offer an acceptable amenity to
the city in exchange for the incentive.
Sec. 5.2. Amenities for which zoning incentives may be offered.
Amenities for which Incentives may be offered in the I, 12 and CC Districts
may be provided either on or off the site of the applicant's primary proposal
and may include:
Sec. 5.3. Zoning incentives which may be granted.
The following incentives may be granted by the common council to the
applicant on a specific site:
1. Affordable housing;
2. Passive and active open space and related improvements;
3. Parks and plazas;
4. Child care or adult care facilities;
5. Utilities;
6. Parking or road improvements for use by the general public;
7. Health or other human service facilities;
8. Cultural, visitor or historic facilities;
9. Building or facade improvements in accordance with guidelines
adopted by the common council of the City of Olean;
10. Other facilities or benefits to the residents of the community; and
11. Any combination of amenities and/or cash in lieu of any amenity.
Sec. 5.0 CHARTER Sec. 5.3
C:813
Sec. 5.4. Incentive zoning applications.
Applications for incentives in exchange for amenities shall be submitted
to the common council through the code enforcement officer of the city,
who shall also notify the department of community development of such
application, and the common council shall evaluate the adequacy of
amenities to be accepted in exchange for the requested incentive.
The following information shall be provided by the applicant to the common
council:
Sec. 5.5. Application review process.
The common council shall review the proposal and inform the applicant
whether or not the application is complete and whether the application is
worthy of further consideration. If the application is deemed to be worthy of
further consideration, the common council shall prepare a resolution with
required minimum sponsorship and submit that together with two sketch
plans prepared by the applicant to the planning board.
1. Increases in building density;
2. Changes of use;
3. Increases in lot coverage;
4. Changes in setbacks or height;
5. Increases in floor area;
6. Reductions or modifications of parking requirements where shared or
joint use parking is practicable and the necessary agreements have
been reached.
1. A description of the proposed amenity;
2. The cash value of the proposed amenity;
3. A narrative which describes the benefits to be provided to the
community by the proposed amenity; gives preliminary indication that
there are adequate sewer, water, transportation, waste disposal and fire
protection facilities in the zoning district in which the proposal is
located to handle the additional demands the incentive and amenity, if it
is an on-site amenity, may place on these facilities beyond the demand
that would be placed on them as if the district were developed to its
fullest potential; and explains how the amenity helps implement the
physical, social, economic development or cultural policies of the
comprehensive development plan as supplemented by other local laws
and ordinances adopted by the common council.
4. The requested incentive or incentives. The common council shall refer
all applications to the planning board for its review and comment.
Sec. 5.3 OLEAN CODE Sec. 5.5
C:814
The first sketch shall show how the site will be developed with the amenity,
if it is on-site, and the incentive. The plan shall also show existing
development, property owner's names and tax account numbers for all
property within 200 feet of the property lines of the proposed project or
such other distance specified by the common council.
If the incentive will result in a structural height increase, the applicant
shall submit an elevation drawing at a scale of 1/4 inch equal one inch
which shows the height permitted by the district regulations, the proposed
additional height, the distance to other principal structures on-site and on
adjacent properties and their heights, as well as property line locations.
If the incentive will result in a setback or open space reduction, the drawing
shall show this reduction in relation to the principal structures on-site and
on adjacent properties, as well as property line locations.
The second sketch plan should show existing development, property
owners' names, and tax account numbers for all property within 200 feet of
the property line at the project site, or such other distance as specified by
the common council; but shall only show how the site would be developed
exclusive of any amenity or incentive.
The applicant shall also submit such additional information and plans as
may be required by the planning board which, in its judgment, are
necessary in order to perform a thorough evaluation of the proposal.
The planning board shall review the proposal and report to the common
council with their evaluation of the adequacy with which the amenity or
amenities and incentives fit the site and how they relate to adjacent uses
and structures. The planning board's review shall be limited to the planning,
design and layout considerations involved with project review and such
other issues as may be specifically referred by the common council. The
planning board's report shall be submitted to the common council within 70
days from the date the application by the applicant to the common council
is determined to be complete. This time period may be extended/suspended
for good cause by the common council.
The common council will review the planning board's report. The common
council will notify the applicant whether it is willing to further consider the
proposal and hold a public hearing thereon.
Sec. 5.6. Public hearings and environmental compliance.
For common council public hearings on incentive zoning requests, the city
clerk shall give notice of the hearing in the official newspaper of the city at
least 10 days prior to the date of the hearing.
All applicable requirements of the State Environmental Quality Review
(SEQR) Act shall be complied with as part of the review and hearing
process. In addition to other information that may be required as part of
an environmental assessment of the proposal, the assessment shall include
verification that the area has adequate sewer, water, transportation, waste
Sec. 5.5 CHARTER Sec. 5.6
C:815
disposal and fire protection facilities to, first, serve the remaining vacant
land in the district as though it were developed to its fullest potential
under the district regulations in effect at the time of the amenity/incentive
proposal; and then, serve the on-site amenity and incentive.
Sec. 5.7. Final common council action.
Following the hearing and in addition to compliance with all SEQR
requirements, the common council shall, before taking action, refer the
proposal for review and comment to other governmental agencies as may
be required, and may refer the proposal to other agencies for review and
comment. In order to approve an amenity incentive proposal, the common
council shall determine that the proposed amenity provides sufficient public
benefit to provide the requested incentive. Thereafter, the planning board is
authorized to act on an application for preliminary plan approval.
Following preliminary plan approval and subject to meeting all conditions
imposed on the preliminary plan, including the provision by the applicant
of a performance bond to guarantee completion of the amenities and all
documentation required by the city attorney and common council, the
applicant may submit a final plan for review and approval.
If the common council finds that a community benefit is not suitable on site
or cannot be reasonably provided, the common council may require a cash
payment in lieu of the provision of the amenity. These funds shall be placed
in a trust fund to be used by the city upon approval by the common council
exclusively for amenities specified in these provisions. Cash payments shall
be made prior to the issuance of a building permit.
Sec. 5.6 OLEAN CODE Sec. 5.7
C:816
ARTICLE 6
AREA AND BULK REGULATIONS DENSITY CONTROL
Sec. 6.0. Purpose.
In order to provide a sound environment including adequate open spaces for
access to light and air, to facilitate the prevention of fire, to prevent undue
concentration of population, and to lessen congestion in the streets, no
building or premises shall be erected, altered or used except in accordance
with the standards set forth in this article.
Sec. 6.1. Density control schedule (area and bulk schedule).
The attached schedule of density controls is hereby adopted and declared
to be part of this zoning chapter. It is hereinafter referred to as the "City of
Olean density control schedule."32
Sec. 6.2. Corner lots.
Wherever a side or rear yard is adjacent to a street, both front and side
yards shall be considered to be front yards and the standards for front yards
shall apply.
Sec. 6.3. Projections into required yards.
Sec. 6.4. Compliance with maximum residential density.
6.3.1 The following projections into required yards are permitted:
1. Awnings or movable canopies and overhangs six feet into any yard.
2. Cornices, eaves, retaining walls and roofs three feet into any yard.
6.3.2 Equipment needed for the operation of active or passive solar energy
systems may be approved within required yard setbacks subject to site
plan approval.
6.3.3 Any open or enclosed porch, deck or attached carport or garage shall
be considered a part of the building in the determination of the size of
the required yard or lot coverage. Paved terraces which are not covered
shall not be considered a part of the building.
6.3.4 Accessory uses and buildings may be located in accordance with
section 10.5.
6.4.1 In all districts where residences are permitted, a lot held in single
ownership may be improved for residential use according to the
minimum lot size per dwelling unit and area bulk regulations for the
district as set forth in the density control schedule, provided that there
shall be no more than one principal building and use on each lot except
32.Editor's note: This table is included as an attachment to this chapter.
Sec. 6.0 CHARTER Sec. 6.4
C:817
Sec. 6.5. Side yard for multi-family dwelling units.
Side yards for semi-detached, townhouses or multi-family dwelling units,
where permitted, shall be required at the ends of the total structure only.
Sec. 6.6. Building separations.
The requirements for minimum distance separations between principal
buildings, whether on the same or on different lots, shall be those shown in
section 6.1, "Density control schedule".
Sec. 6.7. Exceptions to front yard requirements.
Where a proposed lot abuts two or more lots which have front yards of less
than the required depth for the district, the front yard for the proposed lot
need not exceed the average front yard of the abutting lots. If one abutting
lot has a front yard of less than the required depth for the district, the front
yard of the proposed lot need not exceed a depth 1/2 way between the depth
of the front yard of the abutting lot and the required front yard depth.
Where a proposed lot abuts two or more lots which have front yards greater
in depth than the required depth for the district, or if one abutting lot has
a front yard greater than the required depth for the district, the front yard
requirement for the proposed lot shall be determined by averages in the
manner specified above.
Sec. 6.8. General exception to height regulations.
Projections such as chimneys, silos, church spires, domes, elevator shaft
housings, water tanks, skylights, antennae, aerials, flagpoles, solar energy
collectors and equipment used for the mounting and operation of such
collectors, and other similar objects not used for human occupancy shall be
subject to site plan approval prior to issuance of a building permit.
Sec. 6.9. Exceptions to side yard requirements.
Where the side wall of a building is not parallel to the side lot line or where
the side lot line is irregular, the width of the side yard may be varied. In
such case, the average width of the side yard shall not be less than the
as provided herein. If two or more residential structures are proposed
to be located on the same lot, the maximum average density
requirement must be complied with and the lot shall be subdivided so
as to provide adequate width and yards.
6.4.2 A building permit shall not be issued for any residential lot of required
or larger than required size according to the requirements of this
zoning law where the lot has been reduced in size through subdivision
and any resulting subdivided lot is not in compliance with the lot size
requirements of this zoning law.
Sec. 6.4 OLEAN CODE Sec. 6.9
C:818
otherwise required minimum width; provided, however, that such yard shall
not be narrower at any point than 1/2 of the normally required width.
Sec. 6.10. Through lots.
In the case of a lot running through from one street to another street or
alley, the frontage on which the majority of the buildings in the block front
shall be considered the primary frontage for the purposes of this chapter. In
cases where there is no clearly defined frontage, the owner, when applying
for a building permit, shall specify which lot line is considered the primary
frontage. The rear portion of such a lot shall, however, be treated as a lot
front for the purposes of determining required setbacks and locations of
permitted structures and uses.
Sec. 6.11. Transition yard requirements.
Where a residential district abuts a nonresidential district along a street
line, there shall be provided in the non-residential district, a landscaped
setback or yard area at least equal in depth to 1/2 of the dimension required
in the residential district.
Sec. 6.9 CHARTER Sec. 6.11
C:819

ARTICLE 7
PLANNED RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT (PR)
Sec. 7.0. Intent.
It is the intent of this article that use regulations and density controls
be established for low density single-family residential districts which may
be added to the city through annexation. The Planned Residential District
provides for somewhat lower density residential single-family development
than the R1, R2 or R3 Districts, in keeping with the environmental and
topographical characteristics of the hillside areas adjacent to the present
city boundaries. It is the intent of this article that developments in areas
where these regulations are applicable respect the preservation of unique
views which are integral to the natural heritage of the city and the character
and density of surrounding areas. The PR District use and density control
regulations are intended to apply to new zoning designations subject to full
review and approval by the common council of the city. They are applicable
to any area which may be annexed in the future by the city where lower
density residential development will meet the objectives of this article.
Sec. 7.1. Permitted uses.
Within the PR Planned Residential Use District, permitted principal, special
and accessory uses shall be as specified in the following sections. Permitted
uses in the PR District are further identified in section 4.14 of this chapter,
entitled "Use regulation table".
7.1.1 Permitted principal uses.
1. Adult care facilities.
2. Churches or places of worship.
3. Day care centers.
4. Detached single-family dwellings.
5. Governmental uses.
6. Libraries.
7. Museums.
8. Nursery schools.
9. Public and private schools.
10. Public parks and recreational uses.
7.1.2 Permitted accessory uses, buildings and structures.
1. Accessory uses and structures customarily incident to any of the
uses mentioned for this use district, and not on the same lot.
Sec. 7.0 CHARTER Sec. 7.1
C:821
Sec. 7.2. Dimensional requirements.
The dimensional requirements for this district are specified in section 6.1,
entitled "Law density control schedule", which is part of this law.
Sec. 7.3. Off-street parking requirements and loading
requirements.
The off-street parking and loading regulations are specified in Article 10,
Sections 10.3 and 10.4, of this law.
Sec. 7.4. Signage.
Signs are permitted as listed in article 11, section 11.21 of this law.
Sec. 7.5. Site plan review.
Site plan review and approval shall be secured as required in Article 9 of
this law.
2. Accessory uses and structures customarily incident to any of the
uses mentioned for this use district, and on the same lot.
3. Antennas.
4. Private parking lots.
7.1.3 Special permitted uses. The following uses may be permitted in the PR
Planned Residential Use District consistent with the provisions of this
law and provided that a special use permit is approved by the planning
board:
1. Bed and breakfasts.
2. Clustered projects.
3. Colleges and institutions of higher education.
4. Multi-family dwellings.
5. Private golf courses.
6. Semi-detached single-family dwellings.
7. Senior citizen housing.
8. Two-family dwellings.
The following uses may be permitted in the PR Planned Residential
Use District consistent with the provisions of the law and provided
that this special use permit is permitted by the zoning board of
appeals.
3. Home occupations.
Sec. 7.1 OLEAN CODE Sec. 7.5
C:822
ARTICLE 8
PLANNED BUSINESS DISTRICT (PB)
Sec. 8.0. Intent.
It is the intent of this article that use regulations and density controls be
established for planned business districts which may be added to the city
through annexation. The Planned Business District provides for mixed-use
business and industrial park developments along regional arterial roads in
keeping with the environmental characteristics of areas most suitable for
consideration for annexation as development occurs in future years. It is
the intent of this article that developments in areas where these regulations
are applicable respect the character and density of surrounding areas. The
PB Use District use and density control regulations are intended to apply to
new zoning designations subject to full review and approval by the common
council of the city. They are applicable to any area which may be annexed in
the future by the city where business development will meet the objectives
of this article.
Sec. 8.1. Permitted uses.
Within the PB Use District, permitted principal, special and accessory uses
shall be as specified in the following sections. Permitted uses in the PB
Use District are further identified in section 4.14 of this law, entitled Use
Regulation Table.
8.1.1 Permitted principal uses.
1. Adult care facilities.
2. Amusement game centers.
3. Antique and craft shops.
4. Art galleries.
5. Banks and financial institutions.
6. Barber and beauty shops.
7. Bars and night clubs.
8. Bowling alleys.
9. Commercial parking lots.
10. Day care centers.
11. Drive-in uses.
12. Dry cleaning businesses.
13. Garage service and repair uses.
Sec. 8.0 CHARTER Sec. 8.1
C:823
14. Gasoline filling stations.
15. Gasoline/grocery service marts.
16. General business office uses.
17. Government uses.
18. Hotels and motels.
19. Libraries.
20. Manufacture, fabrication, extraction, assembly, and other handling
of material.
21. Museums.
22. Newspaper and publishing facilities.
23. Non-profit clubs, membership.
24. Nursing and convalescent homes.
25. Parking structures.
26. Personal service establishments.
27. Photographic studios.
28. Professional offices.
29. Professional office buildings.
30. Public and private schools.
31. Public parks and recreational uses.
32. Public utilities or transportation uses.
33. Research laboratories.
34. Standard and fast food restaurants.
35. Retail businesses and commercial uses other than those listed
above.
36. Theaters.
37. Vehicle sales and/or repair uses.
38. Veterinary hospitals.
39. Warehousing and wholesale and retail distribution centers
including offices and showrooms.
8.1.2 Permitted accessory uses, buildings and structures.
Sec. 8.1 OLEAN CODE Sec. 8.1
C:824
Sec. 8.2. Dimensional requirements.
The dimensional requirements for this district are specified in section 6.1,
entitled "Density control schedule", which is part of this law.
Sec. 8.3. Off-street parking requirements and loading
requirements.
The off-street parking and loading regulations are specified in article 10,
sections 10.3 and 10.4, of this law.
Sec. 8.4. Signage.
Signs are permitted as listed in article 11, section 11.21 of this law.
Sec. 8.5. Site plan review.
Site plan review and approval shall be secured as required in article 9 of
this law.
1. Accessory uses and structures customarily incident to any of the
uses mentioned for this use district, and not on the same lot.
2. Accessory uses and structures customarily incident to any of the
uses mentioned for this use district, and on the same lot.
3. Antennas.
4. Private parking lots.
8.1.3 Special permitted uses. The following uses may be permitted in the PB
Planned Business Use District consistent with the provisions of this
chapter and provided that a special use permit is approved by the
planning board:
1. Colleges and institutions of higher education.
2. Funeral homes.
3. Private golf courses.
Sec. 8.1 CHARTER Sec. 8.5
C:825

ARTICLE 9
PLANNING BOARD: SPECIAL USE PERMITS AND SITE PLAN
REVIEW AND APPROVAL
Pursuant to the city laws and in accordance with the general City Law of
the State of New York, as amended, the city shall have a planning board.
The planning board will consist of seven members appointed by the mayor
with the approval of a majority of the common council. The term of office
is seven years. Appointments will be in a manner so that one member's
term expires each succeeding year. If a vacancy occurs for a reason other
than the expiration of a term, it will be filled by mayoral appointment for
the remainder of the unexpired term. Members must be residents of the
city. Members may not be members of the common council. The mayor
and common council may provide for compensation to be paid to members,
experts, clerks, and a secretary and provide for such other expenses as
may be necessary and proper, not exceeding the appropriation made by
the mayor and common council for his purpose. The mayor will designate
a chairperson from among the members of the planning board, and in the
absence of the chairperson, the planning board may designate a member
to serve as chairperson. The appointment of chairperson is for a one-year
term.
Sec. 9.0. Special uses.
9.0.1 Purpose and intent. The purpose of special use approval is to allow the
proper integration into the community of uses which may be suitable
only under certain conditions and at appropriate locations. Because of
their unusual characteristics, or the special characteristics of the area
in which they are to be located, special uses require special
consideration so that they may be properly located with respect to the
objectives of this zoning chapter and their effect on nearby properties.
9.0.2 Authorization to grant or deny special uses. The planning board is
hereby authorized to approve special uses. The special uses listed in
this zoning law may be permitted, enlarged, or otherwise altered upon
authorization by the planning board in accordance with the standards
and procedures set forth in this section. In permitting a special use or
the modification of a special use, the planning board may impose those
standards and requirements expressly specified by this law and any
additional conditions which the planning board considers necessary
and reasonable to protect the best interests of the surrounding
property, the neighborhood, or the city as a whole. These conditions
may include, but are not limited to, size or controlling the location and
number of vehicle access points, increasing the street width, limiting
the number, size and location of signs, limiting hours of operation, and
required fencing, screening and landscaping or other facilities to
protect adjacent or nearby property. In the case of a use existing prior
to the effective date of this law change in use or in lot area or an
alteration of structure shall conform with the requirements dealing
with special uses.
Sec. 9.0 CHARTER Sec. 9.0
C:827
The duration of an approved special use permit shall be six months or
such greater period not to exceed one year as may be specified in the
approval by the planning board. Special use permit approval may be
renewed by the planning board for a period of six months upon written
application to the planning board and copies to the code enforcement
officer, such application to be submitted prior to the expiration of the
special use permit approval period.
On application, and after public notice and hearing, the planning board
may authorize the issuance by the code enforcement officer of permits
for any of the special uses for which this law requires such permits.
9.0.3 Procedures for special uses.
a. A property owner(s) or his agent(s) may initiate a request for a
special use or modification of a special use by filing an application
which includes a legal description of the property, a proposed
current site plan showing the size and location of the lot, the
location of all buildings and proposed facilties, including access
drives, parking areas and all streets within 250 feet of the lot, plans
and elevations necessary to show the proposed development, other
drawings or information necessary to an understanding of the
proposed use and its relationship to surrounding properties and a
filing fee.
b. In the case where a special use has been approved a building
permit shall be issued after the granting of the special use by the
planning board, and then only in accordance with the terms and
conditions of the special use permit.
c. Before a special use is permitted the proposed special use shall be
subject to public notice and a public hearing, pursuant to the
procedures specified in section 9.1.6.
d. The planning board, on its own motion, may revoke any special use
permit for non-compliance with conditions set forth in the granting
of said permit after first holding a public hearing and giving notice
of such hearing. The forgoing shall not be the exclusive remedy and
it shall be unlawful and punishable for any person to violate any
condition imposed by a special use permit. In such cases a period of
60 days shall be granted the applicant for full compliance prior to
revocation of the said permit. In cases where there is imminent
danger to the public health, safety or welfare, the revocation of the
special use permit shall be immediate.
e. The planning board may require that special use permits be
periodically renewed after notice and a public hearing to determine
if the original conditions have been complied with or whether
conditions have changed since the original special use permit was
granted.
Sec. 9.0 OLEAN CODE Sec. 9.0
C:828
f. The planning board may, at its discretion, waive any submission
requirements which it deems to be not relevant to the proposed use
and site.
9.0.4 Standards governing special uses. A special use shall comply with the
standards of the district in which it is located. In approving such uses,
the planning board shall take into consideration the public health,
safety and welfare and comfort and convenience of the public in general
and of the residents of the immediate neighborhood in general and
shall, to the maximum extent possible further the expressed intent of
this law and the accomplishment of the following objectives:
a. In order to grant any special use, the planning board shall find that
the request is in harmony with the general purpose and intent of
this zoning law, taking into account the location and size of use, the
nature and intensity of the operations involved in or conducted in
connection with the use and the size of the site with respect to
streets giving access thereto.
b. In order to grant any special use, the planning board shall find that
the establishment, maintenance, or operation of the use applied for,
under the circumstances of the particular case, will not be
detrimental to the health, safety or general welfare of persons
residing or working in the neighborhood of such proposed use or
will not be detrimental or injurious to the property and
improvements in the neighborhood or to the general welfare of the
city.
c. The proposal will not result in the destruction, loss, or damage of
any natural, scenic or significant historical resource.
d. The proposal will not create excessive additional requirements of
public cost for public facilities and services; and will not be
detrimental to the economic welfare of the community.
e. The proposal will be served adequately by essential public facilities
such as highways, streets, police and fire protection, stormwater
drainage, water and sewer, schools or that the applicant for the
proposed special use shall otherwise provide that these services be
adequately obtained.
f. The proposal essentially conforms with the comprehensive
development plan.
g. All proposed structures, equipment or material shall be readily
accessible for fire and police protection.
h. The proposed use shall be of such location, size, and character that,
in general, it will be in harmony with the appropriate and orderly
development of the district in which it is proposed to be situated
and shall not be detrimental to the orderly development of adjacent
Sec. 9.0 CHARTER Sec. 9.0
C:829
Sec. 9.1. Site plan review and approval. [L.L. No. 42-00, § 3,
6-22-2000; L.L. No. 6-02, § 1, 11-12-2002; L.L. No. 1-08, § 1,
1-14-2008]
properties, in accordance with the zoning classification of such
properties.
i. The proposal conforms to all applicable requirements of article 10,
"Development guidelines".
In addition to the above, in the case of any use located in, or
directly adjacent to, a residential district:
a. The location and size of such use, the nature and intensity of
operations involved in or conducted in connection therewith,
its site layout and its relation to existing streets shall be such
that both pedestrian and vehicular traffic to and from the use
and the assembly of persons in connection therewith will not
be hazardous or inconvenient to, or incongruous with, the said
residential district or conflict with the normal traffic of the
neighborhood.
b. The location and height of buildings, the location, nature and
height of walls and fences, and the nature and extent of
landscaping on the site shall be such that the use will not
hinder or discourage the appropriate development and use of
adjacent land and buildings.
9.1.0 Intent. The intent of site plan approval is to authorize the city's
planning board to review and approve site plans for uses otherwise
permitted by this law in order to determine full compliance with the
intent of the standards of this law. The objective is to evaluate site plans
in order to minimize conflicts between the site layout and design of
proposed uses and existing uses and natural site conditions and thereby
minimize any adverse effects affecting the health, safety, and overall
welfare of the community.
9.1.1 Authorization. The power to approve, approve with modification, or
disapprove site plans for as required by this chapter is vested in the
city's planning board. Section 27 of the General City Law of New York
State provides legislative authority for the common council to authorize
the planning board to review and approve site plans. Prior to issuing a
building permit for construction, expansion or change in use of any use,
a site plan and supporting documentation shall be submitted to the
planning board for its review and approval. The planning board may
require that the site plans be prepared by a licensed architect or
engineer. Such requirement shall be based on the complexity of the site
features and of the proposed structure(s) or land use as related to
same.
Sec. 9.0 OLEAN CODE Sec. 9.1
C:830
9.1.2 Applicability and exceptions. Under this article, all new development
or land use activities within the city shall require site plan review
before being undertaken, except the following:
1. Construction or expansion of a single one-family or two-family
dwelling and ordinary accessory structures, and related land use
activities.
2. Landscaping or grading which is not intended to be used in
connection with a land use reviewable under the provisions of this
law.
3. Ordinary repair or maintenance or interior alterations to existing
structures or uses.
4. Exterior alterations or additions to existing structures which would
not increase the square footage of the existing structure by more
than 500 square feet.
5. Agricultural or gardening uses not involving substantial timber
cutting.
6. All signs (except in conjunction with new development).
7. Garage, lawn and porch unless:
a) They last more than three days; or
b) They are held at the same place more than three times within
12 months.
9.1.3 Concept plan conference. Concept plan submittal is optional and may
be waived by the planning board. The purpose of concept plan submittal
is to encourage the person applying for a use to consult early and
informally with the planning board in order to save time and money and
to make the most of opportunities for desirable development.
9.1.3.1 Requirements. A concept plan, if prepared, shall be submitted in
triplicate to the planning board. Before preparing a concept layout,
the developer may discuss with the planning board the general
requirements as to design of streets, reservations of land, drainage,
sewage, water supply, fire protection, and other improvements as
well as procedural matters.
Sec. 9.1 CHARTER Sec. 9.1
C:831
Developers of land adjoining state or county highways are advised
to consult with the District Engineer of the New York State
Department of Transportation or Cattaraugus County Highway
Superintendent at the concept layout stage in order to resolve
problems of street openings or storm water drainage at the
earliest possible stage in the design process. The planning board
shall provide written comments on the concept plan of a proposed
development and in the course of its review may consult with other
interested public agencies.
The concept plan shall include the following information:
1. An area map showing:
a. Applicant's entire holdings, that portion of the applicant's
property under consideration for development and any
adjacent parcels owned by the applicant.
b. All properties, their ownership and uses, subdivisions,
streets, zoning districts, easements, and adjacent
buildings within 500 feet of the applicant's property.
2. A site development plan, including but not limited to:
a. Existing natural features such as water bodies,
watercourses, wetlands, wooded areas, individual large
trees, flood hazard areas.
b. Zoning districts, school districts.
c. Special improvement districts (water, sewer, lights, fire,
drainage and the like).
d. Easements.
e. All existing built features.
f. All proposed buildings, structures and public
improvements.
3. A map showing the topography of the site.
4. A soils overlay, if general site grades exceed 10% or if portions
of the site have susceptibility to erosion, flooding or ponding.
The requirement for submission of these documents may be
waived at the sole discretion of the planning board.
9.1.4 Preliminary site plan application. Application for preliminary site plan
approval shall be made in writing in triplicate to the code enforcement
officer. The code enforcement officer shall notify the city clerk of receipt
of the application and shall refer the application to the planning board
for its review and approval. For the purposes of this law, the submission
Sec. 9.1 OLEAN CODE Sec. 9.1
C:832
date shall be the date of the first planning board meeting following
submission to the code enforcement officer.
9.1.5 Preliminary site plan requirements. The preliminary site plan
application shall include the information listed below. The planning
board may at its discretion waive any preliminary requirements which
are not relevant to the proposed use and site.
1. An area map showing that portion of the applicant's property under
consideration for development, any adjacent parcels owned by the
applicant, and all streets, zoning districts, easements and adjacent
buildings within 500 feet of applicant's property.
2. A preliminary site plan shall include the following information:
a. Title of drawing, including the name and address of the
applicant.
b. North arrow, scale and date.
c. Boundaries of the project at a scale of not more than 200 feet
to one inch.
d. Existing natural features such as watercourses, water bodies,
wetlands, wooded areas and individual large trees, showing
features to be retained.
e. Existing and proposed contours at intervals of not more than
10 feet.
f. Location of proposed land uses and their areas in square feet
or acres, the uses proposed and the height of each proposed
structure.
g. Location of all existing or proposed site improvements
including streets, drains, culverts, retaining walls, fences and
easements, whether public or private.
h. Description of sewage disposal and water systems and the
location proposed for such facilities.
i. Provision for buffer areas and other landscaping.
j. Delineation of residential areas, if proposed, indicating the
general extent of each area, a description of the dwelling unit
types proposed, and a calculation of residential density in
dwelling units per gross acre for each such area.
k. Location of all parking and truckloading areas, showing access
and ingress drives.
l. The location, design and size of all signs and lighting facilities.
Sec. 9.1 CHARTER Sec. 9.1
C:833
m. The approximate locations and dimensions of areas proposed
for neighborhood parks or playgrounds, or other permanent
open space.
n. Building orientation, footprint and elevations.
o. The location and design of all energy distribution facilities,
including electrical, gas and solar energy.
p. Provision for energy efficiency.
q. Grading and erosion control measures including the proposed
location of sediment sink/settling pond and interceptor swales,
etc.
r. Location and design for stormwater management facilities.
s. A drainage report including supporting design data and copies
of the engineering computations used to determine the design
capacities and performance requirements of drainage
facilities.
t. The lines and dimensions of all property which is offered, or is
to be offered, for dedication for public use, with the purpose
indicated thereon, and of all property that is proposed to be
reserved by deed covenant for the common use of the property
owners of the development.
3. The planning board may require additional information which
appears necessary for a complete assessment of the project.
4. The planning board's review of the preliminary site plan shall
include, but is not limited to the following considerations:
a. Adequacy and arrangement of vehicular traffic access and
circulation, including emergency vehicle access.
b. Location, arrangement, appearance and sufficiency of offstreet
parking and loading.
c. Location, arrangement, size and design of buildings, lighting
and signs.
d. Relationship of the various uses to one another and their scale.
e. Adequacy, type and arrangement of trees, shrubs and other
landscaping constituting a visual and noise buffer between
adjacent uses and adjoining lands.
f. Adequacy of storm water and sanitary waste disposal.
g. Adequacy of structures, roadways and landscaping in areas
susceptible to flooding and ponding or erosion.
Sec. 9.1 OLEAN CODE Sec. 9.1
C:834
h. Compatibility of development with natural features of the site
and with surrounding land uses.
i. Adequacy of floodproofing and flood prevention measures
consistent with the flood hazard prevention regulations of the
Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA).
j. Adequacy of building orientation and site design for energy
efficiency. The extent to which the proposal plan conserves
energy use and energy adequate sunlight for use by solar
energy systems.
k. Adequacy of open space for play areas, informal recreation and
the retention of natural areas such as wildlife habitats,
wetlands and wooded areas.
l. Adequacy of pedestrian access, circulation, convenience and
safety, including compliance with the requirements for access
by the physically challenged which are incorporated in the
American Disabilities Act (ADA).
m. Those requirements that apply that are found in Article 10.
In its review of a preliminary site plan, the planning board
may consult with the code enforcement officer, fire and police
departments, other local and Cattaraugus County officials,
and any designated private consultants, in addition to
representatives of federal and state agencies including, but
not limited to, the soil conservation service, the New York
State Department of Transportation (NYSDOT) and the New
York State Department of Environmental Conservation
(NYSDEC).
9.1.6 Public hearing. Upon the planning board's certification that the
preliminary site plan application is complete and satisfactory, the
planning board shall schedule a public hearing. Applicants are required
to mail notices of such public hearings to the owners or occupants of all
lands within a radius of 250 feet from any part of the property for which
site plan review is requested. Such notices shall be postmarked at least
10 days prior to the date scheduled for the public hearing.
9.1.7 Notification of decision on preliminary site plan. Within 45 days of the
public hearing at which a preliminary site plan is considered, the
planning board shall act upon it. The planning board's action shall be in
the form of a written statement to the applicant stating whether or not
the preliminary site plan is approved, conditionally approved, or
disapproved. A copy of the appropriate minutes of the planning board
shall be a sufficient report. The planning board's statement may include
recommendations as to desirable revisions to be incorporated in the
final site plan application. If the preliminary layout is disapproved, the
planning board's statement will contain the reasons for such findings.
Sec. 9.1 CHARTER Sec. 9.1
C:835
In such a case the planning board may recommend further study of the
proposal and resubmission of the preliminary site plan.
9.1.8 Final site plan application. After receiving approval, with or without
conditions, from the planning board on a preliminary site plan, and
approval for all necessary permits and curb cuts from the director of
public works and responsible local, county and state officials, the
applicant may prepare its final site plan and submit it to the planning
board for its review and approval. The planning board, at its discretion,
may waive the concept and final application procedure.
If more then one year has elapsed between the time of the planning
board's report on the preliminary site plan and submission by the
applicant of a final site plan application, and if the planning board
finds that conditions have changed significantly in the interim, the
planning board may require a resubmission of the preliminary site
plan for further review and possible revisions prior to accepting the
proposed final site plan application for review. The final site plan shall
conform to the approved preliminary site plan, and shall incorporate
any revisions or other features that may have been recommended by
the planning board at the preliminary review. All revisions shall be
clearly indicated by the applicant.
9.1.9 Notification of decision on final site plan. Within 62 days of the
submission of the final site plan, the planning board shall render a
decision.
1. Upon approval, the planning board shall endorse its approval on a
copy of the final site plan and shall forward it to the code
enforcement officer who shall then issue a building permit if the
project conforms to all other applicable requirements.
2. Upon disapproval, the planning board shall so inform the code
enforcement officer and he shall deny a building permit. The
planning board shall also notify the applicant in writing of its
decision and its reason for disapproval. A copy of the appropriate
minutes may suffice for this notice.
3. Specifications for improvements shown on the site plan shall be
those set forth in this law and in other laws, rules and regulations,
or in construction specifications of the city.
9.1.10 Time restriction for action on final site plan. The duration of an
approved site plan shall be six months or such greater period not to
exceed one year as may be specified in the approval by the planning
board. Site plan approval may be renewed by the planning board for a
period of six months upon written application to the planning board and
copied to the code enforcement officer, such application to be submitted
prior to the expiration of the site plan approval period.
9.1.11 Failure to comply with any condition of the site plan approval shall
constitute a violation of the zoning law subjecting the applicant or any
Sec. 9.1 OLEAN CODE Sec. 9.1
C:836
Sec. 9.2. Appeal.
The applicant or any interested person may appeal a decision of the
planning board. The appeal is made to the Supreme Court for review by
a proceeding under Article 78 of the Civil Practice Law and Rules. Such
proceedings shall be instituted within 30 days after the filing of a decision
on a special use permit or site plan review application.
Sec. 9.3. Fees for required special use permits or site plan review.
The common council may require the payment of fees to the city by
applicants whose proposals require special use permits or site plan review
as described by this article. Fees for special use permits or site plan review
in accordance with this article shall be established from time to time by law
of the common council.
successor in interest in the property for which site plan approval was
granted to all penalties set forth in Article 17 of the Zoning Law. The
applicant, or any successor in interest the property for which site plan
approval was granted shall be required to appear before the planning
board for review of the conditions of site plan approval within 30
days. The planning board upon such review may remove or amend the
conditions of site plan approval.
Sec. 9.1 CHARTER Sec. 9.3
C:837

ARTICLE 10
DEVELOPMENT GUIDELINES AND GENERAL PROVISIONS
Sec. 10.0. General.
The planning board, in reviewing a site plan, shall take into consideration
the prospective character of the development and require that
improvements be designed to be consistent with reasonable protection of
the public health, safety, or welfare. The code enforcement officer shall
ensure compliance with this article and any other applicable laws, articles
or sections.
Sec. 10.1. Lots and blocks.
Sec. 10.2. Streets, roads, and sidewalks.
Street systems shall be designed with due regard to the needs for:
Convenient traffic access and circulation; traffic control and safety; access
for fire fighting, snow removal, and street maintenance equipment;
patrolling by the police department; and stormwater drainage and sewage
disposal. Streets shall be designed to accommodate the prospective traffic,
and so arranged as to separate through traffic from neighborhood traffic
insofar as it is practicable.
Sec. 10.3. Off-street parking requirements.
10.1.1 Lot size and arrangement. The dimensions and arrangements of lots
shall be such that there will be no foreseeable difficulties, for reasons of
topography or other conditions, in providing access to buildings on such
lots or in securing building permits to build. In general, side lot lines
shall be at right angles or radial to street lines, unless a variation from
this can be shown to result in a better plan.
10.2.1 Streets and roads. All streets and roads shall be constructed in
conformance with specifications set forth by the director of public
works of the city.
10.2.2 Sidewalks. It is the policy of the city to encourage the building of
sidewalks. Location of sidewalks generally shall be within the right-ofway
of public streets and pedestrian access easements. Sidewalks shall
conform to specifications set forth by the director of public works of the
city.
10.3.1 General requirements.
1. Parking shall not be permitted in front yards except following site
plan review as provided for in article 9 of this zoning law. Under
any circumstances, a minimum four-foot wide planting strip shall
be provided between the adjacent sidewalk or public right-of-way
and any permitted parking area.
Sec. 10.0 CHARTER Sec. 10.3
C:839
2. It shall be the responsibility of the owner of a property to provide
the total number of off-street parking spaces required by this law
for any uses which are enlarged, erected or structurally altered
after the effective date of this law.
3. A parking space shall be a minimum of nine feet by 20 feet,
exclusive of parking aisles and driveways appurtenant to and
giving access thereto.
4. An area containing one or more parking spaces shall have direct
access to a public street or alley.
5. No exit or entrance drive connecting a parking area and a street
shall be permitted within 30 feet of the intersection of two public
rights-of-way.
6. Where appropriate, the planning board may, upon the presentation
of evidence, vary the number and circumstances of the following
parking space requirements, in order that the general welfare be
served and the proposed uses be equitably treated.
7. In stadiums, theaters, churches, and other places of assembly, in
which patrons or spectators occupy benches, pews, or other similar
seating facilities; each 20 inches of such seating facilities shall be
counted as one seat.
8. The outdoor lighting of off-street parking lots shall be designed to
shield adjacent properties from glare.
9. If the uses, structures or parcels for which parking is provided are
under separate ownership, the right to joint use of parking spaces
shall be evidenced by a deed, lease, contract or other appropriate
written document to establish the joint use. Upon application by an
owner or owners, the zoning board of appeals may, without
requiring a variance, authorize the joint use of parking facilities
upon a finding that up to 50% of the parking spaces required for a
specified use which is primarily a daytime activity may be used to
satisfy the parking requirements for a specified use which is
primarily an evening activity. Applicants seeking such authorization
shall submit written documentation justifying their requests.
10. Off-street parking lots in residential areas shall be restricted to
passenger vehicles only. The use of off-street parking lots in
residential areas for the parking or storage of trucks, house
trailers, mobile homes, utility trailers or other motorized
equipment not of a residential passenger carrying nature shall be
prohibited.
10.3.2 Required off-street parking spaces. The minimum number of parking
spaces required shall be determined by the number or amount of
dwelling units, bedrooms, floor area, members, equipment, employees,
and/or seats contained in such new buildings, uses or structures, or
Sec. 10.3 OLEAN CODE Sec. 10.3
C:840
added by alteration of buildings or structures, and such minimum
number of spaces shall be maintained by the owners of such buildings
or structures, as follows:
1. Single-family dwelling unit—Two spaces per unit.
2. Two-family dwelling—Two spaces per unit.
3. Townhouses or multi-family dwelling unit—One-and-one-half
spaces per one-bedroom unit; two spaces per two-bedroom unit;
and 2 1/2 spaces per three-bedroom unit. Any den or similar room
capable of being used as a bedroom shall be deemed to be a
bedroom.
4. Home occupation—One space for each person or employee
engaged in any home occupation.
5. Hospitals, nursing homes—One space for each employee on major
shift plus 0.25 spaces per bed.
6. Bed and breakfasts, inns—One space for each bedroom within the
facility.
7. Motels/hotels—One space for each unit plus one space for every
four employees plus one space per 150 square feet net area of
restaurants and assembly rooms.
8. Offices—A minimum of one space is required, plus one space for
each 300 square feet of gross floor area over 1,000 square feet.
9. Retail establishments, veterinary hospitals, banks, and related
commercial establishments of a personal service nature—A
minimum of one space is required, plus one space for each 200
square feet of gross floor area over 1,000 square feet, plus one
space per employee.
10. Restaurants—One space for each 150 square feet of customer floor
area.
11. Conference/convention centers, commercial recreation, private
membership clubs—One space for every 150 square feet of public
assembly space.
12. Roadside stands—One space for every 100 square feet area
devoted to selling or display.
13. Nursery and elementary schools—One space per employee plus
one additional space per classroom.
14. High schools and colleges—Five spaces for each classroom.
15. Churches or places of worship, auditoriums, theaters—One space
for every four seats.
Sec. 10.3 CHARTER Sec. 10.3
C:841
16. Industrial uses.
a. One space for each 800 square feet of floor area devoted to
manufacture including printing, publishing, and laundry or dry
cleaning plants.
b. One space for each 1,500 square feet of floor area devoted to
storage or stationary operating equipment.
c. One space for each 3,000 square feet of area devoted to
outside storage, including used car lots and equipment rental
or sales yards.
d. For any industrial use, one space for each company vehicle.
17. Funeral homes a minimum of 10 spaces for each establishment,
plus one space for each 150 square feet of gross floor area over
1,000 square feet.
10.3.3 Calculation of required parking spaces. In the case of combination of
uses, the total requirements for off-street automobile parking spaces
shall be the sum of the requirements for the various uses, unless it can
be proven that staggered hours of use would permit joint use of parking
areas or other modifications. Whenever a major fraction of a space is
required, a full space shall be provided.
10.3.4 Dimensions for off-street automobile parking spaces and lots. Every
such space provided shall be at least nine feet wide and 20 feet long,
and every space shall have direct and usable driveway access to a street
or alley with minimum maneuver area between spaces as follows:
1. Parallel parking: Five feet end to end with twelve-foot aisle width
for one directional flow and twenty-four-foot aisle width for two
directional flow.
2. Thirty-degree parking: Eleven-foot aisle width for one directional
flow and twenty-four-foot aisle width for two directional flow.
3. Forty-five-degree parking: Thirteen-foot aisle width for one
directional flow and twenty-four-foot aisle width for two directional
flow.
4. Sixty-degree-parking: Eighteen-foot aisle width for one directional
flow and twenty-four-foot aisle width for two directional flow.
5. Perpendicular parking: Twenty-four-foot aisle width for one
directional and two directional flow.
6. For the purpose of computing the area necessary for required offstreet
parking, 350 square feet of unobstructed net area shall be
considered one parking space, unless the code enforcement officer
certifies that the layout and design of the parking area are
Sec. 10.3 OLEAN CODE Sec. 10.3
C:842
adequate to permit safe and convenient access and maneuvering
despite a lesser square footage of net area.
10.3.5 Location of required parking spaces.
1. Residential Districts (R1, R2, and R3) and Residential Transition
(RT) District:
a. Required automobile parking spaces shall be provided on the
same lot as the residence. This space shall be graded for
parking use and readily accessible from the street.
b. Open parking areas may encroach on any required side or rear
yard to within three feet of a property line except that in
existing lots with six-foot side yards and in the Residential
Transition District, required parking spaces may, upon
approval of the planning board, extend to the side and/or rear
lot lines.
2. Commercial Districts (CC and GC), Waterfront Conservation (WC)
and Industrial District (I) and General Industrial District (I2):
a. Required parking spaces shall be provided on the same lot as
the business, residential, institutional or industrial use, or not
more than 400 feet distant from them.
b. Where such parking is situated adjacent to a residential use it
shall be set back a minimum of six feet from the residential lot
line, and an adequate landscape buffer in conformance with
section 10.17 shall be provided within such setback area.
c. Notwithstanding the requirements of subsection 2a. above,
required parking spaces to serve adult uses shall be provided
on the same lot as the use said parking is proposed to serve.
10.3.6Off-street parking waiver. Off-street parking requirements may be
waived in whole or in part upon finding by the zoning board of appeals
that:
1. Adequate public off-street parking facilities are available within
400 feet of the lot containing the subject use, or
2. Evidence of satisfactory off-site parking arrangements has been
documented.
10.3.7 Construction of parking areas. All off-street parking areas, with the
exception of those for single family residences, shall meet the following
construction standards:
1. Be paved with a suitable all-weather, dustfree surface. The
individual spaces shall be visibly marked with paint or other
durable material.
Sec. 10.3 CHARTER Sec. 10.3
C:843
Sec. 10.4. Off-street loading and unloading requirements.
In all districts, wherever a lot or structure which is to be occupied by
manufacturing, commercial, business or other similar uses requires the
receipt and distribution by vehicles of materials or merchandise, there shall
be provided and maintained, on said lot, off-street loading berths shall be
located in such a way as not to unreasonably interfere with the movement
of people and vehicles on public ways. The planning board may allow use of
a public alley to satisfy loading berth requirements.
Sec. 10.5. Accessory building and uses. [L.L. No. 42-00, §§ 1, 2,
6-27-2000]
2. Be provided with wheel stops to keep parked vehicles within proper
boundaries.
10.3.8 Landscaping. At least 10% of the area of a lot usable for off-street
parking shall be devoted to landscaping with lawn, trees, shrubs or
other plant material. All loading berths and parking areas of three or
more spaces that abut a residential lot line, and any parking lot for
more than 20 cars shall be screened adequately, as set forth in section
28-243, from adjoining properties. All parking areas and landscaping
shall be properly maintained thereafter in a sightly and well-kept
condition.
10.4.4[1] Landscaping shall be as required in section 10.3.8.
10.5.1 Accessory buildings. Accessory buildings not attached to principal
buildings shall comply with the following:
1. Accessory buildings 100 square feet or more in size shall require a
building permit.
2. Accessory buildings shall only be located on the same lot as the
principal use stated in the density control schedule.
3. Accessory buildings shall only be located in a rear or side yard in
compliance with the following minimum requirements:
a. R1, R2, R3, RT, CC, GC, WC Districts:
(1) For buildings greater than 100 square feet
Side yard: Minimum six feet.
Rear yard: Minimum six feet.
(2) For buildings less than 100 square feet.
Side yard: Minimum three feet.
Rear yard: Minimum three feet.
(3) "I" Districts:
Sec. 10.3 OLEAN CODE Sec. 10.5
C:844
Sec. 10.6. Driveway standards.
Sec. 10.7. Fences and walls.
Fences and walls are permitted as follows:
Side yard: No minimum.
Rear yard: No minimum.
b. Where any district abuts an existing residential use and/or a
residential district, any accessory building shall be located a
minimum of 1/2 the distance specified in the density control
schedule for principal structures.
4. Accessory buildings shall not be located closer than five feet to the
principal building.
10.5.2 Accessory uses. In a residential district, accessory uses not enclosed
in a building, including swimming pools and tennis courts, shall be
erected only on the same lot as the principal structures, shall not be
located in front yard on such lots; and shall be located not less than six
feet from any lot line and shall not adversely affect the character of any
residential neighborhood by reason of noise or glare or safety.
10.5.3 Where 50% or more of the lots in a block are occupied by buildings
which have yard, coverage or setback dimensions which are different
than those required under this chapter, the average yard dimensions,
coverage and setbacks shall determine the requirements for any new
accessory building or use within the block. Or, where no standard block
exists the word "block" as used above shall be interpreted to mean
those structures within 250 feet of either side of the lot in question, on
the same side of the street. The average set-back shall be based on no
fewer than two similar uses.
10.6.1 Portions of driveways which lie within public rights-of-way shall be
constructed in conformance with specifications set forth by the director
of public works of the city.
10.6.2 All work and materials shall be furnished as required to meet
specifications set forth by the director of public works of the city and
county and state highway departments.
10.6.3No alteration or addition shall be made to any portion of a driveway
lying within a public-right-of-way without first securing permission from
the director of public works.
10.6.4No more than two driveways to a single commercial establishment
entering on one street shall be permitted.
10.7.1 Where a driveway meets a street, no hedge, wall or other planting
shall be installed and maintained which exceeds 2 1/2 feet in height for
a distance of eight feet from the public right-of-way.
Sec. 10.5 CHARTER Sec. 10.7
C:845
Sec. 10.8. Steep slopes, storm drainage, erosion and sediment
control and environmental protection.
The City of Olean includes areas of steep slopes which are herein defined as
slopes equal to or greater than 10%. Development in areas of steep slopes
shall conform to specifications developed by the director of public works of
the city.
The provisions and requirements of this law shall not be a substitute for the
applicable provisions and requirements of the State Environmental Quality
Review Act of New York State.
Sec. 10.9. Design.
Every effort should be made to preserve unique physical features such
as historic landmarks, stream banks, forested areas, natural lookouts,
desirable views of the hills and mountains which surround the city as well
as other major natural features, rock outcroppings and other unique natural
features of the city environment. Storm drainage, erosion and sediment
control shall conform with specifications set forth by the director of public
works of the city.
10.7.2 The minimum clear vision distance at a street intersection shall be 30
feet measured from the intersection along the lot lines of the lot.
10.7.3 Fences, walls, hedges or screen plantings may be required, as
specified elsewhere in this Law for multi-family, commercial or
industrial uses, as is necessary to protect the residential quality of
adjacent property.
10.7.4 Fence and wall regulations.
1. Residential districts—Maximum height of four feet shall be allowed
for fences and/or walls located in a front yard at a street
intersection; any fences or walls located in a front yard at a street
intersection shall be constructed of materials that shall not hinder
clear vision in conformance with subsection 10.7.5.
2. Business and industrial districts—There shall be no restrictions,
except that any fence or wall located on a residential lot line or
district boundary shall be limited to four feet in height at the
property line or a maximum of six feet if located a minimum of six
feet from the property line and that fences and walls located in a
front yard at a street intersection shall be constructed of materials
that shall not hinder clear vision in conformance with subsection
10.7.5.
10.7.5 The clear vision area shall contain no plantings, fences, walls,
structures, or temporary or permanent obstructions exceeding three
feet in height measured from the top of the street pavement, unless
such plantings have all branches and foliage removed to a height of
eight feet above the finished grade.
Sec. 10.7 OLEAN CODE Sec. 10.10
C:846
Sec. 10.10. Open space, parks and playgrounds.
The planning board may, as a condition of site plan approval, require that
specific areas be designated for recreational purposes. Such designation
shall depend upon the magnitude and character of the project, and
accessibility to existing public recreational areas. All lands proposed for
park or recreation purposes shall meet the following minimum standards.
Sec. 10.11. Utilities.
Sec. 10.12. Industrial district regulations.
10.10.1 Such lands shall either be deeded to the city or be held in corporate
ownership and maintained by an established organization.
10.10.2 Such lands shall have locational and physical characteristics which
render them readily usable for appropriate recreation purposes, and
their locations shall be selected with a view to minimizing hazards and
vehicular traffic conflict for children walking between such facilities
and their homes in the neighborhood.
10.10.3 Any such area shall be located at a suitable place on the edge of the
development so that additional land may be added at such time as the
adjacent land is developed.
10.10.4 A detailed development plan shall be provided for each
neighborhood park or playground. As a minimum, the development plan
shall provide for an approximately level area at least 2,000 square feet
in size with appropriate play structures and activity areas.
10.10.5 The development plan shall show how the entire area is to be
graded, drained, and landscaped to make it a useful and attractive
feature of the neighborhood.
10.11.1 Provision for water supply, sanitary sewer systems and electrical,
telephone and other utilities shall conform to specifications set forth by
the director of public works of the city.
10.11.2 Utility easements. An easement shall be provided for all utility lines
wherever those utility lines do not fall within a dedicated right-of-way.
All utility easements shall be plotted on the site plan submitted to the
planning board. Utility easements shall have a minimum width of 10
feet. All utility lines which are primarily intended to provide service to
the lots within a subdivision shall be installed underground at a depth
and at such locations as will minimize risk of interruption of services.
10.11.3 Additional easements. The planning board shall have the right to
require additional easements when the purposes of the easements are
found to be in the public interest.
10.12.1 Design standards.
Sec. 10.10 CHARTER Sec. 10.12
C:847
1. General standards. The following general standards are hereby
adopted for the control of any industrial use:
a. Smoke shall not be emitted when the shade of such smoke is
darker than No. 2 on the Ringlemann's Scale for Grading the
Density of Smoke published by the U.S. Bureau of Mines.
b. Noise levels shall not exceed 90 dba measured at the
boundaries of the lot occupied by such use causing the same.
c. Discharge of effluent into any sanitary sewer system shall not
occur except in accordance with the provisions of the Code of
the City of Olean.
d. Open storage or stacking of any hazardous waste materials
shall be in accordance with the standards of the New York
State Department of Environmental Conservation.
2. Specific standards. The following specific standards are hereby
adopted and must be complied with, for any use in any industrial
district and before the same be permitted, established, maintained
or conducted:
a. Storage facilities. Materials, supplies, or semi-finished
products shall be screened wherever possible in conformance
with section 10.17.
b. Wherever possible, provisions for handling of all freight shall
either be on those sides of any building which do not face on
any street or proposed streets or be suitably screened
therefrom.
c. _____
(1) Buffers from residential use districts. All principal
buildings shall be set back from any lot lines abutting a
residential use district a minimum distance equal to twice
the required yard depth within the residential use district.
Such buffer shall be landscaped in accordance with
section 10.17.
(2) Landscaping. All areas of the plot not occupied by
buildings, parking, driveways or walkways, or storage
shall be landscaped with lawn, trees, shrubs, or other
plant material. Such landscaping shall take into
consideration the natural growth presently on the
premises, and the nature and condition of the terrain, as
well as the situation of the lands and premises themselves
and with regard to adjoining lands and premises, and shall
be provided in conformance with section 10.17.
d. Off-street parking and loading. Shall conform to sections 10.3
and 10.4.
Sec. 10.12 OLEAN CODE Sec. 10.12
C:848
e. Signs. Shall conform to the requirements of article 11,
Signage.
f. Utilities. All water and sewer facilities shall be designed and
installed according to city standards as per section 10.11.
10.12.2 Most stringent standards to govern. In the event that there is an
inconsistency between subsections 10.12.1(1) and 10.12.1(2) and any
other section of this law, the more stringent regulations shall be
applicable.
10.12.3 Design standards for the Special Industrial District (I3).
1. Building construction. In order to protect the investment that both
public and private entities have made, the overall appearance of
any proposed structure shall be reviewed and approved by the
Urban Renewal Agency (URA). The design, materials and colors of
any proposed buildings will be considered in this review. The
standards located elsewhere in this zoning law will govern the
overall size and lot coverage of any proposed development.
2. Utilities. All utility services shall be provided underground.
3. Driveways, loading and parking areas. All driveways, loading and
parking areas shall be paved with asphalt or concrete. Parking for
employees and for any commercial vehicles shall be placed to the
side or rear of any proposed development. No on-street parking
shall be permitted. Loading facilities shall be restricted to the sides
or rear of buildings. Requirements for the sizes and number of
parking spaces are located elsewhere in this zoning law.
4. Landscaping. All undeveloped areas, that is areas without
buildings, parking or storage areas, shall be planted and
maintained as green space. The undeveloped areas between any
proposed building and the street frontage shall be graded and
seeded to provide a uniform grass area. Existing trees on the site
that are 12 inches in diameter measured 4 1/2 feet from the ground
shall be retained, if feasible. At the time a building permit is applied
for, landscaping plans shall be submitted to the URA.
5. Outdoor storage. Any outdoor storage area shall be restricted to
the side or rear of proposed buildings, and must be approved by the
URA. Any proposed outdoor storage area shall be screened by a
fence and/or shrubbery to the satisfaction of the URA prior to any
storage area being established.
6. Regulations on odor, smoke and noise. If the URA believes that any
proposed development may have a detrimental effect due to any
potential odor, smoke or noise emission, the applicant may be
required to provide sufficient mitigating procedures prior to URA
approval of such project.
Sec. 10.12 CHARTER Sec. 10.12
C:849
Sec. 10.13. Home occupation.
7. Signs and lighting. Signs shall be limited to those identifying the
occupants of the building and shall be of permanent weatherproof
material.
If affixed to the facade of the building, signs shall be of a design
and character in keeping with the architecture of the building and
shall not exceed 10% of the area of the exposed facade or 120
square feet in total gross area, whichever is the smaller.
If freestanding, signs shall be located a minimum of 30 feet from
the front property line and 20 feet from the side property line.
Signs shall not exceed five feet in height, measured from the
ground, and shall have a minimum of two feet of clearance,
measured from the ground. In no case shall a freestanding sign
exceed 45 square feet in total gross area.
Illumination of all signs shall be of a nature that will provide
continuous illumination of a non-flashing nature. Every effort shall
be made to insure that the concentration of the illumination is
focused on the sign and does not fall off-site.
8. Local, state and federal regulations. It shall be the expressed
responsibility of any owner and/or tenant of land purchased or
leased from the Urban Renewal Agency to be in compliance with all
local, state and federal environmental regulations.
9. Maintenance. All buildings and property shall be maintained to
present a neat and orderly appearance at all times. All waste,
scrap, refuse, empty containers and cartons shall be stored in
suitable containers.
10. Earthmoving, cutting and filling. In an effort to minimize the costs
of development and to improve certain properties for future
development, any excess fill shall be deposited on URA property as
approved by the URA. Any fill material brought into the site must
receive prior approval from the URA.
10.13.1 A home occupation shall conform to the following standards which
shall be minimum requirements:
10.13.2 No more than 25% of the total floor area of a dwelling unit or 500
square feet, whichever is the lesser, may be used for such use.
10.13.3 The use shall be carried on wholly within the enclosed walls of the
dwelling unit or an accessory building.
10.13.4 There shall be no external evidence of such use except for one sign
not exceeding two square feet in area mounted flush with and on the
front facade of the dwelling unit. No stock, merchandise, equipment or
displays of any kind shall be visible outside the dwelling unit or
accessory building.
Sec. 10.12 OLEAN CODE Sec. 10.13
C:850
Sec. 10.14. Satellite TV antennas.
No satellite television antenna of any kind may be erected or established in
the city except in conformance with the standards in this section and section
4.14, "Use regulation table".
10.13.5 No external structural alternations which are not customary to a
residential building shall be allowed.
10.13.6 The use shall not result in or cause vehicular traffic that will create
a nuisance to abutting properties or be detrimental to the residential
character of the neighborhood.
10.13.7 Use that involves primarily catalogue sales or order processing and
which does not involve volumes of stock or merchandise being
distributed at the site may be deemed a home occupation, subject to the
provisions provided such use meets the intent of all standards set forth
herein.
10.13.8 Any form of business, the primary function of which is the wholesale
or retail sale of goods or articles at the premises, shall be deemed a
commercial use.
10.13.9 The following uses and other uses similar in character shall not be
considered to meet the intent of this section:
1. Vehicle engine repair.
2. Vehicle body work.
3. Veterinary hospital, kennel.
4. Bar and restaurant.
5. Any use that is not permitted in a Type 5 (wood frame) building
construction under the New York State Uniform Fire Prevention
and Building Code.
10.14.1 Satellite antenna size.
1. In residential and commercial districts:
a. Satellite antennas shall not exceed 10 feet in diameter.
b. The total height of ground-mounted antennas shall not exceed
15 feet above the ground.
2. In all other districts:
a. Antennas shall not exceed 16 feet in diameter.
b. The total height of ground-mounted antennas shall not exceed
20 feet above the ground.
Sec. 10.13 CHARTER Sec. 10.14
C:851
Sec. 10.15. Townhouse and multi-family developments.
All townhouse and multi-family development, as permitted in section 4.14
of this law and under the provisions of the city's subdivision regulations,
shall, in addition to the requirements set forth in said section and articles,
conform to the following standards. These standards shall be regarded as
minimum requirements:
3. Roof-mounted installations shall not exceed the height restrictions
as set for the zoning district within which the installation is placed.
10.14.2 Satellite antenna location.
1. For any use, subject to the provisions contained herein, such
antenna shall be located only in the rear yard of any lot provided
that such antenna is located a minimum of five feet from any
principal building and lot line measured at the outermost diameter
of the antenna. If a usable satellite signal cannot be obtained from
such rear yard, the antenna may be located on the side or front
yard of the property subject to site plan approval. For purposes of
this law a usable satellite signal is a satellite signal which when
viewed on a conventional television set, is at least equal in picture
quality to that received from local commercial television stations or
via cable television.
2. In the event that a usable satellite signal cannot be obtained by
locating the antenna on the rear, side or front yard of the property,
such antenna may be placed on the roof of the structure, provided
that site plan approval is obtained prior to such installation. Such
permit may be issued upon a showing by the applicant that a usable
satellite signal is not obtainable from any other location on the
property.
10.14.3 General provisions.
1. For all uses, satellite television antennas shall be located and
designed to reduce visual impacts from surrounding properties at
street level and from public streets.
2. Not more than one satellite television antenna shall be allowed on
any residential lot less than 10,000 square feet in size.
3. All antennas and the construction and installation thereof shall
conform to applicable building and electrical code regulations and
requirements.
4. Antennas shall meet all manufacturers' specifications, be of noncombustible
and corrosive-resistant material, and be erected in a
secure, windresistant manner.
5. Every antenna must be adequately grounded for protection against
a direct strike by lightning.
Sec. 10.14 OLEAN CODE Sec. 10.15
C:852
Sec. 10.16. Gasoline stations, service and repair garages,
automobile sales areas.
Where permitted, a gasoline station, service and repair garage and
automobile sales area shall conform to the following standards which shall
be regarded as minimum requirements:
10.15.1 Townhouse and multi-family developments shall meet the following
standards:
1. Front yard—Minimum 25 feet or 10 feet per [story].
Rear yard—Minimum 30 feet or 10 feet per story.
Side yard—Minimum 10 feet (at ends of [lot].
2. Maximum building height shall be as specified in section 6.1,
"Density control schedule".
3. Maximum site coverage by all buildings and structures shall not be
more than 50% of the lot area, such percentage to be calculated on
the basis of the total project area.
4. Accessory buildings, including unattached garages, shall be
located a minimum distance of 10 feet from any lot line and shall
only be permitted in the rear or side yard.
5. Parking. Shall be in conformance with section 10.3, "Off-street
parking".
10.16.1 Minimum lot size shall be:
1. Seven thousand five hundred square feet for a gasoline station,
service and repair garage.
2. Ten thousand square feet for a combination gas station, mini-mart
convenience food store.
3. Additional lot area and setbacks shall be required as deemed to be
adequate by the planning board to accommodate tractor trailer
servicing.
10.16.2 At least one lot frontage and width shall be a minimum of 100 feet.
10.16.3 Fuel pumps and other service devices shall be located at least 35
feet from any front lot line and 50 feet from any side and rear lot lines.
This distance shall be measured from the outside edge of the fuel
island.
10.16.4 All automobile parts, including tires and dismantled vehicles are to
be stored within a building. Tires that are offered for sale may be placed
outside during normal business hours, but must be stored in a rack. Old
tires to be scrapped or sold for junk must be stored either inside a
Sec. 10.15 CHARTER Sec. 10.16
C:853
Sec. 10.17. Buffer and landscaping requirements.
building or behind a eight-foot high fence, wall or natural screen in
conformance with section 10.17.
10.16.5 Accessory goods for sale may be displayed on the pump island and
the building island only, if provided for in a suitable stand or rack.
10.16.6 All repair work is to be performed within a building. Automobiles
waiting to be serviced or stored on the premises shall not encroach on
any required yard area. Wrecked automobiles being held for insurance
adjuster inspection may be stored for a period not to exceed 90 days
and must be stored in the rear of the premises and screened to the
greatest extent possible.
10.16.7 Parking.
1. No vehicle shall be parked, stored or left standing within 15 feet of
the street line and/or fuel pump islands.
2. Parking requirements shall be in conformance with section 10.3.
Such parking areas shall not conflict with the traffic pattern
established for the use of the fuel pumps. Additional parking area
may be required by the planning board to accommodate tractor
trailer delivery.
3. Where parking areas abut a residential use, they shall be screened
by a buffer area no less than 10 feet in depth composed of denselyplanted
plant material, solid fencing, or a combination of both
which, in the opinion of the planning board, will be adequate to
prevent the transmission of headlight glare across the zone
boundary line. Such buffer screen shall have a minimum height of
six feet above finished grade at the highest point of the parking
area. The materials used shall be in keeping with the character of
the adjacent residential area. If said shrubbery or fences becomes
decayed and fails to provide an adequate screen, the code
enforcement officer may direct the property owner to replace said
shrubs or fences.
10.16.8 All storage and display areas shall be provided with a hard, dustfree
surface, shall be adequately drained and, if lighted, shall produce
no glare on adjacent properties.
10.16.9 A maximum of two driveways and curb cuts shall be permitted per
lot frontage. These shall be no less than 20 and no wider than 30 feet,
and located a minimum of 30 feet from any street intersection and a
minimum distance of 30 feet shall be maintained between such
driveways and curb cuts.
10.16.10 Parking is prohibited in front yards except as approved by the
planning board as part of site plan review.
Sec. 10.16 OLEAN CODE Sec. 10.17
C:854
10.17.1 Intent. The objective of this section is to ensure consideration of the
physical and visual elements of land use development in the city which
require, or may be improved, by buffering, setbacks and landscaping in
order to enhance the appearance, screen or effectively separate
different land uses and minimize impacts on adjoining uses such as dirt,
litter, noise, glare and incompatible buildings or uses (such as outdoor
storage, loading and parking areas). The planning board may require
that a professional licensed landscape architect prepare plans under
this section.
10.17.2 Buffer and landscaping techniques. The particular type of buffer
and landscaping treatment shall be as determined by the planning
board to meet the intent of this section. The following types of
treatment may be considered:
1. Landscaping and other screening including tree planting, use of
berms, and planting of shrubs designed to separate, obscure or
soften an incompatible view or use.
2. Visual setting, including ground-cover and plant materials
designed to stabilize the landform and provide an appropriate
foreground or setting.
3. Physical separation, including setbacks from public streets or
adjacent uses in combination with plant materials or features
designed to separate land use types or activities.
10.17.3 Planting standards.
1. Trees. All trees shall be plant species having an average crown
spread of greater than 15 feet and having trunks which can be
maintained in a clean condition, free of branches from grade to five
feet above grade. Trees having an average mature spread of less
than 15 feet may be substituted by grouping the same so as to
create the equivalent of a fifteen-foot crown. Tree species shall be a
minimum of seven feet of overall height immediately after planting.
2. Shrubs and hedges. Shrubs shall be a minimum of two feet in
height when measured immediately after planting. Hedges, when
measured, shall be planted and maintained so as to form a
continuous visual screen within two year[s] after time of planting.
3. All disturbed soil areas within a the site shall be replaced or
reseeded in an appropriate fashion.
4. No landscape feature shall be erected, placed or maintained in
such a manner as to interfere with clear vision and/or the safe
movement of vehicular traffic.
Sec. 10.17 CHARTER Sec. 10.18
C:855
Sec. 10.18. Fast food restaurants.
Where permitted, fast food restaurants meeting the definition of this
chapter shall conform to the following standards which shall be regarded as
minimum requirements.
Sec. 10.19. Drive-in use regulations.
Where permitted either as accessory to other permitted uses or as principal
use, these facilities as defined in this law shall conform to the following
standards which shall be regarded as minimum requirements.
10.18.1 Minimum lot size shall be 10,000 square feet.
10.18.2 At least one lot frontage shall be a minimum of 100 feet.
10.18.3 Access.
1. A maximum of two driveways and curb cuts shall be permitted on
each street frontage.
2. All drives shall be no less than 20 and no wider than 30 feet in
width.
3. Drives shall be located a minimum of 30 feet from any street
intersection and shall maintain a minimum of 30 feet between such
driveways or curb cuts.
4. Driveways shall create minimal conflict with pedestrian access to
the building from the parking lots and sidewalk abutting the
property.
10.18.4 Parking.
1. The number of parking spaces shall be as specified in section
28-229.
2. Parking lots shall be designed to provide pedestrian safety.
10.18.5 Landscape requirements. A landscape area equal to that portion of
land contiguous to the public right-of-way and extending a depth of five
feet shall be provided. Landscaping shall also be used to screen or
buffer to parking, dumpsters, freezers and other accessory uses as per
section 10.17.
10.19.1 All drive-through lanes shall be distinctly marked and shall be
separate from circulation lanes.
10.19.2 To the extent possible, lanes shall not cross any principal pedestrian
access to the building or site.
10.19.3 Stacking or queuing requirements.
1. Fast-food restaurants. A minimum of 140 feet between start of lane
to service window.
Sec. 10.18 OLEAN CODE Sec. 10.19
C:856
Sec. 10.20. Commercial parking lots and structures.
All commercial parking lots and structures, as permitted in section 4.14,
"Use regulation table", shall conform to the following standards which shall
be regarded as minimum requirements.
Sec. 10.21. Swimming pool regulations.
A swimming pool shall not be located, constructed or maintained on any lot,
except in conformity with the following requirements:
a. Minimum 80 feet from start of lane to order station.
b. Minimum 60 feet from order station to service window.
2. _____
a. Minimum of 100 feet from start of lane to service window.
3. Multiple drive-through lanes. The planning board may allow
reductions for businesses with multiple drive-through lanes based
on review of proposed traffic circulation and usage.
4. All uses shall maintain a minimum distance of 20 feet from the
service window to the public right-of-way or interior parking aisles.
10.20.1 Any parking garage facade fronting on a primary street shall
achieve architectural unity/compatibility with the surrounding
structures that it is intended to serve.
10.20.2 A minimum of 8% of the lot area shall be devoted to landscaping
which shall be provided in conformance with section 10.17.
10.20.3 Adjacent sidewalks shall be rebuilt as necessary and shall be
designed to promote pedestrian safety.
10.20.4 Ingress and egress shall be designed to promote the orderly flow of
traffic to and from city streets. Directional signs shall be used as
necessary to ensure this flow.
10.21.1 Such pool shall be located in a rear yard only.
10.21.2 The entire portion of the premises upon which such pool is located
shall be enclosed with an impassable fence of not less than four feet in
height above grade.
10.21.3 Every gate or other opening in the fence enclosing such pool shall
be capable of being closed and locked.
10.21.4 Such pool shall be not less than six feet from the side and rear lot
lines.
Sec. 10.19 CHARTER Sec. 10.21
C:857
Sec. 10.22. Adult bookstores, adult entertainment establishments,
adult cabarets, adult theaters and adult motion picture theaters.
Where permitted, adult bookstores, adult entertainment establishments,
adult cabarets and adult theaters and adult motion picture theaters,
meeting the definition of this law, shall conform to the following standards
which shall be regarded as minimum standards.
10.21.5 Such pool and/shall not occupy more than 25% of the rear yard area,
after excluding all private garages or other accessory buildings or
structures.
10.21.6 Such pool shall be chemically treated in a manner sufficient to
maintain the bacterial standards established by the provisions of the
New York State Sanitary Code relating to public swimming pools.
10.21.7 No lighting or spot lighting shall be permitted which will project
light rays beyond the lot lines of the lot on which said pool is located.
10.21.8 No permit shall be issued for such pool unless the applicant can
show that the proposed drainage for such pool is adequate and will not
interfere with the public water-supply system, existing sewage or
stormwater drainage facilities, the property of others or public
highways.
10.22.1 All adult uses shall be operated in a manner that is consistent with
the New York State Penal Law relating to exposure, obscenity or
lewdness.
10.22.2 No adult use shall be operated within 1,000 feet of:
a. A church, synagogue or place of worship;
b. A public or private elementary or secondary school, day care, preschool
or other uses of a similar nature;
c. A boundary of any residence or residential district; or
d. A public park, municipal building or community center.
10.22.3 No adult use shall be operated within 1,000 feet of another adult
use.
10.22.4 For the purpose of this law, measurement shall be made in a straight
line, without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the
nearest portion of the building or structure as part of the premises
where an adult use is conducted, to the nearest property line of the
premises of any of the uses specified in subsections 10.22.2a. through
d. identified above or to another adult use as defined by this law.
10.22.5 No more than one adult use shall be operated on any single parcel of
land.
Sec. 10.21 OLEAN CODE Sec. 10.22
C:858
Sec. 10.23. Mobile home park development standards.
Where permitted, mobile home park developments meeting the definition
of this chapter shall conform to the following standards, which shall be
regarded as minimum requirements.
10.22.6 No adult use shall be operated in the same building, structure, or
portion thereof, which contains another adult use.
10.22.7 All adult uses shall be conducted in an enclosed building.
Regardless of location or distance, no one who is passing by an
enclosed building having a use governed by this section shall be able to
hear any activities within the building.
10.22.8 All building openings, entries, windows, doors, etc. associated with
an adult use shall be located, covered or screened in such a manner as
to prevent a view into the interior of the building from any public rightof-
way or adjacent property.
10.22.9 No exterior sign associated with an adult use or establishment shall
contain any photographic or artistic representation of the human body.
10.22.10 No adult use shall be established in any building which is used, in
part, for residential purposes.
10.22.11 No residential use shall be established in any building which
contains an approved adult use.
10.22.12 Prior to the commencement of any adult use, or upon transfer of
ownership or control of the building or property, the premises shall be
inspected by the code enforcement officer and determined to be in
compliance with all laws, ordinances, rules and regulations applicable
to the use and occupancy for an adult use and in compliance with this
section.
10.22.13 Adequate landscaping shall be provided to minimize the visual
impact of any structure containing an adult use on adjacent sites.
10.23.1 General requirements.
1. Special use permits issued for the development of a mobile home
park shall be for a period of up to three years. If the park owner
maintains the facility in accord with the conditions established by
the planning board in the approval of the original permit, the
permit shall be renewable for continuing periods of up to three
years.
2. No development activities shall take place and no mobile homes
may be transported to the site until the planning board has granted
site plan approval in accordance with section 9.1 of this law.
10.23.2 Tract requirements.
Sec. 10.22 CHARTER Sec. 10.23
C:859
1. All mobile home parks shall be planned as an integrated unit and
shall be located on a tract of land of not less than 15 acres.
2. The density of development in a mobile home park shall not exceed
five units per gross acre.
3. No mobile home shall be located closer than 100 feet to any
property line or street line which abuts the mobile home park.
4. No mobile home shall be located closer than 35 feet to the
pavement edge of any internal street within the mobile home park.
5. Vehicular entrances and exits shall be located so as to provide an
unobstructed clear site distance of not less than 300 feet in both
directions along on the adjacent public road from the interior road
at the point of intersection.
6. All interior roads shall be improved in accordance with the
construction standards of the city.
7. Sidewalks shall be installed in accordance with the construction
standards of the city along at least one side of all interior streets.
8. Each mobile home park shall set aside not less than 20% of the total
acreage of the site as open space and recreation area.
9. An area of not less than 500 square feet per mobile home unit shall
be provided for developed recreation use. Areas designated for
recreational use shall, in the opinion of the planning board, be of
adequate size and shape as to be usable for active recreation
purposes.
10. No occupant of a mobile home shall operate a home occupation
within a mobile home park.
11. Appropriate street lighting shall be installed on interior streets
with the minimum number of lights being: One at each intersection
of two interior park streets; one at the intersection of any park
street with an abutting public street; and at least one light every
200 feet where such intersections are more than 200 feet apart.
12. A landscaped screen shall be planted and maintained within each
setback area required by subsection 10.23.2.3. The landscaped
screen shall consist of the planting of two staggered rows of
evergreen trees not more than six feet apart on center and not less
than four feet in height. Such plantings shall be located no closer
than 10 feet to any side or rear property lines and no closer than 25
feet to any part of the property abutting a public street. Screen
plantings shall be arranged around entrances and exits so as not to
interfere with sight distance or vehicular safety.
13. The display of mobile homes for sale on a mobile home park may be
permitted, provided that such sales area is:
Sec. 10.23 OLEAN CODE Sec. 10.23
C:860
a) Located entirely within the mobile home park and is not visible
from a public street.
b) Not located at the park entrance.
c) Accessed by an improved asphalt, or other hard, dust-free
surface and contains a minimum of six off-street parking
spaces for customers.
d) Landscaped and buffered from adjacent mobile home units and
other residential areas by a dense hedge or physical features
acceptable to the planning board.
14. Exposed ground surfaces in all parts of any mobile home park shall
be paved, surfaced with crushed stone or other solid material, or
protected with grass or other ground cover capable of preventing
erosion and of eliminating objectionable dust and mud.
15. The storage, collection and disposal of solid waste shall be
conducted so as to eliminate any opportunity for the creation of
health hazards, rodent harborage, insect breeding areas, accident
or fire hazards or air pollution.
16. If group solid waste storage areas are provided for park occupants,
they shall be located not more than 300 feet from any mobile home
lot or site they are designated to serve. Such areas shall be
enclosed or otherwise screened from public view and shall be
rodent and animal proof. Containers shall be provided. A sufficient
number of containers shall be provided to properly store all solid
waste produced.
17. Electrical distribution and telephone service lines shall be installed
underground and shall comply with all requirements of the utility
companies serving the area.
18. All mobile home parks shall be provided with facilities for the safe
storage of necessary fuels. All systems shall be installed and
maintained in accordance with applicable codes and regulations
governing such systems.
10.23.3 Lot requirements.
1. Each mobile home lot or site shall have an area of at least 6,000
square feet and a minimum width of 55 feet.
2. No mobile home shall be located closer than 25 feet to another
mobile home or any other structure within the mobile home park.
3. Not more than one mobile home shall be placed on any lot or site
and no detached accessory structures shall be permitted on a lot or
site.
Sec. 10.23 CHARTER Sec. 10.23
C:861
4. Each lot or site shall be provided with approved connections for
public water and sewer services, electricity and telephone.
5. A surfaced parking pad shall be provided on each lot or site for one
mobile home and not less than one automobile.
6. At least one shade tree of not less than two inches in diameter,
measured one foot above ground level, shall be planted on each lot
or site.
7. Each lot or site designated for the placement of a mobile home shall
front on an approved interior street.
8. Two off-street parking spaces shall be provided for each mobile
home lot or site. Such spaces may be located on the individual lot or
site or grouped in a common off-street parking area to serve two or
more mobile home lots or sites. Off-street parking areas to serve
two or more mobile home lots or sites shall be improved in
accordance with the city's construction specifications.
9. No travel trailer, camper, boat, snowmobile or similar auxiliary
vehicle or conveyance shall be stored on any individual mobile
home lot or site. Storage space, however, may be provided within
the mobile home park for auxiliary vehicles. Parking areas for the
storage of such vehicles shall be improved in accordance with the
city's construction specifications.
10.23.4 Lot improvement requirements.
1. Each lot or site shall be provided with a stand that will provide a
firm base and adequate support for the mobile home. Such stand
shall have a dimension approximating the width and length of the
home and any expansions or extensions thereto. Anchored tiedowns
shall be provided at least on each corner of the stand.
2. The stand area shall be graded to ensure adequate drainage. The
maximum grade variance from one end of the stand to the other
shall not exceed six inches.
3. Each lot or site shall have a patio with an area of not less than 200
square feet. Patios shall not be less than 10 feet in width. Patios
shall be installed in accordance with the city's construction
standards and located so as to provide access to the front door of
the mobile home.
4. All mobile homes shall be completely skirted within 90 days of
occupancy. Materials used for skirting shall provide a finished
exterior appearance and shall be similar in character to the
material used in the mobile home.
5. Expandable rooms and other extensions to a mobile home unit shall
be supported on a stand built in accordance with the construction
Sec. 10.23 OLEAN CODE Sec. 10.23
C:862
Sec. 10.24. Telecommunications facilities. [Added 6-24-2015 by L.L.
No. 4-2015]
standards for the mobile home stand. Skirting shall be installed
around the base of all such expansions or extensions.
6. Steps shall be installed at all entrance and exit doors. Such steps
shall be constructed of durable, weather resistant materials and
equipped with handrails.
10.24.1 Intent. The City of Olean recognizes the increased demand for
wireless communication transmitting facilities and the need for the
services they provide. Often, these facilities require the construction of
a communications tower and/or similar facilities. The intent of this
section is to regulate telecommunications facilities in accordance with
the guidelines of the Telecommunication Act of 1996 by:
1. Accommodating the need for telecommunication towers/antennas
while regulating their location and number in the community.
2. Minimizing adverse visual impacts of these towers/antennas
through proper design, siting and screening.
3. Preserving and enhancing the positive aesthetic qualities of the
built and natural environment in the City of Olean.
4. Avoiding potential damage to adjacent properties from tower
failure, falling ice, etc., through engineering and proper siting.
5. Requiring the joint use of towers when available, and encouraging
the placement of antennas on existing structures, to reduce the
number of such structures in the future. No new tower may be
established without proof that reasonable efforts have been made
to co-locate with an existing telecommunications facility or upon an
existing structure.
This Section 10.24 shall be an addition to and not replace any
other federal, state, or local requirement, approval and/or consent
related to a covered telecommunication facility, including, without
limitation, code enforcement compliance, overlay district
requirements, and design district requirements.
In the event a facility is to be located in an Industrial 3 (I3)
District, Section 10.12.3 of this chapter shall be applicable in
addition to this Section 10.24 as well as any other local
requirements, approvals and/or consents.
10.24.2 Non-co-located/new structure antennas. An antenna that will not be
mounted on an existing structure or is more than 50 feet higher than
the existing structure on which it is mounted is permitted as follows:
Sec. 10.23 CHARTER Sec. 10.24
C:863
1. WC, I, I-2, I-3 Zoning Districts: site plan and special use permit
applications required. GC, CC, RT, R1, R2 and R3 Zoning Districts:
Telecommunications towers are not permitted.
2. The tower must be set back a minimum of the height of the tower
from all property lines and existing building(s).
3. The maximum height of a tower is 175 feet. A variance for height
will be required from the Zoning Board of Appeals to exceed this
height following initial review by the Planning Board.
4. All applications for telecommunications facilities shall be treated as
a Type 1 action under the State Environmental Quality Review Act
(SEQRA).
5. The application shall include an adequate inventory report
specifying existing telecommunication facility sites and structures
of height exceeding 75% of the height of the proposed tower within
a one-mile radius from the proposed site if the application is for
cellular telephone or personal communications use, or a five-mile
radius for all other services. The inventory report shall contain an
evaluation of opportunities for shared use as an alternative to the
proposed location.
6. The applicant must demonstrate that the proposed
telecommunication facility cannot be accommodated on all existing
sites in the inventory due to one or more of the following reasons:
a. The planned equipment would exceed the structural capacity
of existing and approved telecommunication facilities or other
structures, considering existing and planned use for those
facilities;
b. The planned equipment would cause radio frequency
interference with other existing or planned equipment, which
cannot be reasonably prevented;
c. Existing or approved telecommunication facilities or other
structures do not have space on which proposed equipment
can be placed so it can function effectively and reasonably;
d. Other technical reasons make it impracticable to place the
equipment proposed by the applicant on existing facilities or
structures;
e. The property owner or owner of the existing tower, etc., or
other structure refuses to allow such co-location.
10.24.3 Special use permit application materials. An application for a
special use permit shall make written application to the Planning
Board. This shall include:
1. Special use permit application.
Sec. 10.24 OLEAN CODE Sec. 10.24
C:864
2. Site plan application forms including long-form EAF.
3. Site plan, in form and content acceptable to the City, prepares to
scale and in sufficient detail and accuracy showing at a minimum:
a. The exact location of the proposed tower, together with guy
wires and guy anchors, if applicable.
b. The maximum height of the proposed tower.
c. A detail of tower type (monopole, guyed, freestanding, or
other).
d. The color or colors of the tower.
e. The location, type and intensity of any lighting on the tower.
f. The property boundaries (a copy of a property survey must also
be provided).
g. Proof of the landowner's consent if the applicant will not own
the property. (A copy of a lease agreement must also be
provided if the applicant will not own the property.)
h. The location of all structures on the property and all structures
on any adjacent property within 50 feet of the property lines,
together with the distance of these structures to the tower.
i. The names of adjacent landowners.
j. The location, nature and extent of any proposed fencing and
landscape or screening.
k. The location and nature of proposed utility easements and
access road, if applicable.
l. Building elevations of accessory structures or immediately
adjacent buildings.
m. "Before" and "after" propagation studies prepared by a
qualified radio frequency engineer (signed and sealed by a
professional engineer registered in the State of New York)
demonstrating existing signal coverage, contrasted with the
proposed signal coverage resulting from the proposed
telecommunications facility.
n. A "search ring" prepared by a qualified radio frequency
engineer (signed and sealed documents by a professional
engineer registered in the State of New York) and overlaid on
an appropriate background map demonstrating the area within
which the telecommunications facility needs to be located in
order to provide proper signal strength and coverage to the
target cell. The applicant must be prepared to explain to the
Planning Board why it selected the proposed site, discuss the
Sec. 10.24 CHARTER Sec. 10.24
C:865
availability (or lack of availability) of a suitable structure
within the search ring which would have allowed for a colocated
antenna(s), and to what extent the applicant explored
locating the proposed tower in a more intensive use district.
Correspondence with other telecommunications companies
concerning co-location is part of this requirement.
o. Proof such as a letter of intent from a provider that the
proposed tower will serve a wireless telecommunications
provider with a valid FCC license to provide service to the
area.
p. Map showing the applicant's entire FCC license service area
and a copy of the FCC-issued license.
q. Name of maintenance company, key points of contact,
addresses and phone numbers if maintenance of the
communication tower and associates facilities is to be
contracted out or done by someone other than the applicant or
service provider. Applicant shall notify the Code Enforcement
Office of any change with its maintenance company and
provide appropriate contact information.
Planning Board, upon reviewing the application, may request
reasonable additional visual and aesthetic information as it
deems appropriate on a case by case basis. Such additional
information may include, among other things, enhanced
landscaping plans, line-of-sight drawings, and/or visual
simulations from viewpoints selected by the City Planning
Board. Line-of-site drawings and visual simulations are
mandatory for applications.
4. General description of the proposed project, including:
a. Type of services and facilities to be provided;
b. Size of the major trading area (overall network area) within the
municipality and five miles beyond licensed by the Federal
Communications Commission (FCC); and
c. Size of the area to be served by this project.
10.24.4 Special use permit standards. The following criteria will be
considered by the City prior to the approval/denial of a request for a
special use permit, the criteria listed may be used as a basis to impose
reasonable conditions on the applicant.
1. Siting preferences: The City may express a preference that the
proposed telecommunications facility be located in an alternate
technologically feasible and available location. A guideline for the
City's preference, from most favorable to least favorable districts/
property, is as follows:
Sec. 10.24 OLEAN CODE Sec. 10.24
C:866
a. Property with an existing structure suitable for co-location;
b. Municipal or government-owned property;
c. WC, I, I-2 and I-3 Districts.
2. Aesthetics: Telecommunications facilities shall be located and
buffered to the maximum extent which is practical and
technologically feasible to help ensure compatibility with
surrounding land uses. In order to minimize any adverse aesthetic
effect on neighboring residences to the extent possible, the
Planning Board may impose reasonable conditions on the
applicant, including the following:
a. The Planning Board may require a monopole or guyed tower (if
sufficient land is available to the applicant) instead of a
freestanding tower. Monopoles are a preferred design.
b. The Planning Board may require reasonable landscaping
consisting of trees or shrubs to screen the base of the tower
and/or to screen the tower to the extent possible from adjacent
residential property. Existing on-site trees and vegetation shall
be preserved to the maximum extent possible.
c. The City can request additional site plan requirements such as
specially designed towers, additional screening, greater
setbacks, and improved landscaping to address aesthetic
concerns.
d. The City will require the applicant to show that he has made
good faith efforts to co-locate on existing towers or other
available and appropriate structures and/or to construct new
towers near existing towers in an effort to consolidate visual
disturbances.
e. Towers should be designed and sited so as to avoid, whenever
possible, application of FAA lighting and painting
requirements. Towers shall not be artificially lighted except as
required by the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA). Towers
shall be of a nonreflective finish, the color of which shall be
subject to approval. Any lights which may be required by FAA
shall not consist of strobe lights, unless specifically mandated
by FAA.
f. No tower shall contain any signs or advertising devices. A
small sign on the fencing shall be placed to identify the
ownership of the facility and a telephone number for
emergencies.
g. The applicant must submit a copy of its policy regarding colocation
on the proposed tower with other potential future
applicants. Such policy should allow co-location under the
Sec. 10.24 CHARTER Sec. 10.24
C:867
following conditions: (1) the new antenna(s) and equipment
do not exceed structural loading requirements, interfere with
tower space used or to be used by the applicant nor pose
any technical or radio frequency interference with existing
equipment, (2) the party desiring to co-locate pays the
applicant an appropriate and reasonable sum to co-locate, and
(3) the party desiring to co-locate has a similar policy of colocation
for the applicant.
3. Radio-frequency effect: The Planning Board may impose a
condition on the applicant that the communication antennas be
operated only at Federal Communications Commission (FCC)
designated frequencies and power levels and/or Environmental
Protection Agency (EPA) technical exposure limits, and that the
applicant provide competent documentation to support that the
maximum allowed frequencies, power levels and exposure limits
for radiation will not be exceeded.
4. Traffic, access and safety:
a. A road turnaround and one parking space shall be provided to
assure adequate emergency service access. Maximum use of
existing roads, public or private, shall be made. The use of
public roadways or road rights-of-way for the siting of a tower
or antenna(s) accessory structures is prohibited.
b. All towers and guy anchors, if applicable, shall be enclosed by
a fence not less than eight feet in height or otherwise
sufficiently protected from trespassing or vandalism.
c. The applicant must comply with all applicable state and federal
regulations including but not limited to FAA and FCC
regulations.
5. Removal of tower: The applicant shall agree to remove the tower if
the telecommunications facility becomes obsolete or ceases to be
used for its intended purpose for 12 consecutive months and notify
the City Code Enforcement Office of its discontinued use. The
Planning Board shall require the applicant to provide a demolition
bond (in an amount determined by the Planning Board based on the
cost of removal) for purposes of removing the telecommunications
facility in case the applicant fails to do so as required above.
10.24.5 Exemptions.
1. Tower and antenna(s) may be repaired and maintained without
restrictions.
2. Antennas used solely for residential household television and radio
reception.
Sec. 10.24 OLEAN CODE Sec. 10.24
C:868
Sec. 10.25. Solar energy production facilities. [Added 6-9-2015 by
L.L. No. 3-2015]
3. Satellite antennas measuring two meters or less in diameter and
located in commercial and industrial districts and satellite
antennas one meter or less in diameter regardless of location.
4. Private-residence-mounted satellite dishes or television antennas
or amateur radio equipment including without limitation ham or
citizen band radio antennas.
10.24.6 Revocation of permit. Any facility receiving a special use permit,
that subsequently does not meet the requirements of that permit, shall
have its permit revoked, and the tower shall be removed within 90 days
of notification by the City at the owner's expense.
10.25.1 Intent; zones. Because it is in the public interest to provide for and
encourage renewable energy systems and a sustainable quality of life,
the purpose of this section is to facilitate the development and
operation of renewable energy systems based on sunlight. A solar
energy production facility (aka major solar collection system or solar
farm) shall be permitted under a special use permit in the following
districts: General Commercial (GC), Industrial (I), Industrial 2 (I2),
Industrial 3 (I3) and Waterfront Conservation (WC), when measures are
taken, as provided in this section, to minimize adverse impacts on
neighboring properties and protect the public health, safety, and
welfare. This section shall pertain only to major solar collection systems
or solar farms. Where other sections of the Code conflict with this
section, provisions of this section shall control.
10.25.2 Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have
the meanings indicated:
MAJOR SOLAR COLLECTION SYSTEM OR SOLAR FARM — An area of
land or other area used for a solar collection system principally used to
capture solar energy and convert it to electrical energy to transfer to
the public electric grid in order to sell electricity to or receive a credit
from a public utility entity, but also may be for on-site use. Solar farm
facilities consist of one or more freestanding ground- or roof-mounted
solar collector devices, solar-related equipment and other accessory
structures and buildings, including light reflectors, concentrators, and
heat exchangers, substations, electrical infrastructure, transmission
lines and other appurtenant structures and facilities.
MINOR SOLAR COLLECTION SYSTEM — A solar voltaic cell, panel,
or array, or solar hot air or water collector device, which relies upon
solar radiation as an energy source or collection, inversion, storage
and distribution of solar energy for electricity generation or transfer
of stored heat, secondary to the use of the premises for other lawful
purposes, with the total surface area of all solar collectors on the lot not
to exceed 4,000 square feet.
Sec. 10.24 CHARTER Sec. 10.25
C:869
10.25.3 Design standards for major solar collection system or solar farm.
1. The design of a major collection system or solar farm shall adhere
to existing structural height requirements of the underlying zoning
district. If the solar farm requires a roof mounting on buildings on
the property, the roof-mounted installation may not exceed the
maximum principal building height or accessory building height
specified for the building type in the underlying zoning district.
2. The design of the solar farm shall adhere to existing setback
requirements of the underlying zoning district. If the solar farm will
be constructed by the utilization of ground mounting, then a
ground-mounting plan and process must be submitted during the
special use permit application process. The ground-mounting plan
may consist of standard solar manufacturer installation plans and
processes for ground mounting and/or may be addressed in the
applicant's site plans.
3. Systems and solar panels shall be placed and arranged such that
reflected solar radiation or glare shall not be directed onto adjacent
buildings, properties or roadways.
4. System shall not be used to display advertising, including signage,
streamers, pennants, spinners, reflectors, ribbons, balloons, flags,
banners, or similar materials, with the exception of the following:
Necessary equipment information, warnings, or indication of
ownership shall be allowed on any equipment of the system or
where required by the New York State Building Code.
5. No system or any of its components shall be illuminated, except to
the degree minimally necessary for public safety and, or
maintenance and only in compliance with the City of Olean Zoning
Ordinance, Article 11, Signage.
6. All mechanical equipment, including any structure for batteries or
storage cells, shall be screened and fenced from adjacent
properties to restrict unauthorized access.
7. No system shall be used or constructed such that it becomes a
private or public nuisance or hazard.
8. Stormwater and snowmelt runoff and erosion control shall be
managed in a manner consistent with all applicable federal, state,
and local regulations and shall not impact neighboring properties.
9. Systems which have not been in active and continuous service for
one year shall be removed at the owner's or operator's expense.
10. The site shall be restored to as natural conditions as possible within
six months of the removal of the system.
Sec. 10.25 OLEAN CODE Sec. 10.25
C:870
11. Removal of trees and other existing vegetation should be
minimized or offset with planting elsewhere on the property.
10.25.4 Requirements for special use permit application (in addition to
Article 9, Section 9.0):
1. A recorded plat or survey of the tract on which the solar farm is to
be placed.
2. Any other relevant studies, reports, certificates and approvals as
may be reasonably requested by the Planning Board, including but
not limited to design review, maintenance plans, etc.
10.25.5 Abandonment.
1. All applications for a solar farm shall be accompanied by a
decommissioning plan to be implemented upon abandonment, or
cessation of activity, or in conjunction with removal of the facility,
prior to issuance of a building permit.
2. If the applicant begins but does not complete construction of the
project within 18 months after receiving final site plan approval,
this may be deemed abandonment of the project and require
implementation of the decommissioning plan to the extent
applicable.
3. The decommissioning plan must ensure the site will be restored to
a useful, nonhazardous condition without delay, including, but not
limited to, the following:
a. Removal of aboveground and below-ground equipment,
structures and foundations.
b. Restoration of the surface grade and soil after removal of
equipment.
c. Revegetation of restored soil areas with native seed mixes,
excluding any invasive species.
d. The plan shall include a timeframe for the completion of site
restoration work.
Sec. 10.25 CHARTER Sec. 10.25
C:871

ARTICLE 11
SIGNAGE
Sec. 11.0. General. [L.L. No. 4-02, § 1, 10-22-2002]
11.0.1 Intent. The purpose of this article is to promote and protect the
public health, welfare and safety by regulating existing and proposed
outdoor advertising, outdoor advertising signs and outdoor signs of all
types. It is intended to protect property values, create a more attractive
economic and business climate, enhance and protect the physical
appearance of the community, preserve the scenic and natural beauty of
designated areas, and provide a more enjoyable and pleasing
community. It is further intended hereby to reduce sign or advertising
distractions and obstructions that may contribute to traffic accidents,
reduce hazards that may be caused by signs overhanging or projecting
over public rights-of-way, provide more open space, and curb the
deterioration of natural beauty and community environment.
11.0.2 Scope. This article by its terms applies to all signs within the city
excepting those signs erected and maintained within disposition
parcels located in the neighborhood development area of the Urban
Renewal Plan for the city.
11.0.3 Signs restricted.
1. The construction, erection, alteration, reconstruction, display,
ownership, maintenance or operation of any sign within the city
except as provided by this article is hereby prohibited.
2. Signposts are specifically prohibited from the public right-of-way
with the exception of those that are necessary or recommended by
the State of New York Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices.
3. Signs overhanging the public right-of-way are prohibited except in
the city center and general commercial zones.
4. Signs judged obscene by the zoning board are prohibited.
5. No electric sign or electrically illuminated sign, or any sign board,
signpost, portion of any advertising nature or otherwise shall be
permitted or allowed to remain on the sidewalk nor on any portion
of the city streets.
11.0.4 Institutional signs. Institutional signs shall not exceed 32 square feet
in size nor shall there be more than one such sign per institution.
11.0.5 Temporary banners within rights-of-way. Signs, other than official
street or traffic signs, shall not be erected within the right-of-way lines
of any street, except that temporary banners may be permitted for
festivals or special events with the requirement that special permits for
such banners be issued by the mayor and common council of the city.
Sec. 11.0 CHARTER Sec. 11.1
C:873
Sec. 11.1. Signs in residential use districts.
Signs in the R1 Single-family Residential, R2 Single-family/General
Residential, R3 General Residential and RT Residential Transition use
districts shall conform to the following regulations:
11.1.1 Identification signs. Identification signs shall be permitted as an
accessory use in any residential district as follows:
1. Customary professional or home occupation identification signs not
over two square feet in size, related solely to the profession or
home occupation conducted on the premises by a resident thereof.
2. No more than one such identification sign shall be permitted for
each professional or other person so engaged and residing in the
premises; but if a dwelling has frontage on more than one street, an
additional identification sign shall be permitted for each additional
frontage.
3. Such identification sign may be affixed to the face of the building or
may be erected on a post not over four feet high, located in the yard
but at least five feet from the property line or 20 feet from street
pavement, whichever is greater.
4. The sign may not be illuminated.
5. A permit is required; however, no fee will be charged.
11.1.2 Bulletin boards.
1. Permanent bulletin boards or similar announcement signs are
allowed only for churches and other nonprofit institutions. They
may not exceed 20 square feet in gross area and shall be located
either on the face of the building or on a post or posts at least five
feet from the property line. One such sign shall be permitted for
each street frontage.
2. Signs may be illuminated by night by back lighting or by direct
lighting provided the latter is so screened as not to be visible from
an adjacent residence.
3. A permit is required; however, no fee will be charged.
11.1.3 Temporary signs. Temporary "For Sale" or "To Let" signs relating to
the premises and containing the name, address and telephone number
of the owner or authorized agent, or both, and not exceeding six square
feet in area in the aggregate shall be permitted. One such sign shall be
permitted for each street frontage and may not be illuminated.
Temporary signs must be removed within 48 hours after the intent of
business of the sign is complete. See section 11.0.3. No fee will be
charged for this sign.
Sec. 11.1 OLEAN CODE Sec. 11.1
C:874
Sec. 11.2. Signs in commercial use districts. [L.L. No. 5-02, § 1,
10-22-2002]
11.1.4 Flags, civic insignia. Flags, flagpoles, badges, insignia of any
government or government agency, or any civic, charitable, religious,
patriotic, fraternal or similar organization shall be considered as being
signs and subject to all provisions of this article except that no fee will
be charged.
11.1.5 Attaching to trees, poles or structures. It shall be unlawful for any
person to paint, post, place or fix any business or commercial
advertisement, paper, handbills or circulars, or cause the same to be
done, on or to any curbstone, flagstone or any other portion of any
sidewalk or street, or upon any tree, lamppost, hitching post, telegraph
post, telegraph pole, telephone pole, hydrant, bridge or any other
structure within the limits of the city.
11.2.0 Generally. Signs in the CC City Center and GC General Commercial
use districts shall conform to the following regulations:
1. Permits required. A sign permit shall be required before any sign or
billboard may be erected, altered, reconstructed or displayed
within the city.
2. Application for permit. Written application shall be made to the
code enforcement officer on a form provided by the code
enforcement officer and shall be accompanied by complete plans
and specifications showing the construction, method of support and
materials to be used. Application may be made by the owner or by
the lessee of the property upon which such sign is to be placed. The
code enforcement officer may require the plans and specifications
be signed by a professional engineer or architect registered in the
state.
3. Permit fees. Each application shall be accompanied by a fee as
established by the common council which may be amended or
modified from time to time. The code enforcement officer of the city
may require proof of the monetary value of sign. Licensed signs at
the time of the enactment of this article must obtain permits under
the provisions of this article upon expiration of their licenses. All
other signs within the city must comply with the requirements of
this article on the effective date of its enactment.
Sec. 11.1 CHARTER Sec. 11.2
C:875
Upon the approval of the code enforcement officer of such
application and of the place and manner of erecting the sign
therein mentioned, and upon his writing or stamping thereon the
amount of the fee required for the sign applied for, the applicant
shall pay to the city clerk the fee prescribed by this division, and
thereupon the city clerk shall issue to the applicant a license for
the sign applied for.
Licenses shall be issued for a period of three years. New
installations approved will be for three-year periods following the
issuance of a permit; however, construction of an approved sign
must be commenced within 30 days after the issuance of the
permit and completed within 60 days thereafter.
License fees for the erection or maintenance of signs shall be
established by the mayor and common council of the city by
resolution from time to time.
Liability insurance must be obtained by the owner of a sign prior
to approval by the code enforcement officer. Minimum liability
coverage is $10,000 property damage, and $100,000 personal
injury. All liability insurance policies shall be approved by the city
attorney prior to issuance of a sign permit.
4. Temporary permits. Temporary signs shall require a permit from
the code enforcement officer, but a fee will not be required.
A permit for a temporary sign may be issued for a period not
exceeding 90 days; and such sign shall be removed within 24
hours after expiration unless an extension of time, not exceeding
30 days, shall have been granted in writing by the code
enforcement officer.
Materials, except frames, used in the construction of temporary
signs may be of light-weight material. Temporary signs shall
conform to all other applicable provisions of this article.
5. Unsafe, unlawful and deteriorating signs. Whenever it shall appear
to the code enforcement officer that any sign has been constructed
or erected or is being maintained in violation of the terms of this
article, or is unsafe or insecure, or is a menace to the public, or has
been allowed to deteriorate, he shall give written notifications to
the property owner and/or tenant. Said sign shall be removed or
repaired and placed in a safe condition within 10 days after receipt
of the written notification. If the foregoing is not complied with, the
city will have the sign in question removed and the cost added to
the property owner's tax bill.
Sec. 11.2 OLEAN CODE Sec. 11.2
C:876
In the event a sign has been damaged and presents an immediate
threat to the public, the code enforcement officer may order the
immediate removal of said sign and take appropriate action to
protect the public and recover costs. Any time a business goes out
of business or moves, the owner or company shall remove all signs
of said business.
6. Sign mounting. All exterior signs shall be permanently mounted
and securely anchored.
7. Restrictions. Signs and billboards shall not in any way obstruct the
required door or window area of any building or structure.
Signs shall not be attached to or placed upon any portion of a fire
escape.
Signs shall not be erected that will in any way interfere with the
activities of the fire department.
Signs constructed or erected after the adoption of this zoning law
shall not be rotating or contain any moving parts.
8. Traffic control signs. Signs necessary for traffic control on private
property and containing no advertising may be erected, not to
exceed an area of 12 square feet per sign.
9. Exemptions. The provisions of this article shall not apply to the
following signs:
a. Traffic signs erected by governmental bodies.
b. Railroad warning signs.
c. Municipal signs.
d. Memorial signs or tablets, names of buildings and date of
erection when cut in any masonry surface or when constructed
of bronze or other combustible [non-combustible] materials.
e. Occupational signs denoting only the name and profession of
an occupant in commercial buildings and the name and nature
of the occupancy in public and institutional buildings. Such
signs shall not exceed two square feet in area.
10. Illumination. Signs may be illuminated at night by back lighting or
direct lighting only provided the latter is so screened as not to cast
any direct light upon any residence. No sign or lighting device shall
be of the flashing, intermittent or reciprocating type.
Illuminated signs must bear the National Underwriters seal of
approval or must be inspected and approved by the city electrical
inspector.
Sec. 11.2 CHARTER Sec. 11.2
C:877
11.2.1 Types of signs allowed. Each business establishment shall be allowed
the following types of signs only and which shall be installed at the
business location only. However, ground signs and pole or pylon signs
may not be used in combination. Further, any area allowed in a ground
sign or a pole or pylon type shall be deducted from the total area
allowed under section 11.2.2, "Size limitations."
1. Wall sign. A sign attached to, erected against or painted on the wall
of a building or structure, with the exposed face of the sign in a
plane parallel to the plane of the wall.
2. Ground sign. A detached sign erected upon or supported by the
ground.
3. Pole or pylon sign. A sign supported by or suspended from a freestanding
column of concrete, structural steel, aluminum pipe or
structural aluminum.
4. Projection signs. Each establishment in the city center and general
commercial zones, shall be permitted one hanging sign for each
frontage on a public right-of-way. Such signs shall not exceed 20
square feet in area per face nor exceed 24 inches from sign face to
sign face. The bottom of such sign shall be a maximum of 13 feet
above the sidewalk and shall not extend into any access driveways
intended for service or emergency vehicles.
11.2.2 Size limitations. The total display area of all signs, including wall,
ground, pole, pylon and window, permitted upon a single lot shall be
determined as follows:
1. On an interior lot, two square feet of display area for each lineal
foot of building frontage facing the main street or highway.
2. On a corner lot where building fronts on a second street, additional
signs must be approved by the zoning board.
11.2.3 General requirements.
1. Any sign attached to a building shall not extend more than 50%
above the roof line immediately behind the sign, and in no case
shall the sign extend above same roof line by more than five feet.
2. Wall signs shall not extend more than 12 inches from the face of the
building into any street, alley, sidewalk, thoroughfare or other
public space.
3. Wall signs projecting six inches or more into any public space from
the face of a building shall have a clearance of not less than eight
feet between the bottom of such sign and the sidewalk level of any
public thoroughfare.
4. Glass in any wall sign must be safety glass or comparable material.
Sec. 11.2 OLEAN CODE Sec. 11.2
C:878
Sec. 11.3. Signs in other use districts.
11.2.4 Ground signs. Two ground signs may be permitted not exceeding 65
square feet in total area and subject to the following regulations:
1. Shall not be more than 10 feet in height as measured from the
ground.
2. Any open space between the ground and the bottom of the sign
shall not exceed three feet.
3. Ground signs may not be located in any area which shall affect
visibility for motor vehicle traffic.
4. An additional sign shall be allowed under the provisions of this
article, and subject to the above regulations.
11.2.5 Pole or pylon signs. One pole or pylon sign may be permitted not
exceeding 65 square feet in area and subject to the following
regulations:
1. The height of the pole or pylon shall not be more than 25 feet above
the ground or curb, whichever is lower.
2. An open space of not less than 10 feet shall be maintained between
the ground level and the bottom of such sign.
11.3.0 Signs in the WC Waterfront Conservation Use District. Within the WC
Waterfront Conservation Use District, all signs shall conform to the
requirements of section 11.1.
In addition to the signs allowed to comply with the requirements of
section 11.1, the owner of an approved mobile home park may be
allowed to erect a single ground mounted sign, subject to the following
regulations:
1. The sign shall only contain the name and address of the mobile
home park.
2. The sign shall not be more than 10 feet in height as measured from
the ground.
3. The sign shall not contain more than 24 square feet in total area on
either of two sides.
4. The sign shall not be illuminated, except indirectly.
5. The sign shall not be located closer than 20 feet to any street or
property line.
11.3.1 Signs in I Industrial Use Districts. Within the I Industrial Use
Districts shall conform to CC and GC use district regulations.
Sec. 11.2 CHARTER Sec. 11.3
C:879
Sec. 11.4. Administration and violations.
11.3.2 Signs in industrial/business parks. Signs shall be allowed in
industrial/business parks subject to the following regulations.
1. One sign of the pole or pylon type identifying the industrial/
business park only and not exceeding 100 square feet in area and
conforming to section 11.2.4.
2. One sign directing traffic to business locations. Such sign shall
contain equal-sized areas not to exceed 12 inches by 72 inches for
each business located within the park.
3. Entrance, exit, safety and other directional signs as required; size
in accordance with size used for New York State signs.
4. Corporation identification signs, if intended to be seen from any
road outside the park or area, will conform to regulations for
business signs. Other corporate identification signs will be at the
discretion of the corporation but will not extend more than five feet
above the roof line.
11.4.0 Billboards and off-premises advertising signs. Billboards shall be
permitted by special use permit only and shall be permitted only in
industrial districts. Off-premises advertising signs shall be permitted by
special use permit only and shall be permitted in the CC, GC and I use
districts only. Such special use permit shall be defined in and be issued
as provided by the zoning ordinance.
11.4.1 Non-conforming uses. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this
article, any nonconforming sign of any type in existence at the date of
the enactment of this article shall, at the expiration of 12 months from
such date, become a prohibited and unlawful use and shall be
discontinued. If a party can show that he has been unduly burdened by
this provision, he may apply in the alternative to the zoning board of
appeals for a special permit to continue his non-conforming sign during
the remaining or undepreciated useful life of such sign, as determined
by an appropriate depreciation formula. For such purpose, the use of a
formula commonly used for income tax purposes or the depreciation
formula used in the depreciation schedules of the income tax returns of
the owner of such sign shall be acceptable.
11.4.2 Variances. Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, upon
application to the zoning board of appeals, that board may vary or adopt
the strict application of any of the requirements of this article.
Sec. 11.3 OLEAN CODE Sec. 11.4
C:880
ARTICLE 12
NON-CONFORMING BUILDINGS, USES AND LOTS
Sec. 12.0. Continuation of non-conforming buildings and lots.
Any lawful building, structure or use of premises existing at the effective
date of the original zoning law of the city, as approved by the Olean
Common Council on July 28, 1936, or any subsequent amendment thereof
applying to such building, structure, or use of premises, may be continued
although such building, structure, or use of premises does not conform to
the provisions of this law provided however:
Sec. 12.1. Discontinuance of a non-conforming use. [L.L. No. 5-00,
§ 1, 9-26-2000]
12.0.1 Nothing herein contained shall be construed to render lawful any use
not lawfully conforming to provisions of the city's zoning law hereby
repealed.
12.0.2 Any extension of a non-conforming use must conform to the
provisions of this law.
12.0.3No non-conforming building or structure shall be enlarged, extended
or increased during its life to an extent exceeding 15% of its existing
gross floor area or in aggregate value 50% of the replacement cost of
the building, whichever is greater, unless said building or structure is
changed to conform to the requirements of this law.
12.0.4 A building or structure containing a non-conforming use may be
repaired or strengthened sufficiently to remove a hazard to public
safety, as such hazard may be determined by the code enforcement
officer, but not so as to perpetuate the non-conforming use or character
of the structure. Nothing in this law shall prevent the strengthening or
restoring to a safe condition any wall, floor or roof which has been
declared unsafe by the code enforcement officer.
12.0.5 Only by approval of the zoning board of appeals shall a building used
to house a non-conforming use be restored if damaged or destroyed by
fire, flood, earthquake or other act of God. Substantial restoration shall
be made within six months of the occurrence of the damage, except that
this time limit may be extended by the zoning board of appeals in cases
of practical difficulty or hardship. Any building damaged by such
occurrence to the extent of more than 50% of its replacement value and
not demolished shall be repaired or rebuilt within a six-month period to
conform to the building line of the original structure.
12.0.6No non-conforming use shall be maintained, renewed, changed or
extended without a certificate of compliance having first been issued by
the code enforcement officer.
12.1.1 Any building or land which is used for or occupied by a nonconforming
use and which is changed to or replaced by a conforming
Sec. 12.0 CHARTER Sec. 12.1
C:881
Sec. 12.2. Necessary maintenance and repairs.
A building or structure of non-conforming use may be repaired or restored
to a safe condition except as specified in section 12.5.
Sec. 12.3. Prior construction.
Any building or structure for which a building permit was issued prior to the
effective date of this law, or any subsequent amendment thereof applying,
may be completed and used in accordance with the plans and specifications
for such building and structure.
Sec. 12.4. Existing undersized lots.
use, shall not thereafter be used for or occupied by a nonconforming
use.
12.1.2 When a non-conforming use has been discontinued for a period of one
year, it shall be deemed abandoned and shall not thereafter be reestablished
and the future use shall be in conformity with the provisions
of this law.
12.1.3Within residential districts, no off-street parking is required for a
building that was last utilized for a nonconforming use regardless of
how long the building or any portion of the building was vacant so long
as the building (1) is being converted into a single or a two-family
residential use, and (2) has no more than five bedrooms in the entire
building. Within the meaning of this provision, the term "bedroom"
includes any room with a bed and any room that is actually used for
overnight sleeping, like a den.
12.4.1 Any lot held in single and separate ownership prior to the adoption of
this law, and whose area is less than the specified minimum lot
requirements of this law for the district, may be considered as
complying with such minimum lot requirements and no variance shall
be required, provided that:
1. Such lot does not adjoin any other lot or lots held by the same
owner whose aggregate area is equal to or greater than the
minimum lot area required for that district.
2. Such lot has an area of at least 3,000 square feet and a minimum
width of at least 40 feet at the required setback line if it is to be
used for residential purposes.
3. The following minimum yard dimensions are maintained for
residences:
Side yards—Four feet.
Rear yards—Ten feet.
Front yards—Fifteen feet.
Sec. 12.1 OLEAN CODE Sec. 12.4
C:882
Sec. 12.5. Reduction in lot area.
A building permit shall not be issued for any lot that is reduced in area so
that it creates a non-conforming bulk or use in violation of any regulations
contained in this law.
4. No detached accessory building shall be located closer to a side lot
line than three feet, nor less than five feet to the residence building
and is located behind the rear line of such residence building. No
accessory building shall be located closer to the rear lot line than
three feet if no easement is located along such rear lot line.
5. All other bulk requirements for that district are complied with.
12.4.2 In any district where residences are permitted, such undersized nonconforming
lots may be used for not more than one single-family
dwelling.
Sec. 12.4 CHARTER Sec. 12.5
C:883

ARTICLE 13
GENERAL EXCEPTIONS
Sec. 13.0. Public properties.
Nothing in this law shall restrict construction or use in the exercise of a
governmental function of public buildings, lands or property.
Sec. 13.1. Public utilities.
Nothing in this law shall restrict the construction or use of underground or
overhead distribution facilities of public utilities operating under the laws
of the State of New York. Other facilities may be constructed subject to a
site plan approval.
Sec. 13.0 CHARTER Sec. 13.1
C:885

ARTICLE 14
ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS
Sec. 14.0. Establishment and duties. [L.L. 3-00, § 1, 3-28-2000]
Pursuant to city laws and in accordance with the General City Law of the
State of New York, as amended, the city shall establish a zoning board
of appeals. The zoning board of appeals shall consist of seven members
appointed by the mayor with the approval of a majority of the common
council. Members shall be electors residing in the city. The mayor and
common council may provide for compensation to be paid to members,
experts, clerks and a secretary and provide for such other expenses as
may be necessary and proper, not exceeding the appropriation made by
the mayor and common council for this purpose. The zoning board of
appeals shall designate a chairperson, vice-chairperson and secretary with
the approval of the mayor and common council. In the absence of a
chairperson, vice-chairperson or secretary, the zoning board of appeals
may designate members to serve in acting capacities in these positions. A
member of the zoning board of appeals shall not at the same time be a
member of the common council of the city. The mayor and common council
shall have the power to remove any member of the zoning board of appeals
for cause, after public hearing.
14.0.1 Term of appointment. The terms of office of the members of the
zoning board of appeals shall be seven years. Of the members of the
zoning board of appeals first appointed, one shall hold office for the
term of one year, one for the term of two years, one for the term of three
years, one for the term of four years, one for the term of five years, one
for the term of six years and one for the term of seven years, from and
after his or her appointment. The appointment of the chairperson shall
be for a term of one year.
Their successors shall be appointed for the term of seven years from
and after the expiration of the terms of their predecessors in office. If
a vacancy shall occur otherwise than by expiration of term, it shall be
filled by the mayor and common council of the city by appointment for
the duration of the unexpired term.
14.0.2 Staff. The zoning board of appeals may employ such clerical or other
staff assistance as may be necessary, and prescribe their duties,
provided that it shall not at any time incur expenses beyond the amount
of the appropriations made by the mayor and common council of the
city and then available for that purpose.
14.0.3 Powers and duties. The zoning board of appeals shall have all the
powers and duties prescribed by law and this law, which are more
particularly specified as follows:
1. Interpretation. It shall be the responsibility of the zoning board of
appeals to hear and decide appeals from, and review, any order,
Sec. 14.0 CHARTER Sec. 14.0
C:887
requirement, decision, or interpretation made by the code
enforcement officer.
2. Use variances.
a. The zoning board of appeals, on appeal from the decision or
determination of the code enforcement officer, shall have the
power to grant use variances, authorizing a use of the land
which otherwise would not be allowed or would be prohibited
by the terms of this law.
b. No such use variance shall be granted by the zoning board of
appeals without a showing by the applicant that applicable
zoning regulations and restrictions have caused unnecessary
hardship. In order to prove such unnecessary hardship the
applicant shall demonstrate and the zoning board of appeals
shall find that:
(1) Under the applicable regulations of this law the applicant
is deprived of all reasonable economic use or benefit from
the property in question, which deprivation must be
established by competent financial evidence; and
(2) That the alleged hardship relating to the property in
question is unique, and does not apply to a substantial
portion of the district or neighborhood; and
(3) That the requested use variance, if granted, will not alter
the essential character of the neighborhood; and
(4) That the alleged hardship has not been self-created.
c. The zoning board of appeals, in the granting of use variances,
shall grant the minimum variance that it shall deem necessary
and adequate to address the unnecessary hardship proven by
the applicant, and at the same time preserve and protect the
character of the neighborhood and the health, safety and
welfare of the community.
3. Area variances.
a. The zoning board of appeals shall have the power, upon an
appeal from a decision or determination of the code
enforcement officer, to grant area variances from the lot area,
lot width, yard, height, lot coverage or other dimensional
requirements of this law.
b. In making its determination, the zoning board of appeals shall
take into consideration the benefit to the applicant if the
variance is granted, as weighed against the detriment to the
health, safety and welfare of the neighborhood or community
by such grant. In making such determination the zoning board
of appeals shall also consider:
Sec. 14.0 OLEAN CODE Sec. 14.0
C:888
(1) Whether an undesirable change will be produced in the
character of the neighborhood or a detriment to nearby
properties will be created by the granting of the area
variance; and/or
(2) Whether the benefit sought by the applicant can be
achieved by some method, feasible for the applicant to
pursue, other than an area variance; and/or
(3) Whether the requested area variance is substantial; and/
or
(4) Whether the proposed variance will have an adverse effect
or impact on the physical or environmental conditions in
the neighborhood or district; and/or
(5) Whether the alleged difficulty was selfcreated, which
consideration shall be relevant to the decision of the
zoning board of appeals, but shall not necessarily preclude
the granting of the area variance.
c. If the zoning board of appeals, in its discretion, shall grant an
area variance, it shall grant the minimum variance that it shall
deem necessary and adequate and at the same time preserve
and protect the character of the neighborhood and the health,
safety and welfare of the community.
4. Imposition of conditions. The zoning board of appeals shall, in the
granting of use variances, area variances and special use permits,
have the authority to impose such reasonable conditions and
restrictions as are directly related to and incidental to the proposed
use of the property, or the period of time such variance shall be in
effect. Such conditions shall be consistent with the spirit and intent
of this law and shall be imposed for the purpose of minimizing any
adverse impact such variance may have on the neighborhood or
community.
All work which is authorized by the grant of a variance or special
use permit shall be commenced within six months or such greater
period not to exceed one year, as may be specified in the approval
by the zoning board of appeals. Unless otherwise authorized by
the zoning board of appeals, all work shall be completed within
one year of the date of the grant of such variance or special
use permit. Such approval may be extended as determined by
the zoning board of appeals upon receipt of written application
submitted prior to the expiration of the approval period.
14.0.4 Mandatory referral.
1. The zoning board of appeals shall, at least five days before a public
hearing, mail notices thereof to the parties, and to the regional
Sec. 14.0 CHARTER Sec. 14.0
C:889
state park commission having jurisdiction over any state park or
parkway within 500 feet of the property affected by such appeal.
2. The zoning board of appeals, before taking final action on any use
variance affecting real property lying within a distance of 500 feet
from the boundary of any city, village or town, or from the boundary
of any existing or proposed county or state park or other recreation
area, or from the right-of-way of any stream or drainage channel
owned by the county or for which the county has established
channel lines, or from the existing or proposed boundary of any
county or state owned land on which a public building or institution
is situated, shall refer such matter to the Cattaraugus County
Planning Board for report and recommendation. If the county
planning board fails to make such report within 30 days after
receipt of referred matter the zoning board of appeals may act
without such report. If the county planning board disapproves the
proposal, or recommends modification thereof, the zoning board of
appeals may act contrary to such disapproval or recommendation
only by a vote of a majority plus one of all the members thereof and
after the adoption of a resolution fully setting forth the reasons for
such contrary action. The zoning board of appeals shall file a report
of its action with the county planning board within seven days after
such action is taken.
14.0.5 Procedure.
1. All appeals and applications made to the zoning board of appeals
shall be in writing, on forms prescribed by said board. Every appeal
or application shall refer to the specific provision of the law
involved, and shall exactly set forth the interpretation that is
claimed, or the details of the variance that is applied for, and the
grounds on which it is claimed that the variance should be granted,
as the case may be.
2. The zoning board of appeals shall hold a public hearing on appeals
within 60 days after receipt and give due notice of such public
hearing by advertising in the official newspaper at least 10 days
prior to the date scheduled for the public hearing.
3. Applicants for use variances are required to mail notices of such
public hearings to the owners or occupants of all lands within a
radius of 250 feet from any part of the property for which the use
variance is being requested. Such notices shall be postmarked at
least 10 days prior to the date scheduled for the public hearing.
4. Applicants for area variances are required to mail notices of such
public hearings to the owners or occupants of all lands abutting any
part of the property for which the area variance is being requested.
Such notices shall be postmarked at least 10 days prior to the date
scheduled for the public hearing. Abutting owners in every
direction shall be notified by the mailing of notices and, in the event
Sec. 14.0 OLEAN CODE Sec. 14.0
C:890
the property for which the area variance is requested fronts on a
street, alley or any other public way, notices shall also be sent to
the owners and/or occupants of properties located on the opposite
side of the street, alley or public way.
5. Applicants for special use permits referred to the zoning board of
appeals shall apply the standards governing special use permits as
provided in subsection 9.0.4 of this law and comply with the notice
requirements provided in subsection 9.0.3(c).
6. Copies of the appeal or application document shall be mailed to the
members of the board of appeals. The board of appeals shall meet
within 15 days of the date of filing the appeal or application, review
the matter and schedule the required public hearing.
7. The zoning board of appeals shall decide on appeals and on other
matters referred to it within 60 days after final public hearing.
8. Every decision of the zoning board of appeals shall be by
resolution, each of which shall contain a full record of said board in
the particular case.
9. Where there are practical difficulties or unnecessary hardship in
the way of carrying out the strict letter of this chapter, the zoning
board of appeals shall have the power to vary or modify the
application of any of the regulations or provisions of this law
relating to the use, construction, structural changes in, equipment
or alteration of buildings or structures, or the use of land, so that
the spirit of the law shall be observed, public safety and welfare
secured and substantial justice done. The zoning board of appeals
shall have no power to vary or modify the application of the
provisions and requirements of the Uniform Fire Prevention and
Building Code of the State of New York.
14.0.6 Rules of procedure, by-laws, forms.
1. Meetings open to the public. All meetings of the zoning board of
appeals shall be open to the public.
2. Minutes of meetings. Such board shall keep minutes of each of its
meetings which are certified as accurate by the secretary of the
board which describe the factors considered by the board in
reaching its decision and which show the vote of each member on
every application to the board. Each member present at any
meeting of the board shall have a vote on every question brought
before the board for its consideration and no member shall be
excused from voting on any question except by a concurring vote of
two-thirds of all present. If a member is absent or abstains from
voting the minutes shall indicate such fact.
3. Quorum and majority vote. Four votes of the board shall constitute
a quorum and four votes shall be necessary to decide in favor of any
Sec. 14.0 CHARTER Sec. 14.0
C:891
applicant or any matter upon which said board is required to pass
under the provisions of this law.
4. Additional procedures and by-laws. The zoning board of appeals
shall have the power to make, adopt, and promulgate such
additional written rules of procedure, by-laws, and forms as it may
deem necessary for the proper execution of its duties and to secure
the intent of this law.
Sec. 14.0 OLEAN CODE Sec. 14.0
C:892
ARTICLE 15
ADMINISTRATION
Sec. 15.0. Enforcement.
This law shall be enforced by the code enforcement officer, who shall be
appointed by the mayor and common council of the city. No building permit
shall be issued or reissued except where all the provisions of this law have
been complied with. The code enforcement officer shall keep the planning
board advised of all matters pertaining to the enforcement of this law other
than routine duties, and shall submit a monthly report to the mayor and
common council, planning board and zoning board of appeals enumerating
the applications received, inspections made, permits issued or refused, and
other actions taken.
Where sufficient cause exists to believe that the terms of this law have been
violated and where corrective action has not been taken nor an appropriate
variance application to the zoning board of appeals filed, within 10 days of
the issuance of a written notice of violation mailed to the record owner(s)
of the property where the violation occurs, with a copy to the alleged
violator, if not the same person, the code enforcement officer, pursuant to
Municipal Home Rule Law SS 10, Subdivision 4(a), is authorized to issue an
appearance ticket directing the alleged violator to appear in a designated
local criminal court at a designated future time in connection with the
alleged and designated offense.
Sec. 15.1. Building permits.
Sec. 15.2. Certificate of compliance.
No land shall be occupied or used and no building or other structure
erected, altered, extended, enlarged or, if a non-conforming use, restored
15.1.1No building or structure shall be erected, added to, or structurally
altered until a permit therefor as specified herein has been issued by
the code enforcement officer. No building permit shall be issued for any
building under the building and building regulations code of the city
where said construction, addition, or alteration or use thereof would be
in violation of any of the provisions of this law.
15.1.2 For zoning purposes, there shall be submitted with all applications
for building permits two copies of a layout or plot plan drawn to scale
showing the actual dimensions of the lot to be built upon, the exact size
and location on the lot of the building and accessory buildings to be
erected, and such other information as may be necessary to determine
and provide for the enforcement of this law.
15.1.3 One copy of such layout or plot plan shall be returned when approved
by the code enforcement officer, together with such permit to the
applicant, upon the payment of a fee as set by the common council of
the city.
Sec. 15.0 CHARTER Sec. 15.2
C:893
shall be occupied, used, or changed in use until a certificate of compliance
shall have been issued by the code enforcement officer stating that the
building, other structure or proposed use thereof complies with the
provisions of the zoning law of the city. Vacated existing commercial
properties may not be used or occupied until a certificate has been issued
to ensure that the new use or occupancy is permitted.
All certificates of compliance for new or structurally altered buildings or
structures shall be applied for coincident with the application for a building
permit therefor. Such certificate of compliance shall be issued within 30
days after the erection or alteration shall have been approved as complying
with the provisions of this law.
Sec. 15.3. Inspection.
The code enforcement officer is hereby empowered to cause any building,
other structure or tract of land to be inspected and examined and to order,
in writing, the remedying of any condition found to exist therein or thereat
in violation of any provision of this law. After any such order has been
served, no work shall proceed on any building, other structure or tract of
land covered by such order, except to comply with such order.
Sec. 15.2 OLEAN CODE Sec. 15.3
C:894
ARTICLE 16
AMENDMENTS
Sec. 16.0. Procedure.
The common council of the city may, from time to time, on its own motion,
or on petition, or on recommendation from the planning board, amend the
regulations and districts established under this article after public notice
and hearing in each case. All proposed amendments of the regulations or
districts herein established shall be filed in writing in a form required by the
common council. The procedure for amending the regulations and districts
established under this law shall be as provided in Section 83 of the General
City Law, as amended from time to time.
Sec. 16.1. Advisory report to the common council of the city.
Every proposed amendment, unless initiated by the planning board, shall be
referred by the common council to the planning board. The planning board
shall report in writing its recommendations thereon to the common council,
accompanied by a full statement of the reasons for such recommendations.
If the planning board fails to report within a period of 45 days from the
date of receipt of notice or such longer time as may have been agreed
upon by it and the common council, the common council may act without
such report. If the planning board recommends disapproval of the proposed
amendment, or recommends modification thereof, the common council shall
not act contrary to such disapproval or recommendation except by a threefourths
vote.
Sec. 16.2. Petition by owners of 50% of frontage.
Wherever the owners of 50% or more of the frontage to a proposed
amendment shall present a petition duly signed and acknowledged to the
common council, requesting an amendment, supplement, change or repeal
of the regulations prescribed for such district or part thereof, it shall be the
duty of the common council to vote upon said petition within 90 days after
filing of the same by the petitioners with the city clerk.
Sec. 16.3. Public notice and hearing.
The common council of the city shall, by resolution, fix the time and place
of the public hearing and cause notice to be given as follows:
16.3.1 By publishing notices of the proposed amendment and the time and
place of the public hearing in a newspaper of general circulation in the
city, not less than 10 days prior to the date of public hearing.
16.3.2 By giving written notice of hearing to any required municipal, county,
regional, metropolitan, state or federal agency in a manner prescribed
by law.
Sec. 16.0 CHARTER Sec. 16.3
C:895
Sec. 16.4. Protest by owners.
If a protest against the proposed amendment is presented to the common
council, duly signed and acknowledged by the owners of 20% or more of
the area of land included in such proposed amendment, or by the owners
of 20% or more of the area of land immediately adjacent extending 100
feet therefrom, or by the owners of 20% or more of the area of land
directly opposite thereto extending 100 feet from the street frontage of such
opposite land, such amendment shall not be passed except by the favorable
vote of at least a three-fourths majority of the common council.
Sec. 16.5. Decision by common council.
The common council shall set the public hearing as required and shall
render its decision within 60 days of the receipt of the planning board's
report, (except the common council shall not be required to hold a public
hearing prior to submission to the planning board). If the common council
deems it advisable, it may require as a condition for approval of the
amendment, that the amended area be put to use within a reasonable length
of time.
Sec. 16.6. Notification of decision.
The common council shall notify the applicant for an amendment of its
decision in writing within five days after the decision has been rendered.
Sec. 16.7. Filing with the secretary of state.
Every amendment to this Law shall be filed with the Secretary of State of
New York and become effective five days thereafter.
16.3.3 (For zoning map amendments only.) By mailing a notice of such public
hearing to the owners of all lands within a radius of 250 feet from any
part of the property or properties for which the change will be
applicable and such notice to all lands within the areas for which it will
be applicable. This notice is provided as a courtesy only, and failure of
the city to fully comply with this noticing provision shall not invalidate
any future amendment.
Sec. 16.3 OLEAN CODE Sec. 16.7
C:896
ARTICLE 17
REMEDIES
Sec. 17.0. Complaints of violations.
Whenever a violation of this law occurs, any person may file a complaint
in regard thereto. All such complaints must be in writing and shall be filed
with the code enforcement officer, who shall properly record such complaint
and immediately investigate the report thereon.
Sec. 17.1. Procedure for abatement of violations.
Sec. 17.2. Alternative penalty.
In addition to the foregoing remedies, an action or proceeding in the name
of the city may be commenced in any court of competent jurisdiction to
compel compliance with or restrain violation of this chapter or orders issued
in compliance with this law.
In the case of any violation or threatened violation of any of the provisions
of this law, or conditions imposed by the common council or planning board
of the city, in addition to other remedies herein provided, the common
council may institute any appropriate action or proceeding to prevent such
unlawful erection, structural alteration, reconstruction, moving and/or use,
to restrain, correct, or abate such violation, to prevent the occupancy of
such building structure or land, or to prevent any illegal act, conduct,
business or use in or about such premises.
17.1.1 Whenever in the opinion of the code enforcement officer, after proper
examination and inspection, there appears to exist a condition which is
a violation of any provision of this law, or of any rule or regulation
adopted pursuant thereto, the code enforcement officer shall serve a
written notice of violation upon the owner of the property in violation.
Fourteen days after notification the condition shall be considered a
violation and shall be subject to appropriate penalties and other
remedies as provided for herein and under the laws of the State of New
York.
17.1.2 Such notice of violation shall: (1) inform the owner of the nature and
details of the condition and the reason why it is a violation, (2)
recommend remedial action which if taken will effect compliance with
this chapter and other rules and regulations of the city, and (3) state the
date by which the violation must be remedied or removed in order to be
in compliance with this law.
17.1.3 In the event the violation is not remedied within the time allowed,
then the person notified of such violation shall be subject to conviction
for a violation as defined by the Penal Laws of the State of New York and
shall be subject to a fine of not more than $250 or by sentence of
imprisonment for a period of not more than 15 days, or both. Each week
that the violation continues shall constitute a separate offense.
Sec. 17.0 CHARTER Sec. 17.2
C:897

ARTICLE 18
FEE SCHEDULE
A schedule of fees for all permits and applications required by this chapter
shall be set by the mayor and common council of the city by resolution from
time to time.
CHARTER Sec. 17.2
C:899

ARTICLE 19
REPEAL
The zoning law adopted by the city on November 12, 1993, as amended
subsequently from time to time, is hereby repealed as to the effective date
of this law. Such repeal shall not affect or impair any act done, offense
committed or right accrued or acquired, or liability, penalty, forfeiture or
punishment incurred prior to the time such repeal takes place.
CHARTER Sec. 17.2
C:901

ARTICLE 20
EFFECTIVE DATE
This zoning law of the city shall be effective upon adoption.
CHARTER Sec. 17.2
C:903

ARTICLE 21
DOWNTOWN OLEAN FORM-BASED ZONING CODE
[Added 12-22-2015 by L.L. No. 8-2015]
(a) The attached "Downtown Olean Form-Based Zoning Code" is added as
a new Article 21.33
(b) Relationship to Other Zoning Laws: Any conflict between the
Downtown Olean Form-Based Zoning Code and any other City
ordinance or regulation must be resolved in favor of the intent of the
Downtown Olean Form-Based Zoning Code.
33.Editor's Note: The Downtown Olean Form-Based Zoning Code is included in the online
version of the Code of the City of Olean (eCode360®). Said document is also on file in the
City offices.
CHARTER Sec. 17.2
C:905
Chapter CCT
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLES
Sec. CCT-1. 1971 Charter Laws.
This table gives the location within parts II and III of sections of the 1971
Charter Laws.
1971 Charter Laws Section Section this Code
118 Pt. II, § 23-2
188 Pt. II, § 7-21
189 Pt. II, § 27-21
250 Pt. II, § 7-56
251, 252 Pt. II, § 7-58
253, 254 Pt. II, § 7-59, Pt. II, § 7-60
257 Pt. II, § 7-61
258 Pt. II, § 7-57
259, 260 Pt. II, § 7-62, Pt. II, § 7-63
262 Pt. II, § 7-64
265-271 Pt. II, § 7-82—Pt. II, § 7-88
273 Pt. II, § 7-89
274 Pt. II, § 5-1
276 Pt. II, § 5-2
278-281 Pt. II, § 5-16
300 Pt. II, § 5-34—Pt. II, § 5-36
301 Pt. II, § 5-33
302, 303 Pt. II, § 5-36
304, 305 Pt. II, § 5-31
306, 307 Pt. II, § 5-36
308 Pt. II, § 5-33
309 Pt. II, § 5-37
315, 316 Pt. II, § 5-38
321-324 Pt. II, § 5-39—Pt. II, § 5-42
329 Pt. II, § 5-32
331 Pt. II, § 27-3
333 Pt. II, § 5-2 Pt. II, § 5-34
334-337 Pt. II, § 5-56—Pt. II, § 5-59
337A Pt. II, § 5-60
Sec. 17.2 OLEAN CODE Sec. CCT-1
C:906
1971 Charter Laws Section Section this Code
337B Pt. II, § 5-61
337C Pt. II, § 5-62
394 Pt. II, § 23-4
Sec. CCT-2. 1971 Code.
This table gives the location within parts II and III of those sections of the
1971 Code, as updated through May 8, 1990, which are included. Sections
of the 1971 Code, as supplemented, not listed herein have been omitted as
repealed, superseded, obsolete or not of a general and permanent nature.
For the location of local laws, ordinances or resolutions adopted subsequent
thereto, see the table immediately following this table.
1971 Code Section Section this Code
1-1 Pt. III, § 1-1
1-2 Pt. III, § 1-3
1-3 Pt. III, § 1-2
1-5 Pt. III, § 1-4
1-6 Pt. III, § 1-6
1-7, 1-8 Pt. III, § 1-8, Pt. III, § 1-9
1-9 Pt. III, § 2-21
1-10 Pt. III, § 1-10
2-1 Pt. III, § 2-1
2-4 Pt. III, § 23-1
2-5 Pt. III, § 2-163
2-6 Pt. III, § 2-2
2-12, 2-13 Pt. III, § 2-118
2-14 Pt. III, § 2-161
2-15 Pt. III, § 10-1
2-31 Pt. III, § 2-141
2-33, 2-34 Pt. III, § 2-142
2-40, 2-41 Pt. III, § 2-116, Pt. III, § 2-117
2-42 Pt. III, § 2-119
2-43 Pt. III, § 2-121
2-44 Pt. III, § 2-120
2-45 Pt. III, § 2-122
2-46 Pt. III, § 6-26
2-57 Pt. III, § 2-102
2-68 Pt. III, § 4-48
Sec. CCT-1 CHARTER Sec. CCT-2
C:907
1971 Code Section Section this Code
2-79 Pt. III, § 24-108
2-91 Pt. III, § 2-162
3-3 Pt. III, § 3-1
3-15—3-18 Pt. III, § 3-21—Pt. III, § 3-24
3-24—3-28 Pt. III, § 3-61—Pt. III, § 3-65
3-34—3-39 Pt. III, § 3-81—Pt. III, § 3-86
3-45—3-47 Pt. III, § 3-101—Pt. III, § 3-103
3-53 Pt. III, § 3-25
3-54, 3-55 Pt. III, § 3-46, Pt. III, § 3-47
4-17—4-19 Pt. III, § 10-22—Pt. III, § 10-24
4-31 Pt. III, § 10-46
4-32—4-36 Pt. III, § 10-66—Pt. III, § 10-70
4-37 Pt. III, § 10-47
5-1 Pt. III, § 4-1
5-17 Pt. III, § 4-21
5-23 Pt. III, § 4-26
5-32—5-34 Pt. III, § 4-24
5-47 Pt. III, § 4-25
6-1 Pt. III, § 5-2
6-2 Pt. III, § 5-1
6-3 Pt. III, § 5-3
6-22—6-24 Pt. III, § 5-26—Pt. III, § 5-28
6-27, 6-28 Pt. III, § 5-29, Pt. III, § 5-30
9-1 Pt. III, § 6-2
9-2—9-4 Pt. III, § 6-47—Pt. III, § 6-49
9-5 Pt. III, § 6-4
9-6 Pt. III, § 6-1
9-7 Pt. III, § 6-27
9-8 Pt. III, § 6-236
9-17 Pt. III, § 6-41
9-19—9-23 Pt. III, § 6-42—Pt. III, § 6-46
9-34—9-37 Pt. III, § 6-66—Pt. III, § 6-69
9-40 Pt. III, § 6-70
9-50—9-55 Pt. III, § 6-86—Pt. III, § 6-91
9-66—9-72 Pt. III, § 6-236—Pt. III, § 6-242
9-73 Pt. III, § 6-244
Sec. CCT-2 OLEAN CODE Sec. CCT-2
C:908
1971 Code Section Section this Code
9-74 Pt. III, § 6-243
9-85, 9-86 Pt. III, § 6-266, Pt. III, § 6-267
9-92—9-97 Pt. III, § 6-286—Pt. III, § 6-291
10 1/2-1 Pt. III, § 6-111 Pt. III, § 6-127
10 1/2-11 Pt. III, § 6-126
10 1/2-12 Pt. III, § 6-112 Pt. III, § 6-127
11-1 Pt. III, § 6-3
11-13—11-15 Pt. III, § 6-166—Pt. III, § 6-168
11-26 Pt. III, § 6-147
11-28 Pt. III, § 6-146
11-29 Pt. III, § 6-171
11-32, 11-33 Pt. III, § 6-212, Pt. III, § 6-213
11-38 Pt. III, § 6-148
11-39 Pt. III, § 6-214
11-44, 11-45 Pt. III, § 6-169, Pt. III, § 6-170
11-46, 11-47 Pt. III, § 6-172, Pt. III, § 6-173
11-53, 11-54 Pt. III, § 6-206, Pt. III, § 6-207
11-55—11-57 Pt. III, § 6-209—Pt. III, § 6-211
11 1/2-1—11 1/2-3 Pt. III, § 9-3—Pt. III, § 9-5
11 1/2-10 Pt. III, § 9-1
11 1/2-16—11 1/2-18 Pt. III, § 9-6—Pt. III, § 9-8
11 1/2-20 Pt. III, § 9-2
11 1/2-21 Pt. III, § 9-9
11 1/2-27 Pt. III, § 9-31
11 1/2-28 Pt. III, § 9-33
11 1/2-29 Pt. III, § 9-32
11 1/2-41—11 1/2-43 Pt. III, § 9-56—Pt. III, § 9-58
11 1/2-54 Pt. III, § 9-34
11 1/2-55 Pt. III, § 9-35
14-1, 14-2 Pt. III, § 16-1, Pt. III, § 16-2
15-10 Pt. III, § 12-146
15-11 Pt. III, § 12-148
15-13—15-16 Pt. III, § 12-149—Pt. III, § 12-152
15-17 Pt. III, § 12-147
15-25 Pt. III, § 12-153
15-35 Pt. III, § 12-154
Sec. CCT-2 CHARTER Sec. CCT-2
C:909
1971 Code Section Section this Code
15-64 Pt. III, § 12-155
15-74 Pt. III, § 12-156
15-88 Pt. III, § 12-157
15-93 Pt. III, § 12-158
15-115(f) Pt. III, § 12-159
15-117, 15-118 Pt. III, § 12-160, Pt. III, § 12-161
15-119 Pt. III, § 5-1
15-135 Pt. III, § 12-23
15-136—15-138 Pt. III, § 12-26—Pt. III, § 12-28
15-139—15-149 Pt. III, § 12-46—Pt. III, § 12-56
15-155—15-158 Pt. III, § 12-76—Pt. III, § 12-79
15-164—15-173 Pt. III, § 12-96—Pt. III, § 12-105
15-179, 15-180 Pt. III, § 12-21, Pt. III, § 12-22
15-181 Pt. III, § 12-57
15-182, 15-183 Pt. III, § 12-24, Pt. III, § 12-25
15-189—15-195 Pt. III, § 12-121—Pt. III, § 12-127
16-16 Pt. III, § 13-141
16-17—16-19 Pt. III, § 13-172—Pt. III, § 13-174
16-20—16-24 Pt. III, § 13-142—Pt. III, § 13-146
16-30—16-40 Pt. III, § 13-161—Pt. III, § 13-171
16-41—16-46 Pt. III, § 13-175—Pt. III, § 13-180
16-57—16-65 Pt. III, § 13-201—Pt. III, § 13-209
16-72—16-82 Pt. III, § 13-226—Pt. III, § 13-236
16-83, 16-84 Pt. III, § 16-26, Pt. III, § 16-27
17-1 Pt. III, § 13-36
17-2 Pt. III, § 13-38
17-3 Pt. III, § 13-37
17-4—17-6 Pt. III, § 13-39—Pt. III, § 13-41
17-21 Pt. III, § 13-101
17-22 Pt. III, § 13-116
Pt. III, § 13-118
17-23 Pt. III, § 13-119
17-24 Pt. III, § 13-117
17-25 Pt. III, § 13-102
18-5, 18-6 Pt. III, § 14-1, Pt. III, § 14-2
18-7 Pt. III, § 16-3
Sec. CCT-2 OLEAN CODE Sec. CCT-2
C:910
1971 Code Section Section this Code
18-8 Pt. III, § 14-3
18-9 Pt. III, § 24-254
19-1 Pt. III, § 15-1
19-2—19-4 Pt. III, § 15-3—Pt. III, § 15-5
19-5 Pt. III, § 15-2
20-1 Pt. III, § 17-1
20-2—20-4 Pt. III, § 17-23—Pt. III, § 17-25
20-5 Pt. III, § 17-22
20-6, 20-7 Pt. III, § 17-26, Pt. III, § 17-27
20-8 Pt. III, § 17-2
20-12—20-14 Pt. III, § 17-28—Pt. III, § 17-30
22-10 Pt. III, § 13-246
22-11—22-14 Pt. III, § 13-283—Pt. III, § 13-286
22-15—22-22 Pt. III, § 13-248—Pt. III, § 13-255
22-23 Pt. III, § 13-247
22-29, 22-30 Pt. III, § 13-271, Pt. III, § 13-272
22-32—22-41 Pt. III, § 13-273—Pt. III, § 13-282
22-42—22-45 Pt. III, § 13-287—Pt. III, § 13-290
22-61—22-63 Pt. III, § 13-356—Pt. III, § 13-358
22-64—22-67 Pt. III, § 13-376—Pt. III, § 13-379
22-68 Pt. III, § 13-359
22-74—22-78 Pt. III, § 13-396—Pt. III, § 13-400
24-1 Pt. III, § 18-1
24-2—24-4 Pt. III, § 18-21—Pt. III, § 18-23
24-5 Pt. III, § 8-1
26-1—26-3 Pt. III, § 21-1—Pt. III, § 21-3
26-4—26-8 Pt. III, § 21-5—Pt. III, § 21-9
26-10—26-12 Pt. III, § 21-32—Pt. III, § 21-34
26-12.1 Pt. III, § 21-31
Pt. III, § 21-35
26-13 Pt. III, § 21-10
26-24—26-27 Pt. III, § 21-57—Pt. III, § 21-60
26-28 Pt. III, § 21-62
26-29 Pt. III, § 21-61
26-30 Pt. III, § 21-56
26-40 Pt. III, § 21-83
Sec. CCT-2 CHARTER Sec. CCT-2
C:911
1971 Code Section Section this Code
26-42—26-45 Pt. III, § 21-85—Pt. III, § 21-88
26-52, 26-53 Pt. III, § 21-106, Pt. III, § 21-107
26-55 Pt. III, § 21-108
26-57 Pt. III, § 21-110
26-75—26-82 Pt. III, § 21-131—Pt. III, § 21-138
27-7.1 Pt. III, § 23-26
27-8 Pt. III, § 23-3
28-1, 28-2 Pt. III, § 24-1, Pt. III, § 24-2
28-3—28-5 Pt. III, § 24-26—Pt. III, § 24-28
28-8, 28-9 Pt. III, § 24-85
28-10, 28-11 Pt. III, § 24-255, Pt. III, § 24-256
28-12 Pt. III, § 24-253
28-14 Pt. III, § 24-4
28-15 Pt. III, § 24-3
28-16 Pt. III, § 24-5
28-17 Pt. III, § 24-29
28-27.1(c) Pt. III, § 24-82
28-28 Pt. III, § 24-88
28-30 Pt. III, § 24-86
28-31 Pt. III, § 24-84
28-35 Pt. III, § 24-252
28-47 Pt. III, § 24-30
28-48(b)—(d) Pt. III, § 24-31
28-53 Pt. III, § 24-6
28-64 Pt. III, § 24-81
28-76 Pt. III, § 24-106
28-79 Pt. III, § 24-110
28-80 Pt. III, § 24-107
28-81(d) Pt. III, § 24-87
28-84 Pt. III, § 24-111
28-86, 28-87 Pt. III, § 24-115, Pt. III, § 24-116
28-88 Pt. III, § 24-114
28-89—28-91 Pt. III, § 24-117—Pt. III, § 24-119
28-92, 28-93 Pt. III, § 24-112, Pt. III, § 24-113
28-101 Pt. III, § 24-134
28-101.1 Pt. III, § 24-135
Sec. CCT-2 OLEAN CODE Sec. CCT-2
C:912
1971 Code Section Section this Code
28-102 Pt. III, § 24-136
28-102.1 Pt. III, § 24-137
28-103, 28-104 Pt. III, § 24-138, Pt. III, § 24-139
28-104.1, 28-104.2 Pt. III, § 24-140, Pt. III, § 24-141
28-105 Pt. III, § 24-142
28-105.01, 28-105.02 Pt. III, § 24-144, Pt. III, § 24-145
28-105.2 Pt. III, § 24-147
28-106 Pt. III, § 24-148
28-106.1 Pt. III, § 24-149
28-107—28-109 Pt. III, § 24-150—Pt. III, § 24-152
28-109.1 Pt. III, § 24-153
28-110, 28-111 Pt. III, § 24-154, Pt. III, § 24-155
28-111.1, 28-111.2 Pt. III, § 24-156, Pt. III, § 24-157
28-112 Pt. III, § 24-158
28-112.1, 28-112.2 Pt. III, § 24-159, Pt. III, § 24-160
28-113—28-115 Pt. III, § 24-161—Pt. III, § 24-163
28-115.1, 28-115.2 Pt. III, § 24-164, Pt. III, § 24-165
28-116 Pt. III, § 24-166
28-116.1 Pt. III, § 24-168
28-116.1.1 Pt. III, § 24-169
28-116.2, 28-116.3 Pt. III, § 24-170, Pt. III, § 24-171
28-117—28-119 Pt. III, § 24-172—Pt. III, § 24-174
28-123—28-127 Pt. III, § 24-191—Pt. III, § 24-195
28-128-127.1 Pt. III, § 24-196
28-128—28-131 Pt. III, § 24-197 Pt. III, § 24-200
28-133—28-136 Pt. III, § 24-201—Pt. III, § 24-204
28-140 Pt. III, § 24-226
28-141 Pt. III, § 24-231
28-141.1 Pt. III, § 24-231
28-141.2 Pt. III, § 24-227
28-141.3 Pt. III, § 24-231
28-141.5 Pt. III, § 24-231
28-141.6—28-141.8 Pt. III, § 24-228—Pt. III, § 24-230
28-141.9 Pt. III, § 24-232
28-142—28-150 Pt. III, § 24-51—Pt. III, § 24-59
28-151 Pt. III, § 24-59
Sec. CCT-2 CHARTER Sec. CCT-2
C:913
1971 Code Section Section this Code
28-167, 28-168 Pt. III, § 24-251
29-1 Pt. III, § 25-1
29-3, 29-4 Pt. III, § 25-2, Pt. III, § 25-3
29-6 Pt. III, § 25-4
30-25, 30-26 Pt. III, § 26-41, Pt. III, § 26-42
30-32, 30-33 Pt. III, § 26-86, Pt. III, § 26-87
30-34 Pt. III, § 26-89
30-35 Pt. III, § 26-88
30-36 Pt. III, § 26-91
30-37 Pt. III, § 26-93
30-38 Pt. III, § 26-90
30-39 Pt. III, § 26-94
30-40 Pt. III, § 26-92
30-46—30-48 Pt. III, § 26-61—Pt. III, § 26-63
30-49 Pt. III, § 26-66
30-50(a), 30-50(b) Pt. III, § 26-68, Pt. III, § 26-69
30-51(a), 30-51(b) Pt. III, § 26-64, Pt. III, § 26-65
30-52 Pt. III, § 26-70
30-53 Pt. III, § 26-67
30-59(a), 30-59(b) Pt. III, § 26-111, Pt. III, § 26-112
30-60 Pt. III, § 26-113
30-66 Pt. III, § 26-131
30-67 Pt. III, § 26-133
30-68 Pt. III, § 26-132
30-74, 30-75 Pt. III, § 26-46, Pt. III, § 26-47
30-76 Pt. III, § 26-45
30-82, 30-83 Pt. III, § 26-43, Pt. III, § 26-44
31-1, 31-2 Pt. III, § 27-1, Pt. III, § 27-2
31-13 Pt. III, § 27-22
31-24 Pt. III, § 27-41
31-25—31-29 Pt. III, § 27-43—Pt. III, § 27-47
31-30—31-43 Pt. III, § 27-136—Pt. III, § 27-149
31-44—31-48 Pt. III, § 27-116—Pt. III, § 27-120
31-49 Pt. III, § 27-48
31-50—31-57 Pt. III, § 27-186—Pt. III, § 27-193
31-58 Pt. III, § 27-50
Sec. CCT-2 OLEAN CODE Sec. CCT-2
C:914
1971 Code Section Section this Code
31-59 Pt. III, § 27-81
31-60 Pt. III, § 27-49
31-61—31-64 Pt. III, § 27-96—Pt. III, § 27-99
31-65—31-67 Pt. III, § 27-166—Pt. III, § 27-168
31-68 Pt. III, § 27-42
Sec. CCT-3. Subdivision Regulations.
This table shows the location within part III of the Subdivision Regulations
as amended through May 8, 1990.
Subdivision Regulations
Section Section this Code
1.200 Pt. III, § 22-4
1.300 Pt. III, § 22-3
2.100 Pt. III, § 22-1
2.200 Pt. III, § 22-1
3.101—3.104 Pt. III, § 22-26—Pt. III, § 22-29
3.200 Pt. III, § 22-30
3.300 Pt. III, § 22-31
3.401, 3.402 Pt. III, § 22-32, Pt. III, § 22-33
4.100—4.110 Pt. III, § 22-76—Pt. III, § 22-86
4.200 Pt. III, § 22-106
4.201—4.205 Pt. III, § 22-110—Pt. III, § 22-114
4.301—4.303 Pt. III, § 22-107—Pt. III, § 22-109
5.100 Pt. III, § 22-51
5.200 Pt. III, § 22-52
5.300 Pt. III, § 22-53
5.400 Pt. III, § 22-54
6.100 Pt. III, § 22-5
7.100 Pt. III, § 22-2
Sec. CCT-4. Zoning Ordinance.
This table shows the location within part III of the Zoning Ordinance as
amended through May 8, 1990.
Sec. CCT-2 CHARTER Sec. CCT-4
C:915
Zoning Ordinance
Article Section Section this Code
1 1, 2 Pt. III, § 28-1, Pt. III, § 28-2
2 1 Pt. III, § 28-76
1(h) Pt. III, § 28-264
2, 3 Pt. III, § 28-77, Pt. III, § 28-78
3-A Pt. III, § 28-118
4 Pt. III, § 28-96
3 1, 2 Pt. III, § 28-116, Pt. III, § 28-117
3, 4 Pt. III, § 28-119, Pt. III, § 28-120
4 1, 2 Pt. III, § 28-136, Pt. III, § 28-137
3 Pt. III, § 28-139
4 Pt. III, § 28-138
5 Pt. III, § 28-140
5 1—4 Pt. III, § 28-156—Pt. III, § 28-159
5A 1 Pt. III, § 28-236
6 1 Pt. III, § 28-176
2 Pt. III, § 28-178
3 Pt. III, § 28-177
7 1, 2 Pt. III, § 28-196, Pt. III, § 28-197
8 1—3 Pt. III, § 28-216—Pt. III, § 28-218
9 1, 2 Pt. III, § 28-256, Pt. III, § 28-257
2-A Pt. III, § 28-258
3—7 Pt. III, § 28-259—Pt. III, § 28-263
10 1 Pt. III, § 28-27
11 1 Pt. III, § 28-26
12 1, 2 Pt. III, § 28-28
3A Pt. III, § 28-28
13 1—4 Pt. III, § 28-29
14 Pt. III, § 28-4
15 1—7 Pt. III, § 28-46—Pt. III, § 28-52
8—10 Pt. III, § 28-54—Pt. III, § 28-56
11 Pt. III, § 28-53
16 1 Pt. III, § 28-30
16A 1—5 Pt. III, § 28-306—Pt. III, § 28-310
17 Pt. III, § 28-5
18 1 Pt. III, § 28-3
Sec. CCT-4 OLEAN CODE Sec. CCT-5
C:916
Sec. CCT-5. Laws of N.Y. (Special Acts).
This table gives the location within parts II and III of Laws of New York
(Special Acts).
Laws of N.Y.
Year Chapter Section Section this Code
1915 535 31 Pt. II, § 23-2
54 Pt. II, § 7-21
55 Pt. II, § 27-21
82 Pt. II, § 7-56
83—85 Pt. II, § 7-58—Pt. II, § 7-60
88 Pt. II, § 7-61
89 Pt. II, § 7-57
Pt. II, § 7-62, Pt. II, § 7-63
90 Pt. II, § 7-64
91 Pt. II, § 5-1
92 Pt. II, § 5-16
97 Pt. II, § 5-31—Pt. II, § 5-36
Pt. II, § 5-38—Pt. II, § 5-42
99 Pt. II, § 27-3
100 Pt. II, § 5-56, Pt. II, § 5-57
125 Pt. II, § 23-4
1916 543 1 Pt. II, § 5-56, Pt. II, § 5-57 Pt.
II, § 27-3
Sec. CCT-6. Local Laws.
This is a numerical listing of the local laws of the city used in this Code,
Repealed or superseded laws and any omitted materials are not reflected in
this table.
L.L. No. Section Section this Code
3-1934 5 Pt. II, § 7-21 Pt. II, § 27-21
2-1937 1(1) Pt. II, § 6-22
1(2) Pt. II, § 6-21
1(3) Pt. II, § 6-24
1(4) Pt. II, § 6-23
1(5)—1(14) Pt. II, § 6-25—Pt. II, § 6-34
1-1938 1 Pt. II, § 6-21—Pt. II, § 6-23
2-1939 1 Pt. II, § 6-22
Sec. CCT-5 CHARTER Sec. CCT-6
C:917
L.L. No. Section Section this Code
Pt. II, § 6-23
2 Pt. II, § 6-26
Pt. II, § 6-29
18-1940 1 Pt. II, § 5-31—Pt. II, § 5-36
Pt. II, § 5-38—Pt. II, § 5-42
24-1940 1 Pt. II, § 6-22, Pt. II, § 6-23
1-1941 1 Pt. II, § 7-57 Pt. II, § 7-62, Pt. II, § 7-63
2-1941 2 Pt. II, § 6-21—Pt. II, § 6-23
1-1942 2 Pt. II, § 6-22, Pt. II, § 6-23
Pt. II, § 6-34
1-1944 2 Pt. II, § 6-22, Pt. II, § 6-23
Pt. II, § 6-34
1-1945 2 Pt. II, § 6-22, Pt. II, § 6-23
Pt. II, § 6-34
2-1946 2 Pt. II, § 6-22, Pt. II, § 6-23
Pt. II, § 6-34
1-1947 2 Pt. II, § 6-22, Pt. II, § 6-23
Pt. II, § 6-34
2-1948 2 Pt. II, § 6-22, Pt. II, § 6-23
Pt. II, § 6-34
3-1949 2 Pt. II, § 6-22, Pt. II, § 6-23
Pt. II, § 6-34
2-1950 2 Pt. II, § 6-22, Pt. II, § 6-23
Pt. II, § 6-34
2-1955 2 Pt. II, § 6-22, Pt. II, § 6-23 Pt. II, § 6-34
1-1964 1 Pt. II, § 2-22
2 Pt. II, § 2-21
3—7 Pt. II, § 2-23—Pt. II, § 2-27
3-1964 1 Pt. II, § 5-34—Pt. II, § 5-36
2 Pt. II, § 5-33
3 Pt. II, § 5-31
Pt. II, § 5-33
Pt. II, § 5-36
4, 5 Pt. II, § 5-38
6 Pt. II, § 5-38
Pt. II, § 5-40—Pt. II, § 5-42
Sec. CCT-6 OLEAN CODE Sec. CCT-6
C:918
L.L. No. Section Section this Code
7 Pt. II, § 5-32
9 Pt. II, § 5-2
Pt. II, § 5-34
1-1966 2—3 Pt. II, § 7-23—Pt. II, § 7-53
10 Pt. II, § 7-29
4-1967 1 Pt. II, § 3-3
1-1968 1 Pt. II, § 23-27
3 Pt. II, § 23-27
6-1968 1 Pt. II, § 5-34—Pt. II, § 5-36
2 Pt. II, § 5-22
3 Pt. II, § 5-31
Pt. II, § 5-33
Pt. II, § 5-36
4 Pt. II, § 5-37
6, 7 Pt. II, § 5-38
8 Pt. II, § 5-36
Pt. II, § 5-40—Pt. II, § 5-42
9 Pt. II, § 5-32
11 Pt. II, § 5-2
Pt. II, § 5-34
4-1973 1 Pt. II, § 23-27
2-1974 1 Pt. II, § 23-27
1-1976 1 Pt. II, § 23-27
1-1978 1 Pt. II, § 23-27
3-1979 I, II Pt. II, § 5-56, Pt. II, § 5-57
IV—VI Pt. II, § 5-60—Pt. II, § 5-62
1-1950 1 Pt. II, § 23-37
2-1960 1—3 Pt. II, § 4-47—Pt. II, § 4-46
1-1962 1 Pt. II, § 23-37
2-1962 2 Pt. II, § 4-1
1-1963 2, 3 Pt. II, § 3-1
1-1964 1 Pt. II, § 6-1
1-1965 1, 2 Pt. II, § 2-52, Pt. II, § 2-53
3 Pt. II, § 2-51
4—9 Pt. II, § 2-54—Pt. II, § 2-59
10 Pt. II, § 2-53
Sec. CCT-6 CHARTER Sec. CCT-6
C:919
L.L. No. Section Section this Code
1-1987 I, II Pt. II, § 5-56, Pt. II, § 5-57
IV—VI Pt. II, § 5-60—Pt. II, § 5-62
3-1987 Pt. II, § 26-261, Pt. II, § 26-262
1—3 Pt. II, § 26-263—Pt. II, § 26-265
1-1989 1 Pt. II, § 5-56—Pt. II, § 5-59
2-1989 1 Pt. II, § 5-59
2-1990 1—4 Pt. II, § 2-37
3-1990 1 Pt. II, § 5-17
2-1991 1—6 Pt. II, § 2-36
1-1992 3-3 Pt. II, § 5-3
67-96(Res.) Pt. II, § 5-59(e)(5)
117-96(Res.) Pt. II, § 2-36
1-00 arts. 1—90 Pt. III, ch. 26, §§ 1—90
3-00 1 Pt. III, § 14.0.1
4-00 1 Pt. III, § 10.5.1(3)(a)(2)
2 Pt. III, § 10.5.1(3)(b)
3 Pt. III, § 9.1.2.(7)
5-00 1 Pt. III, ch. 26, § 12.1.3
6-00 1 Pt. III, ch. 26, § 2.1
2-02 1 2-53(a)
4-02 1 Pt. III, Ch. 28, § 11.0.3.3.
5-02 1 Added Pt. III, Ch. 28, § 11.2.1.4.
6-02 1 Pt. III, Ch. 28, § 9.1.9.
7-02 1 Added Pt. III, Ch. 28, § 4.2.2.c.12.
1-03 1 Added Pt. III, Ch. 28, § 9.1.11.
1-04 Pt. III, Ch. 3. § 3-3.
2-05 1 Pt. III, Ch. 28, § 2.1.
1-08 1 Repealed Pt. II, Ch. 6, § 6-1
2-08 2 Added Pt. II, Ch. 6, § 6-41
3-08 1
4-08 Added Pt. III, Ch. 19.7,
§§ 19.7-1—19.7-4
5-08 Pt. II, Ch. 2, § 2-36
1-2014 1, 2 Added Pt. II, Ch. L.L. 4.5, Art. I
2-2014 1—3 Added Pt. II, Ch. L.L. 4.5, Art. II
3-2014 Pt. II, Ch. L.L. 6-61—6-66, 6-70
Sec. CCT-6 OLEAN CODE Sec. CCT-6
C:920
L.L. No. Section Section this Code
1-2015 Added Pt. II, Ch. L.L. 7, § LL7-22
2-2015 1—7 Added Pt. II, Ch. LL2.5,
§ LL2.5-1—LL2.5-7
3-2015 Pt. III, Ch. 28
4-2015 Pt. III, Ch. 28
5-2015 Pt. III, Ch. 28
6-2015 1—10 Pt. II, Ch. LL4.5, Art. I
7-2015 Pt. III, Ch. 28
8-2015 Pt. III, Ch. 28, Art. 21 (eCode only)
1-2016 Pt. II, Ch. LL2, Art. V
1-2017 Pt. III, Ch. 6, Art. II
Sec. CCT-7. Ordinances and Resolutions.
This table gives the location within this Code of those ordinances and
resolutions adopted since the 1971 Code, as updated through May 8, 1991,
which are included herein. Ordinances and resolutions adopted prior to
such date were incorporated into the 1971 Code, as supplemented.
Ordinances and resolutions adopted since May 8, 1991, and not listed
herein, have been omitted as repealed, superseded or not of a general and
permanent nature.
Res. No. Date Section Section this Code
85-90 6-12-1990 2 Pt. III, § 24-136
98-90 7-24-1990 A-F Pt. III, § 16-2
94-90 9-10-1990 Pt. III, § 24-136
120-90 9-10-1990 1, 2 Pt. III, § 2-101
3a Pt. III, § 2-101
3b Pt. III, § 2-101
78-90 10-9-1990 Pt. III, § 24-135
162-90 10-9-1990 7 Pt. III, § 2-46
129-90 11-27-1990 Pt. III, § 6-66
135-90 11-27-1990 1 Pt. III, § 11-1
2 Pt. III, § 11-21
2(a)—2(c) Pt. III, § 11-22—Pt. III,
§ 11-24
2(d) Pt. III, § 11-27
2(e), 2(f) Pt. III, § 11-25, Pt. III,
§ 11-26
Sec. CCT-6 CHARTER Sec. CCT-7
C:921
Res. No. Date Section Section this Code
3(a)—3(c) Pt. III, § 11-51—Pt. III,
§ 11-53
3(d)—3(h) Pt. III, § 11-53—Pt. III,
§ 11-57
4 Pt. III, § 11-2
5(a)—5(c) Pt. III, § 11-76—Pt. III,
§ 11-78
5(d), 5(e) Pt. III, § 11-78, Pt. III,
§ 11-79
6(a) Pt. III, § 11-32
6(b) Pt. III, § 11-29
6(c) Pt. III, § 11-28
6(d) Pt. III, § 11-30
7 Pt. III, § 11-31
187-90 11-27-1990 Pt. III, § 24-81
25-91 3-12-1991 Pt. III, § 2-181
91-90 3-12-1991 II, III Pt. III, § 25-2, Pt. III, § 25-3
25-91 3-26-1991 A—E Pt. III, § 2-182—Pt. III,
§ 2-186
36-91 3-26-1991 13-1 Pt. III, § 20-1
13-2—13-6 Pt. III, § 20-8—Pt. III,
§ 20-12
13-7 Pt. III, § 20-5
13-8 Pt. III, § 20-3
13-9, 13-10 Pt. III, § 20-36, Pt. III,
§ 20-37
13-12, 13-13 Pt. III, § 20-38, Pt. III,
§ 20-39
13-14 Pt. III, § 20-6
13-15 Pt. III, § 20-40
13-16 Pt. III, § 20-13
13-18(1) Pt. III, § 20-4
13-18(2) Pt. III, § 20-2
13-19 Pt. III, § 20-7
54-91 5-28-1991 Pt. III, § 24-82
56-91 5-28-1991 Pt. III, § 24-146
137-90 5-28-1991 Pt. III, § 24-142
76-91 8-13-1991 Pt. III, § 24-144
Sec. CCT-7 OLEAN CODE Sec. CCT-7
C:922
Res. No. Date Section Section this Code
77-91 8-13-1991 Pt. III, § 24-83
78-91 8-13-1991 Pt. III, § 8-2
97-91 8-13-1991 Pt. III, § 24-134
127-91 9-24-1991 Pt. III, § 6-41
Pt. III, § 6-66
Pt. III, § 6-70
126-91 11-12-1991 11-30 Pt. III, § 6-208
130-91 11-12-1991 1-3 Pt. III, § 27-4
137-91 12-10-1991 Pt. III, § 24-83
147-91 12-10-1991 Pt. III, § 27-41, Pt. III,
§ 27-42
153-91 12-10-1991 Pt. III, § 2-4
156-91 12-10-1991 Pt. III, § 24-134
149-91 1-14-1992 Pt. III, § 24-134
16-92 2-25-1992 Pt. III, § 24-134
18-92 2-25-1992 Pt. III, § 27-187
19-92 2-25-1992 Pt. III, § 2-187
6-92 3-10-1992 2 Pt. III, § 2-3
29-92 3-24-1992 Pt. III, § 20-7
30-92 3-24-1992 Pt. III, § 21-11
38-92 4-14-1992 Pt. III, § 24-134
42-92 4-14-1992 Pt. III, § 6-287
42-93 4-14-1992 Pt. III, § 6-289
43-92 4-14-1992 Pt. III, § 24-134
44-92 4-14-1992 Pt. III, § 2-67
49-92 4-14-1992 Pt. III, § 24-134
50-92 4-14-1992 Pt. III, § 2-161
52-92 4-14-1992 Pt. III, § 21-5
55-92 4-14-1992 Pt. III, § 24-191
57-92 4-14-1992 1(A) Pt. III, § 2-205
Pt. III, § 2-208
1(B) Pt. III, § 2-209
2 Pt. III, § 2-210
3—8 Pt. III, § 2-226—Pt. III,
§ 2-231
9 Pt. III, § 2-207
Sec. CCT-7 CHARTER Sec. CCT-7
C:923
Res. No. Date Section Section this Code
62-92 4-28-1992 25-11 Pt. III, § 19-1
63-92 4-28-1992 1—3 Pt. III, § 4-61
67-92 4-28-1992 1 Pt. III, § 21-82
2(26-41) Pt. III, § 21-84
3 Pt. III, § 21-89
5, 6 Pt. III, § 21-108
7—9 Pt. III, § 21-109—Pt. III,
§ 21-111
68-92 4-28-1992 Pt. III, § 24-155
69-92 4-28-1992 Pt. III, § 2-182
75-92 5-12-1992 Pt. III, § 2-164
84-92 5-12-1992 26-91—26-93 Pt. III, § 21-166—Pt. III,
§ 21-168
87-92 5-12-1992 Pt. III, § 24-134
90-92 5-26-1992 4-16 Pt. III, § 10-21
92-92 5-26-1992 4-21 Pt. III, § 10-26
47-92 6-9-1992 Pt. III, § 17-21
93-92 6-9-1992 Pt. III, § 17-3
99-92 6-9-1992 28-137 Pt. III, § 24-205
88-92 6-23-1992 rule 1—rule 5 Pt. III, § 2-37—Pt. III, § 2-41
rule 6 and
App.
Pt. III, § 2-42
rule 7—rule 9 Pt. III, § 2-43—Pt. III, § 2-45
rule 10— Pt. III, § 2-47—Pt. III, § 2-63
rule 26
rule 27 Pt. III, § 2-36
rule 28— Pt. III, § 2-64—Pt. III, § 2-66
rule 30
rule 31 Pt. III, § 2-68
97-92 11-23-1992 24-85.1
98-92 9-8-1992 Art. 1(1—9) 13-246—13-254
Art. 2(1—7) 13-261—13-267
Art. 3(1—7) 13-276—13-282
Art. 4(1) 13-291
Art. 5(1) 13-301
Art. 6(1) 13-311
Sec. CCT-7 OLEAN CODE Sec. CCT-7
C:924
Res. No. Date Section Section this Code
Art. 7(1—8) 13-321—13-328
108-92 7-14-1992 1 Pt. III, § 3.5-2
2 Pt. III, § 3.5-1
3—6 Pt. III, § 3.5-5—Pt. III,
§ 3.5-8
8, 9 Pt. III, § 3.5-9, Pt. III,
§ 3.5-10
10 Pt. III, § 3.5-4
11 Pt. III, § 3.5-11
12 Pt. III, § 3.5-3
112-92 7-28-1992 Pt. III, § 24-167
119-92 7-28-1992 Pt. III, § 20-7
121-92 7-28-1992 Pt. III, § 24-135
12-92 8-25-1992 Pt. III, § 10-25
122-92 8-25-1992 Pt. III, § 4-61
123-92 8-25-1992 Pt. III, § 10-27
129-92 8-25-1992 1 Pt. III, § 27-212
1.2 Pt. III, § 27-213
2 Pt. III, § 27-211
3, 4 Pt. III, § 27-214, Pt. III,
§ 27-215
6 Pt. III, § 27-216
131-92 9-8-1992 5-31
136-92 8-25-1992 Pt. III, § 24-135
146-92 11-24-1992 13-371—13-377
168-92 10-27-1992 21-36
170-92 11-10-1992 24-135
171-92 11-10-1992 24-163
172-92 12-23-1993 24-135
4-93 1-26-1993 25-1
5-93 1-26-1993 24-204
6-93 1-26-1993 24-59
8-93 1-26-1993 12-76—12-79
Rpld 12-121—12-127
20-93 2-23-93 21-5
27-93 3-9-1993 Rpld 17-30
Sec. CCT-7 CHARTER Sec. CCT-7
C:925
Res. No. Date Section Section this Code
45-93 5-23-1993 24-158
47-93 4-13-1993 24-134
50-93 5-25-1993 Rpld 24-51—24-59
24-119, 24-204
Added 24-51—24-54
56-93 5-11-1993 5-32
57-93 6-8-1993 1-7 Adopting ordinance, p. vii
58-93 5-25-1993 1, 2 24-89
59-93 5-25-1993 1-5 24-113
63-93 5-25-1993 24-144
67-93 5-25-1993 24-135
71-93 6-8-1993 24-134
73-93 6-8-1993 24-157.1
79-93 7-27-1993 Rpld 24-157
84-93 7-27-1993 3-81(3)e.
92-93 7-27-1993 17-21(7)d.
104-93 8-24-1993 24-157.1
114-93 8-24-1993 1-3 21-37
118-93 8-24-1993 24-134
120-93 9-15-1993 1, 2 27-167
121-93 9-15-1993 27-22
123-93 9-15-1993 16-3(c)
126-93 9-15-1993 24-134, 24-135
24-154
127-93 9-15-1993 24-134
132-93 9-28-1993 24-134
135-93 9-28-1993 24-134
150-93 10-26-1993 17-28
151-93 10-26-1993 24-163
152-93 10-26-1993 24-135
153-93 10-26-1993 1, 2 2-171, 2-172
158-93 12-14-1993 24-135
160-93 12-14-1993 24-135
184-93 12-28-1993 24-134
3-94 2-22-1994 24-154.1
4-94 2-8-1994 2-123
Sec. CCT-7 OLEAN CODE Sec. CCT-7
C:926
Res. No. Date Section Section this Code
9-94 3-8-1994 20-41
11-94 3-8-1994 2-36—2-66
15-94 3-22-1994 24-135
31-94 4-26-1994 24-135
32-94 4-26-1994 24-154.1
41-94 7-26-1994 27-167
42-94 7-26-1994 27-22
48-94 6-28-1994 24-134
49-94 7-26-1994 1 24-144
2, 3 24-134, 24-135
50-94 6-14-1994 24-134
51-94 6-14-1994 24-135, 24-169
59-94 6-28-1994 24-134
60-94 6-28-1994 6-169(f)
61-94 6-28-1994 24-134, 24-169
65-94 6-26-1994 20-14
80-94 7-26-1994 13-1
84-94 9-13-1994 17-28
101-94 10-11-1994 24-168
108-94 10-25-1994 24-134, 24-166
110-94 11-8-1994 3-81(3)e.
115-94 11-8-1994 24-231(f)
120-94 11-22-1994 24-134
122-94 12-27-1994 24-136
125-94 12-27-1994 3.5-6(a)
128-94 12-27-1994 Rpld 22-107(1)
133-94 1-10-1994 22-107(1)
134-94 1-10-1994 22-111(a)
135-94 1-10-1994 24-117(a)
2-95 2-14-1995 24-134
3-95 2-28-1995 17-21
4-95 2-14-1995 1 2-41(a)
6-95 2-28-1995 12-46
9-95 3-14-1995 20-2
13-95 3-28-1995 17-31
Sec. CCT-7 CHARTER Sec. CCT-7
C:927
Res. No. Date Section Section this Code
40-95 6-27-1995 Rpld 27-96—27-98,
27-220—27-261
41-95 6-27-1995 1-7 21-171—21-177
46-95 8-22-1995 13-264(6), (7)
50-95 8-22-1995 20-35, 20-36
51-95 8-22-1995 13-375
57-95 9-12-1995 1, 2 13-401—13-402
3-6 13-411—13-414
60-95 10-24-1995 12-162
61-95 9-12-1995 24-144
83-95 10-24-1995 24-134
84-95 11-14-1995 24-164
86-95 10-24-1995 1 20-1
2 20-15
87-95 10-24-1995 25-1, 25-3
95-95 11-28-1995 24-134
96-95 11-28-1995 24-175
103-95 12-26-1995 27-137
108-95 1-9-1996 24-134
6-96 2-13-1996 24-173(c)
12-96 2-27-1996 24-135
13-96 2-27-1996 5-31(2)
14-96 3-12-1996 24-134
18-96 3-12-1996 24-134
28-96 3-12-1996 24-134
30-96 4-9-1996 12-46
31-96 4-9-1996 6-167
45-96 5-14-1996 27-222
47-96 5-28-1996 24-134
53-96 6-11-1996 27-22
55-96 6-11-1996 27-41, 27-42
27-44, 27-49, 27-51, 27-52,
27-186, 27-187,
27-189.1—27-189.3,
27-191—27-193
61-96 7-23-1996 17-21
72-96 8-27-1996 24-135
Sec. CCT-7 OLEAN CODE Sec. CCT-7
C:928
Res. No. Date Section Section this Code
73-96 8-27-1996 24-135
84-96 9-10-1996 3.5-10
91-96 9-24-1996 Rpld 22-1—22-5,
22-26—22-33, 22-51—22-54,
22-76—22-86,
22-106—22-114
Added 22-1—22-4, 22-26,
22-41—22-46, 22-76—22-78,
22-101—22-104,
22-126—22-145
92-96 10-8-1996 17-21(7)
93-96 9-24-1996 6-242
114-96 11-26-1996 6-242
115-96 11-26-1996 1 3.5-7(b)
2 3.5-10(a)
3 3.5-10(b)
2-97 1-28-1997 6-113
14-97 2-25-1997 24-135
20-97 3-11-1997 24-85.2
24-97 3-25-1997 24-134
29-97 4-22-1997 13-371, 13-376
32-97 5-13-1997 6-71
40-97 5-27-1997 24-135
41-97 5-27-1997 24-135
42-97 5-27-1997 24-135
43-97 5-27-1997 24-135
44-97 5-27-1997 21-172
45-97 5-27-1997 4-61(d)
46-97 5-27-1997 27-23
51-97 5-27-1997 6-207
57-97 5-27-1997 25-1
60-97 6-10-1997 17-21
61-97 6-10-1997 1 3-81(3)a.
2 3-48
74-97 9-9-1997 24-134
109-97 11-25-1997 27-256
111-97 2-11-1997 24-134
Sec. CCT-7 CHARTER Sec. CCT-7
C:929
Res. No. Date Section Section this Code
4-98 2-10-1998 24-257
10-98 2-24-1998 24-134
13-98 2-24-1998 2-40(5), (9)
2-41, 2-46(b), (c)
33-98 4-21-1998 24-113
49-98 6-9-1998 24-28
50-98 6-9-1998 24-169
67-98 11-24-1998 24-134
69-98 9-8-1998 24-135
70-98 10-13-1998 24-134
74-98 11-24-1998 24-135
77-98 9-22-1998 2-46
10-99 2-23-1999 2-64(1)
11-99 2-23-1999 24-134
12-99 2-23-1999 2-41
17-99 2-23-1999 Rpld 27-224, 27-225
27-228, 27-229
18-99 2-23-1999 6-208(c)(3)
20-99 2-23-1999 24-134
31-99 4-6-1999 24-134
46-99 6-8-1999 24-166
55-99 9-14-1999 24-134
56-99 7-27-1999 Added 24-86.4
57-99 8-24-1999 24-134
65-99 8-24-1999 24-135
78-99 10-12-1999 Added 25-86.3
86-99 11-9-1999 24-113(e)
94-99 12-14-1999 Added 24-176
99-99 12-21-1999 27-22
2-00 1-25-2000 2-41(a)
8-00 2-22-2000 2-38
10-00 3-14-2000 16-26, 16-27
28-00 4-5-2000 24-135
29-00 4-5-2000 24-135
37-00 5-9-2000 24-135
38-00 5-23-2000 Added 24-81(c)
Sec. CCT-7 OLEAN CODE Sec. CCT-7
C:930
Res. No. Date Section Section this Code
48-00 6-12-2000 Rpld 20-39
55-00 6-27-2000 24-134
73-00 8-8-2000 2-38
74-00 8-8-2000 24-134
86-00 9-12-2000 24-134
87-00 9-26-2000 24-113(e)
95-00 10-10-2000 24-155
96-00 10-10-2000 24-134
101-00 10-10-2000 2-64
113-00 12-12-2000 24-54
2-01 1-23-2001 22-3
3-01 1-23-2001 2-41(a)
31-01 4-24-2001 24-135
45-01 5-29-2001 24-135
49-01 5-29-2001 24-173(c)
53-01 5-29-2001 24-135
59-01 6-12-2001 24-135
60-01 6-12-2001 24-134
72-01 7-24-2001 24-135
95-01 9-4-2001 24-135
105-01 10-9-2001 24-135
109-01 10-9-2001 23-27(b)
Added 23-27(c)
114-01 10-23-2001 24-164
125-01 11-13-2001 24-134
51-02 5-28-2002 6-3
Added 6-3.1—6-3.4
Rpld 6-126, 6-127
6-147
6-208(2)
6-214(a)
04-02 2-12-2002 2-41(a)
15-02 2-26-2002 24-155.1
25-02 7-9-2002 24-134
27-02 3-26-2002 13-371(2)
28-02 3-26-2002 13-373
Sec. CCT-7 CHARTER Sec. CCT-7
C:931
Res. No. Date Section Section this Code
52-02 5-28-2002 12-1
53-02 7-9-2002 24-134
54-02 5-28-2002 27-256(a)
55-02 5-28-2002 Rpld 12-153, 12-154
57-02 6-11-2002 24-135
82-02 7-9-2002 24-135
83-02 7-9-2002 24-134
88-02 8-13-2002 24-191, 24-192
24-195, 24-197(a)
91-02 9-10-2002 Added 27-224
27-240(g)
27-261
95-02 9-10-2002 25-1
96-02 9-10-2002 24-135
100-02 9-10-2002 Added 5-4
107-02 9-24-2002 24-84(b)
117-02 10-22-2002 24-82
122-02 11-12-2002 6-207
123-02 11-12-2002 6-206(a)
124-02 11-12-2002 6-214
1-03 1-28-2003 24-134
2-03 1-28-2003 24-81(b)
4-03 1-28-2003 2-41(a)
9-03 2-25-2003 Added 24-233
23-03 4-8-2003 24-135
24-03 4-22-2003 24-182
33-03 5-27-2003 27-167
34-03 5-27-2003 27-22
37-03 6-10-2003 24-144
52-03 7-8-2003 24-144
53-03 7-8-2003 24-135
61-03 8-12-2003 23-27
67-03 9-9-2003 24-135
73-03 9-9-2003 24-134
83-03 9-23-2003 24-134
84-03 9-23-2003 24-135
Sec. CCT-7 OLEAN CODE Sec. CCT-7
C:932
Res. No. Date Section Section this Code
90-03 10-14-2003 24-134
93-03 10-28-2003 24-134
94-03 10-28-2003 24-135
95-03 10-28-2003 24-168
111-03 12-23-2003 Added 24-55—24-60
10-04 2-24-2004 24-134
11-04 2-24-2004 24-134
12-04 2-24-2004 24-135
13-04 2-24-2004 24-135
14-04 3-9-2004 21-5
17-04 3-23-2004 24-135
22-04 4-13-2004 21-5
32-04 4-27-2004 24-134
33-04 4-27-2004 24-135
34-04 4-27-2004 24-134
39-04 5-25-2004 24-135
40-04 5-25-2004 24-81(b)
67-04 7-27-2004 24-134
68-04 7-27-2004 Rpld 24-172
69-04 7-27-2004 24-134
79-04 8-10-2004 24-134
88-04 9-28-2004 24-135
89-04 9-28-2004 24-88
105-04 10-26-2004 24-135
106-04 10-26-2004 24-135
107-04 10-26-2004 16-29(b)
116-04 11-23-2004 24-134
118-04 11-23-2004 24-135
119-04 11-23-2004 24-135
120-04 11-23-2004 24-135
124-04 12-14-2004 27-167
125-04 12-14-2004 27-2
22-05 1-11-2005 24-169
15-05 3-8-2005 27-24
16-05 3-8-2005 Added 13-501—13-509
22-05 3-22-2005 27-41—27-193
Sec. CCT-7 CHARTER Sec. CCT-7
C:933
Res. No. Date Section Section this Code
69-05 7-26-2005 24-135
107-05 10-25-2005 24-134
129-05 1-10-2006 24-135
19-06 3-14-2006 13-501—13-550
23-06 3-28-2006 27-167
26-06 4-11-2006 24-135
29-06 3-28-2006 24-113
35-06 4-11-2006 19-1
36-06 4-11-2006 24-136
42-06 4-25-2006 24-84
43-06 4-25-2006 24-135
45-06 4-25-2006 24-113
49-06 5-9-2006 19-1
52-06 5-9-2006 24-113
58-06 5-9-2006 27-167
59-06 5-9-2006 27-22
60-06 5-23-2006 24-134
69-06 6-13-2006 27-220
71-06 6-13-2006 24-192
77-06 6-27-2006 24-135
82-06 6-27-2006 3.5-5, 3.5-7, 3.5-10
92-06 7-25-2006 24-135
108-06 9-26-2006 24-169
109-06 9-26-2006 24-140
110-06 9-26-2006 24-134
118-06 10-24-2006 13-351—13-390
119-06 10-24-2006 24-135
136-06 12-26-2006 6-1—6-292
137-06 12-26-2006 24-163
138-06 12-26-2006 24-135
141-06 12-26-2006 24-135
08-07 2-13-2007 2-41
09-07 2-13-2007 24-139
26-07 4-10-2007 27-197
27-07 4-10-2007 27-22
44-07 6-26-2007 24-85
Sec. CCT-7 OLEAN CODE Sec. CCT-7
C:934
Res. No. Date Section Section this Code
53-07 7-24-2007 21-5
54-07 7-24-2007 16-2
55-07 7-24-2007 12-161
58-07 8-14-2007 24-111
59-07 8-14-2007 24-81
62-07 8-28-2007 24-192
63-07 8-28-2007 24-233
72-07 10-23-2007 23-27
06-08 2-12-2008 24-168
13-08 2-26-2008 24-135
23-08 3-11-2008 27-22
24-08 3-11-2008 27-167
25-08 3-11-2008 27-22
38-08 5-13-2008 24-135
42-08 5-27-2008 Added 24-136
43-08 5-27-2008 24-113
44-08 5-27-2008 27-224
64-08 7-22-2008 24-54
72-08 8-26-2008 27-22; rpld
27-23; added
27-25—27-33; 27-167
75-08 9-9-2008 Added 23-27(d)
84-08 10-14-2008 Added 24-81(b)(1) and (2)
85-08 10-14-2008 24-135
86-08 10-14-2008 24-135
87-08 10-14-2008 24-136
88-08 10-14-2008 24-135
89-08 10-14-2008 24-134
106-08 11-25-2008 24-113
03-09 1-27-2009 2-41
06-09 2-10-2009 24-134
07-09 2-10-2009 12-46—12-47
08-09 3-24-2009 24-173
17-09 3-10-2009 24-152
Sec. CCT-7 CHARTER Sec. CCT-7
C:935
Res. No. Date Section Section this Code
20-09 3-24-2009 Added 24-61—24-70 and
24-71—24-85
23-09 3-31-2009 27-22, 27-167
38-09 5-26-2009 6-80—6-81
45-09 5-12-2009 24-117
52-09 7-28-2009 27-25, 27-26, 27-30, 27-31
66-09 10-27-2009 27-41; added 27-53; 27-189
68-09 10-27-2009 24-134
04-10 1-26-2010 2-41
07-10 2-9-2010 24-134
08-10 2-9-2010 24-142
18-10 3-23-2010 24-144
19-10 3-23-2010 24-88
42-10 6-8-2010 24-136
56-10 8-24-2010 24-134
57-10 8-24-2010 24-134
58-10 8-24-2010 24-135
59-10 8-24-2010 24-135
60-10 8-24-2010 24-81
72-10 9-28-2010 24-135
73-10 9-28-2010 24-135
75-10 9-28-2010 24-134
76-10 9-28-2010 24-142
77-10 9-28-2010 24-134
81-10 9-28-2010 24-135
92-10 12-14-2010 6-80; 6-85
95-10 12-28-2012 5-31
97-10 12-28-2010 24-151
03-11 2-8-2011 24-135
30-11 5-24-2011 24-191
35-11 6-28-2011 27-187
48-11 6-28-2011 24-86.4
61-11 8-23-2011 24-191
64-11 9-13-2011 24-191
68-11 8-23-2011 24-191
78-11 10-11-2011 24-88
Sec. CCT-7 OLEAN CODE Sec. CCT-7
C:936
Res. No. Date Section Section this Code
82-11 11-29-2011 24-7
83-11 11-29-2011 24-54
85-11 11-29-2011 24-134
96-11 1-10-2012 24-136
09-12 4-10-2012 24-134
45-12 6-12-2012 24-134
50-12 7-10-2012 2-188
52-12 7-10-2012 2-38
65-12 9-25-2012 27-187
66-12 9-25-2012 24-134
67-12 10-9-2012 24-135
70-12 10-9-2012 24-134
75-12 11-13-2012 24-134
82-12 12-11-2012 24-134
84-12 1-8-2013 24-140
10-13 2-26-2013 13-335 – 13-343
17-13 3-26-2013 24-134
18-13 3-26-2013 24-173
20-13 4-9-2013 24-151
31-13 5-28-2013 21-161
32-13 5-28-2013 16-2
33-13 5-28-2013 21-5
35-13 6-11-2013 21-11
38-13 6-11-2013 21-168
42-13 6-25-2013 24-134
51-13 7-9-2013 24-134
70-13 8-27-2013 24-134
71-13 8-27-2013 24-134
72-13 9-10-2013 13-301
73-13 9-10-2013 24-191
86-13 11-12-2013 21-108
89-13 11-26-2013 6-67
96-13 12-10-2013 24-191
97-13 12-10-2013 24-191
98-13 12-10-2013 5-32
99-13 1-14-2014 5-27
Sec. CCT-7 CHARTER Sec. CCT-7
C:937
Res. No. Date Section Section this Code
16-14 3-11-2014 2-209
18-14 3-25-2014 16-2
21-14 4-22-2014 24-135
23-14 4-8-2014 13-36 – 13-41
27-14 4-22-2014 24-134
38-14 5-13-2014 2-227
39-14 5-13-2014 2-228
40-14 5-13-2014 2-231
41-14 5-13-2014 24-134
42-14 5-13-2014 24-135
55-14 6-10-2014 21-90
90-14 9-9-2014 24-135
110-14 12-9-2014 2-48
14-15 3-24-2015 13-245 – 13-350
15-15 3-24-2015 13-600 – 13-699
28-15 4-28-2015 27-1 – 27-20; 27-22; 27-24;
27-27
29-15 4-28-2015 24-140
30-15 4-28-2015 24-191
42-15 6-9-2015 24-134
72-15 8-25-2015 24-135
73-15 8-25-2015 24-191
74-15 8-25-2015 24-151
85-15 9-22-2015 13-337; 13-341
86-15 9-23-2015 5-26 – 5-39
95-15 10-27-2015 1-8
96-15 11-10-2015 21-171 – 21-177
97-15 10-27-2015 12-46
101-15 11-10-2015 24-154
102-15 11-24-2015 24-173
107-15 11-24-2015 13-390 – 13-400
111-15 11-24-2015 24-134
04-16 2-9-2016 27-11; 27-14
05-16 2-9-2016 2-64
06-16 2-9-2016 21-1.1
15-16 3-9-2016 24-61 – 24-80
Sec. CCT-7 OLEAN CODE Sec. CCT-7
C:938
Res. No. Date Section Section this Code
45-16 6-14-2016 24-135
46-16 6-14-2016 24-134
47-16 6-28-2016 24-135
69-16 8-23-2016 12-163
75-16 9-27-2016 24-191
76-16 9-27-2016 24-157
77-16 9-27-2016 24-136
78-16 9-27-2016 24-135
91-16 11-22-2016 24-143
93-16 11-22-2016 24-135
98-16 12-13-2016 24-191
101-16 12-13-2016 24-135
25-16 4-26-2016 27-41 – 27-210
02-17 2-14-2017 21-5
22-17 4-11-2017 24-135; 24-157
37-17 5-23-2017 21-108
43-17 6-13-2017 24-135
49-17 6-13-2017 21-173
72-17 9-12-2017 5-3
77-17 9-12-2017 24-234
85-17 11-15-2017 24-134
93-17 12-12-2017 12-1 – 12-120
Chapter SLR
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE
Sec. SLR-1. Consolidated Laws.
This table shows the location within parts II and III of this Code, either in
the text or notes following the text, of references to the Consolidated Laws.
Agriculture and Markets Law
Section Section this Code
106 et seq. Pt. III, Ch. 5, Art. II
108 Pt. III, § 5-29.1
109 Pt. III, § 5-29.1
110 Pt. III, § 5-29.1
118 Pt. III, § 5-32
Sec. CCT-7 CHARTER Sec. SLR-1
C:939
Agriculture and Markets Law
Section Section this Code
124 Pt. III, Ch. 5, Art. II
192-a et seq. Pt. III, Ch. C, Div. 3
Arts and Cultural Affairs Law
Section Section this Code
57.13 et seq. Pt. III, § 2-102
57.19 Pt. III, § 2-102
Civil Practice Law and Rules
Section Section this Code
art. 78 Pt. III, § 9.2
7801 et seq. Pt. II, § 6-26
Pt. II, § 6-29
Pt. III, § 9-34
Pt. III, § 11-32
Pt. III, § 12-25
Pt. III, § 13-231
Correction Law Section Section this Code
186 Pt. III, § 2-227
Criminal Procedure Law
Section Section this Code
2.10 Pt. II, § 2-53
100.40 Pt. II, § 2-58
150.10 Pt. II, § 2-53
150.10 et seq. Pt. II, Ch. 2, Art. IV
Election Law Section Section this Code
1-100 et seq. Pt. II, Ch. 3
Pt. III, Ch. 7
3-420 Pt. II, § 3-2
Environmental Conservation
Law Section Section this Code
1-0101 et seq. Pt. III, Ch. 8
art. 8 Pt. III, Ch. 22
24-050 Pt. III, § 8-1
24-0101 et seq. Pt. III, § 8-1
27-0101 et seq. Pt. III, Ch. 20
Sec. SLR-1 OLEAN CODE Sec. SLR-1
C:940
Environmental Conservation
Law Section Section this Code
36-0101 et seq. Pt. III, Ch. 9
art. 49 Pt. III, § 28-27
71-2301 et seq. Pt. III, § 8-1
Executive Law Section Section this Code
377 Pt. III, § 6-2
310 Pt. II, § LL4.5-4
Pt. III, § 2-227
430 et seq. Pt. III, § 4-22
General Business Law Section Section this Code
32 et seq. Pt. III, Ch. 13, Art. VI
Pt. III, § 13-247
35 Pt. III, Ch. 13, Art. VI
60 et seq. Pt. III, §§ 13-161, 13-162, 13-337,
13-603
300 et seq. Pt. III, Div. 3
320 et seq. Pt. III, Div. 3
399-d Pt. III, Ch. 13, Art. II
460 et seq. Pt. III, Ch. 4
General City Law Section Section this Code
20(2) Pt. III, Ch. 27
20(7) Pt. II, Ch. 5
Pt. III, Ch. 17
Pt. III, Ch. 21
Pt. III, Ch. 27
20(10) Pt. II, Ch. 5
Pt. III, Ch. 21
20(11) Pt. III, Ch. 21
20(12) Pt. III, Ch. 6
Pt. III, § 6-167
20(13) Pt. III, Ch. 3, Pt. III, Ch. 4
Pt. III, § 13-245
Pt. III, § 13-600
Pt. III, Ch. 13—Pt. III, Ch. 16
Pt. III, Ch. 26
Sec. SLR-1 CHARTER Sec. SLR-1
C:941
General City Law Section Section this Code
20(22) Pt. III, § 1-8
Pt. III, § 3.5-4
20(35) Pt. III, Ch. 6
Pt. III, Ch. C, Div. 3, Subdiv. 2, Art. V
20-b Pt. II, Ch. 6, Art. II
Pt. II, § 6-22
23 Pt. II, Ch. LL2, Sec. 2-62
26 Pt. III, § 18-1
26 et seq. Pt. III, Ch. 18
Pt. III, § 18-21
Pt. III, § 18-23, Pt. III, § 18-24
27 et seq. Pt. III, Ch. 18, Art. II
32 Pt. III, § 18-22, Pt. III, § 18-23
32 et seq. Pt. III, Ch. 22
33 Pt. III, § 18-22
40 et seq. Pt. III, Ch. 27, Art. III, Div. 2
45 Pt. III, § 27-99
83 Pt. III, § 16.0
(26-a) Pt. III, Ch. 27
General Construction Law
Section Section this Code
12 Pt. II, § 1-2
Pt. III, § 1-2
13 Pt. II, § 1-2
Pt. III, § 1-2
13-a Pt. II, § 1-2
Pt. III, § 1-2
14 Pt. II, § 1-2
Pt. III, § 1-2
15 Pt. II, § 1-2
Pt. III, § 1-2
19 Pt. II, § 1-2
Pt. III, § 1-2
20 Pt. II, § 1-2
Pt. III, § 1-2
Sec. SLR-1 OLEAN CODE Sec. SLR-1
C:942
General Construction Law
Section Section this Code
22 Pt. II, § 1-2
Pt. III, § 1-2
23 Pt. II, § 1-2
Pt. III, § 1-2
24 Pt. II, § 1-2
Pt. III, § 1-2
25-a Pt. II, § 1-2
Pt. III, § 1-2
30 Pt. II, § 1-2
Pt. III, § 1-2
31 Pt. II, § 1-2
Pt. III, § 1-2
32 Pt. II, § 1-2
Pt. III, § 1-2
33 Pt. II, § 1-2
Pt. III, § 1-2
34 Pt. II, § 1-2
Pt. III, § 1-2
35 Pt. II, § 1-2
Pt. III, § 1-2
36 Pt. II, § 1-2
Pt. III, § 1-2
37 Pt. II, § 1-2
Pt. III, § 1-2
39 Pt. II, § 1-2
Pt. III, § 1-2
40 Pt. II, § 1-2
Pt. III, § 1-2
41 Pt. II, § 1-2
Pt. III, § 1-2
46 Pt. II, § 1-2
Pt. III, § 1-2
51 Pt. II, § 1-2
Pt. III, § 1-2
56 Pt. II, § 1-2
Sec. SLR-1 CHARTER Sec. SLR-1
C:943
General Construction Law
Section Section this Code
Pt. III, § 1-2
58 Pt. II, § 1-2
Pt. III, § 1-2
60 Pt. II, § 1-2
Pt. III, § 1-2
80 Pt. II, § 1-2
Pt. III, § 1-2
90—96 Pt. II, § 1-4
Pt. III, § 1-4
General Municipal Law Section Section this Code
3 et seq. Pt. III, Ch. 2, Art. VI
Art 5-K Pt. III, § 2.1
20(30) Pt. III, § 24-229
27 Pt. III, § 9.1
60 Pt. II, § 2-22
74-c Pt. III, § 3-22
Pt. III, § 3-46
77b Pt. III, § 2-101
78b Pt. III, Ch. C, Div. 3, Subdiv. 2, Art. V
85 Pt. III, § 2-161
85-a Pt. III, Ch. 13, Art. VII
Pt. III, § 13-356
Pt. III, § 13-398
96-a Pt. III, Ch. 11
96-b Pt. III, Ch. 21 Art. III
100 et seq. Pt. III, Ch. 2, Art. VII
103 Pt. II, § LL4.5-1
103(1) Pt. II, § LL4.5-3
103(3) Pt. III, § 2-227
103(4) Pt. III, § 2-231
104 Pt. III, § 2-227
104-b Pt. III, Ch. 2, Art. VII, Div. 2
107 Pt. III, § 2-227
120-w Pt. III, Ch. 20
Sec. SLR-1 OLEAN CODE Sec. SLR-1
C:944
General Municipal Law Section Section this Code
120-aa Pt. III, Ch. 20
122-b Pt. III, Ch. 10, Art. II
Pt. III, § 10-21
181 Pt. III, Ch. 26, Art. III
186 Pt. III, § 4-46
186 et seq. Pt. III, Ch. 4, Art. III
187 Pt. III, § 4-47
188 Pt. III, § 4-47
190 et seq. Pt. III, § 4-47
194 Pt. III, § 4-48
234 et seq. Pt. III, Ch. 18
Pt. III, § 18-24
240 et seq. Pt. III, Ch. 17
370 Pt. III, § 24-51, Pt. III, § 24-52
370 et seq. Pt. III, Ch. 24, Art. II, Div. 2
371 Pt. III, § 24-53—Pt. III, § 24-57
373 Pt. III, § 24-58
450 et seq. Art. III, Div. 3
Pt. III, § 7-81
475 et seq. Pt. III, Ch. 4, Art. II
Pt. III, § 4-22, Pt. III, § 4-23
477 Pt. III, § 4-22
478 Pt. III, § 4-22
800 Pt. III, § 2-117
800 et seq. Pt. III, § 2-118
803 Pt. III, § 2-119
805-a Pt. III, § 2-119
806 Pt. III, Ch. 2
Art. IV, Div. 2
806(2) Pt. III, § 2-120
808 Pt. III, § 2-118
General Obligations Law
Section Section this Code
5-328 Pt. III, § 2-161
Sec. SLR-1 CHARTER Sec. SLR-1
C:945
Labor Law Section Section this Code
Article 8 Pt. II, § LL4.5-4
Pt. III, § 2-227
220 Pt. II, § LL4.5-2.4
Local Finance Law Section Section this Code
1.00 et seq. Pt. III, Ch. 2, Art. VI
Mental Hygiene Law Section this Code
Article 19 Pt. III, § 2.1
Article 21 Pt. III, § 2.1
Article 29 Pt. III, § 2.1
Article 31 Pt. III, § 2.1
Municipal Home Rule Law
Section Section this Code
10(1)(ii)(a)(8), 10(1)(ii)(a)(9) Pt. II, Ch. 6
10(1)(ii)(a)(11) Pt. III, § 13-245
Pt. III, § 13-600
10(1)(ii)(a)(12) Pt. III, § 13-245
Pt. III, § 13-600
10(1)(ii)(c)(2) Pt. II, Ch. 6
10(1)(ii)(c)(3) Pt. II, Ch. 6
10(2) Pt. III, § 13-245
Pt. III, § 13-600
(10)(4)(a) Pt. II, Ch. 2, Art. IV
Navigation Law Section Section this Code
33-c Pt. III, Ch. 20
Penal Law Section Section this Code
140.00 et seq. Pt. III, § 14-1
Public Health Law Section Section this Code
1 et seq. Pt. II, Ch. 4
Pt. III, Ch. 10
Article 28 Pt. III, § 2.1
300 et seq. Pt. II, Ch. 4
Pt. III, Ch. 10
1399-n et seq. Pt. III, § 10-1
Sec. SLR-1 OLEAN CODE Sec. SLR-1
C:946
Public Officers Law Section this Code
Article 7 Pt. II, § 2-49
100 et seq. Pt. III, § 2-66
Real Property Actions and
Proceedings Law Section this Code
Article 13 Pt. II, §§ LL2.5-3, LL2.5-4
Real Property Tax Law Section Section this Code
421-f Pt. II, § 6-61
458 Pt. II, § 6-51
458-b Pt. II, § 6-41
467 Pt. III, § 23-27
Article 11 Pt. II, §§ LL2.5-3, LL2.5-4
Retirement and Social Security
Law Section Section this Code
60-b Pt. III, § 2-142
75-e Pt. III, § 2-142
75-g Pt. III, § 2-142
360-b Pt. III, § 2-142
375-e Pt. III, § 2-142
375-g Pt. III, § 2-142
State Finance Law Section Section this Code
163 Pt. II, Ch. LL4.5
175-b Pt. III, § 2-227
Tax Law Section Section this Code
186-a Pt. II, § 6-31
1201 et seq. Pt. II, § 0-1
Transportation Law Section Section This Code
150 et seq. Pt. II, § 6-22
Vehicle and Traffic Law Section Section this Code
100 et seq. Pt. III, § 24-2
120-5 25-1
155 Pt. III, § 24-3
377 Pt. III, Ch. 20
380-a Pt. III, Ch. 20
404-a Pt. III, § 24-5
Sec. SLR-1 CHARTER Sec. SLR-1
C:947
Vehicle and Traffic Law Section Section this Code
1100 et seq. Pt. III, Ch. 24
1104 Pt. III, § 24-4
1110 Pt. III, § 24-31
1110 et seq. Pt. III, § 24-30
Pt. III, § 24-31
1111(d)(2) Pt. III, § 24-82
1127(a) Pt. III, § 24-84
1142 Pt. III, § 24-86
1142(a), 1142(b) Pt. III, § 24-87, Pt. III, § 24-88
1150 et seq. Pt. III, § 24-251
1172 Pt. III, § 24-86
1172(a), 1172(b) Pt. III, § 24-87, Pt. III, § 24-88
1180 et seq. Pt. III, § 24-81
1200 et seq. Pt. III, Ch. 24, Art. IV
1203-a Pt. III, § 24-5
1203-a et seq. Pt. III, § 24-113
1220 Pt. III, Ch. 20
1224 Pt. III, § 16-3
1227 Pt. III, § 14-3
1600 Pt. III, Ch. 24
1602 Pt. III, § 24-27
1640 et seq. Pt. III, Ch. 24
1640(a)(1) Pt. III, § 24-86
1640(a)(3) Pt. III, § 24-88
1640(a)(4) Pt. III, § 24-251
1640(a)(6) Pt. III, § 24-84
1640(a)(9) Pt. III, Ch. 24, Art. IV
1640(a)(10) Pt. III, Ch. 24, Art. IV, Div. 3
1640(a)(11) Pt. III, § 24-85
1640(a)(12) Pt. III, § 24-30
1640(a)(13) Pt. III, § 24-252
1640-a Pt. III, § 24-255
1641(2) Pt. III, § 24-5
1643, 1644 Pt. III, § 24-111
1680 et seq. Pt. III, § 24-81
1683 Pt. III, § 24-31
Sec. SLR-1 OLEAN CODE Sec. SLR-1
C:948
Vehicle and Traffic Law Section Section this Code
1683(a)(6) Pt. III, § 24-30, Pt. III, § 24-31
1683(a)(8) Pt. III, § 24-84
Pt. III, § 24-107
Sec. SLR-1 CHARTER Sec. SLR-1
C:949