The Charter
Chapter C
CHARTER
C:1

ARTICLE I
Incorporation; City and Ward Boundaries; Definitions
§ C1-1. Short title.
This local law shall be known as the "Charter of the City of Port Jervis."
§ C1-2. Corporate name and powers.
The City of Port Jervis located within the boundaries hereinafter described
shall be a municipal corporation in perpetuity under the corporate name
and style of the City of Port Jervis. Said corporation may sue and be sued;
complain and defend in any court; adopt and use a common seal and shall
possess all those powers granted pursuant to the laws of the State of New
York.
§ C1-3. City boundaries.
A. All that portion of the territory of this state comprising part of the
present Town of Deerpark, in the County of Orange, included within the
following boundaries, is hereby constituted a city, which shall be known
as the City of Port Jervis, to wit: Beginning at the "Tri-State Monument,"
which was set in the year 1882, by joint commission, at the junction of
the Delaware and Neversink Rivers to mark the intersection of the lines
of the States of New York, New Jersey and Pennsylvania, and running
thence along the line of the State of New Jersey, south fifty degrees
thirty minutes east, about three hundred feet, to a monument on the
easterly bank of the Neversink River; thence up the said river along the
top of the bank as it winds and turns about one thousand five hundred
twelve feet to an iron bar, located south thirty-one degrees west
thirteen feet from a marked chestnut tree; thence south fifty-seven
degrees thirty minutes east two thousand two hundred seventy-eight
feet to a large marked chestnut tree, standing near the junction of the
Clove Brook and a small stream from the east; thence north forty-seven
degrees fifty minutes east, one thousand two hundred forty-six feet to
the northeasterly corner of the Neubauer property in the line of lands
formerly belonging to Philip B. Elting; thence north fifteen degrees
west one thousand five hundred sixty-seven feet to a locust tree on the
easterly bank of the Neversink River, marked with two hacks and a
blaze, located eighty-nine feet north fifty degrees east from the easterly
corner of the Elting stone farmhouse; thence up the said river, along the
top of the bank as it winds and turns, about four thousand two hundred
fifteen feet to a small oak tree, marked with three hacks and a blaze,
opposite the mouth of the Cuddeback Brook, so-called; thence across
the Neversink River to the mouth of said brook and up along the
easterly side of the same, as it winds and turns, to the southeasterly line
of Kingston Avenue; thence easterly along the southeasterly line of
Kingston Avenue to the present boundary line of the Village of Port
Jervis, which at this point is four hundred feet northeasterly from the
line which divided the lands formerly belonging to Simeon Westfall and
§ C1-1 CHARTER § C1-3
C:3
Elting Cuddeback; thence north thirty-six degrees west along the
present boundary line of said village to a point six thousand five
hundred feet from the Neversink River; thence south fifty-three degrees
west to the berm bank of the Delaware and Hudson Canal; thence
northwesterly along said canal to a point on the lands of Charac J.
Van Inwegen, opposite the wasteweir leading from said canal to the
Delaware River; thence southwesterly crossing said canal and along
the easterly line of said wasteweir and a continuation of said line
to the center of the Delaware River; thence down the center of said
river following the boundary line between the States of New York
and Pennsylvania, to a point in the prolongation of the boundary line
between the States of New York and New Jersey; thence south fifty
degrees forty minutes east to the place of beginning.
B. Also all that tract or parcel of land situate in the Town of Deerpark,
County of Orange and State of New York, bounded and described as
follows, shall be included within the boundaries of the City of Port
Jervis: Beginning at a point in the present northwesterly boundary line
of the City of Port Jervis located two thousand six hundred feet,
measured along the said northwesterly boundary line, from a stone
monument marking the most northerly corner of the existing city
boundaries; running thence north forty-five degrees west a distance of
six hundred ten feet to a corner in the southeasterly line of great lot
forty-five of the seventh division of the Minisink Patent; thence along
the said line north forty-five degrees east a distance of four hundred
forty feet to a point; thence north forty-five degrees west a distance of
one thousand six hundred ninety and twelve one-hundredths feet to a
corner marked by a stake and stones; thence south forty-five degrees
west a distance of two thousand one hundred eighty-two and eightynine
one-hundredths feet to a point; thence south sixty-two degrees
twenty minutes west a distance of four hundred ninety-three feet to a
point which is three hundred feet from the easterly right-of-way line of
the Berme Road running from Port Jervis to Sparrowbush; thence
parallel with and three hundred feet from the easterly right-of-way line
of the said road south twenty-seven degrees forty minutes east a
distance of five hundred eighty-nine and two-tenths feet to a point in the
westerly right-of-way line of Skyline Drive; thence southerly along the
westerly right-of-way line of the said drive a distance of five hundred
twenty-eight feet to an iron bar; thence north sixty-one degrees fifteen
minutes east a distance of one hundred fifty feet to an iron bar; thence
south twenty-eight degrees forty-five minutes east a distance of fifty
feet to an iron bar; thence south sixty-one degrees fifteen minutes west
a distance of one hundred fifty feet to an iron bar and the westerly
right-of-way line of Skyline Drive aforesaid; thence south twenty
degrees twenty-eight minutes east a distance of one hundred twentyfive
and nine-tenths feet to a point; thence south two degrees twentyeight
minutes west a distance of eighty-six and two-tenths feet to a
point; thence south twenty degrees fifty-eight minutes west sixty feet to
a point; thence south fifty-seven degrees fifty-eight minutes west thirtyfive
feet to a point in the easterly right-of-way line of the Berme Road
§ C1-3 PORT JERVIS CODE § C1-3
C:4
§ C1-4. Ward and district boundaries. [Amended 5-27-1975 by L.L.
No. 1-1975, approved 6-10-1975]
The city shall be divided into four (4) wards. The four (4) wards shall be
further divided into two (2) election districts each. The wards and election
districts shall be bounded, respectfully, as follows:
aforesaid; thence along the easterly right-of-way line of the said road
south twenty-seven degrees forty-two minutes east a distance of two
hundred seventy-four feet to a point; thence north sixty-two degrees
eighteen minutes east a distance of three hundred feet to a point;
thence south twenty-seven degrees forty-two minutes east a distance of
three hundred feet to a point; thence north sixty-two degrees eighteen
minutes east a distance of three hundred sixty feet to a point; thence
south twenty-eight degrees fifteen minutes east a distance of two
hundred feet to a point in the present northwesterly boundary line of
the City of Port Jervis; thence along the said boundary line north fiftythree
degrees east a distance of two thousand nine hundred thirty feet
to the place of beginning.
A. First Ward. The First Ward shall include all that part of the city lying
within the following boundaries, to wit: Beginning at the center line of
the Erie-Lackawanna Railroad track where the city boundary line
intercepts the track on its most westerly boundary; thence in a
southeasterly direction for a distance of thirty-seven hundred feet,
thence northeast, a distance of six hundred along the city boundary line
to the center line of Park Avenue; thence southeast to the intersection
of Park Avenue and West Main Street, thence west along the center line
of West Main Street to the intersection of Grandview Avenue and West
Main Street; thence southwest to the center line of the Erie-
Lackawanna Railroad; thence in a southeasterly direction for a distance
of five thousand eight hundred feet to a projected center line of Wagner
Place; thence south along the projected line of Wagner Place to the
center of the Delaware River or the city boundary line, thence in a
northerly direction along the city boundary line to the point of
beginning.
(1) First District of the First Ward. The First District of the First Ward
shall include all that part of the city lying within the following
boundaries, to wit: Beginning at the center line of the Erie-
Lackawanna Railroad track at a point where the city boundary line
intercepts the track on its most westerly boundary; thence in a
southeasterly direction for a distance of thirty-seven hundred
southeast to the intersection of Park Avenue and West Main Street,
thence west along the center line of West Main Street to the
intersection of Grandview Avenue and West Main Street, thence
southwest to the center of the Delaware River or the city boundary
line, thence north along said boundary line to the point of
beginning.
§ C1-3 CHARTER § C1-4
C:5
(2) Second District of the First Ward. The Second District of the First
Ward shall include all that part of the city lying within the following
boundaries, to wit: Beginning at the center line of the Erie-
Lackawanna Railroad track at the center line of a projection line of
Wagner Place, thence southerly along the projected line of Wagner
Place to the city boundary line in the center of the Delaware River,
thence in a northwesterly direction along the city boundary line a
distance of six thousand feet, thence northeast to the center line of
the Erie-Lackawanna Railroad track, thence in a southwesterly
direction along the center line of said track to the point of
beginning.
B. Second Ward. The Second Ward shall include all that part of the city
lying within the following boundaries, to wit: Beginning at the center
line of the Erie-Lackawanna Railroad track at a point where a projected
center line of Church Street bisects the track, thence in a northeasterly
direction along the center line of Church Street to the center line of
East Main Street, thence southeast along the center line of East Main
Street to the center line of the abandoned New York, Ontario and
Western Railroad right-of-way, thence continuing in the same
southeasterly direction on a projected line to the east bank of the
Neversink River, thence northeast along the Neversink River as it winds
and turns a distance of sixteen hundred feet to the mouth of Cold Brook;
thence north along the center line of Cold Brook to the intersection of
said brook and Beach Road, thence northeast along the center line of
Beach Road to the center line of Kingston Avenue; thence west along
the center line of Kingston Avenue to the intersection of West Street
and Kingston Avenue, thence northwest along the center line of West
Street to the intersection of Canal Street and West Street; thence west
along the center line of Canal Street to the intersection of Orange
Street and Canal Street; thence south along the center line of Orange
Street to the center line of West Main Street; thence west along center
line of West Main Street to the intersection of Hudson Street and West
Main Street; thence due north to the monument of Point Peter, thence in
a northerly direction along the center line of the Elks Brox Park Road as
it winds and turns to the entrance road of Kolmar Laboratories; thence
due north to the city boundary line; thence in a southwesterly direction
along said city boundary line to the center line of Park Avenue; thence
southeast along center line of Park Avenue to the intersection of West
Main Street and Park Avenue; thence west along center line of West
Main Street to the intersection of West Main Street and Park Avenue;
thence southwest to the center line of the Erie-Lackawanna Railroad
track; thence southeast along center line of said track to the point of
beginning.
(1) First District of the Second Ward. The First District of the Second
Ward shall include all that part of the city lying within the following
boundaries, to wit: Beginning at a point where East Main Street
and Orange Street intersect; thence running in a southeasterly
direction along the center line of the Ontario and Western Railroad
§ C1-4 PORT JERVIS CODE § C1-4
C:6
right-of-way; thence continuing in the same southeasterly direction
on a projected line to the east bank of the Neversink River; thence
northeast along the Neversink River as it winds and turns a
distance of sixteen hundred feet to the mouth of Cold Brook; thence
north along the center line of Cold Brook to the intersection of said
brook and Beach Road; thence northeast along center line of Beach
Road to the center line of Kingston Avenue; thence west along
center line of Kingston Avenue to the intersection of West Street
and Kingston Avenue; thence northwest along the center line of
West Street to the intersection of Canal Street and West Street;
thence west along center line of Canal Street to the intersection of
Canal Street and Orange Street; thence south along the center line
of Orange Street to the point of beginning.
(2) The Second District of the Second Ward. The Second District of the
Second Ward shall include all that part of the city lying within the
following boundaries, to wit: Beginning at a point where a
projected center line of Church Street bisects the center line of the
Erie-Lackawanna Railroad track; thence in a northwesterly
direction along the center line of Church Street to the center line of
East Main Street; thence west along the center line of East Main
Street to the intersection of East Main Street and Hudson Street;
thence due north to the monument at Point Peter; thence in a
northerly direction along the center line of Elks-Brox Park Road to
the entrance road of Kolmar Laboratories; thence due north to the
city boundary line, thence along the city boundary line to the center
line of Park Avenue, thence southeast along center line of Park
Avenue to the intersection of Park Avenue and West Main Street,
thence west along the center line of West Main Street to the
intersection of West Main Street and Park Avenue, thence
southwest to the center line of the Erie-Lackawanna Railroad track,
thence southeast along center line of said track to the point of
beginning.
C. The Third Ward. The Third Ward shall include all that part of the city
lying within the following boundaries, to wit: Beginning at a point in the
center line of West Main Street where Hudson Street and West Main
Street intersect; thence due north to the monument at Point Peter;
thence in a northerly direction along the center line of Elks Brox Park
Road to the entrance of Kolmar Laboratories; thence due north to the
city boundary line; thence northeasterly along the said city line a
distance of six hundred feet; thence southeasterly along the said city
line to the base of the Reservoir No. 1 spillway; thence due east two
thousand feet more or less along said city line; thence southeast along
city line to a monument on the north side of Van Avenue, thence along
the north side of Van Avenue in a southerly direction to a point at the
junction of the New York, Ontario and Western Railroad right-of-way
and Cold Brook; thence along the east bank of said brook in a southerly
direction as it winds and turns to Beach Road; thence northerly along
the center line of Beach Road to the center line of Kingston Avenue;
§ C1-4 CHARTER § C1-4
C:7
thence westerly on Kingston Avenue to the intersection of West Street;
thence northerly along the center line of West Street to the center line
of Canal Street; thence westerly on Canal Street to the center line of
Orange Street; thence in a southwesterly direction along the center line
of Orange Street to the center line of West Main Street; thence westerly
along the center line of West Main Street to the place of beginning.
(1) The First District of the Third Ward. The First District of the Third
Ward shall include all that part of the city lying within the following
boundaries, to wit: Beginning at a point in the center line of West
Main Street where Hudson Street and West Main Street intersect;
thence due north to the monument at Point Peter; thence in a
northerly direction along the center line of Elks-Brox Park Road to
the entrance of Kolmar Laboratories; thence due north to the city
boundary line; thence northeasterly along said city line a distance
of six hundred feet; thence southeasterly along said city line to the
base of the Reservoir No. 1 spillway; thence due east to North
Orange Street; thence southerly on the east side of North Orange
Street to Cross Street; thence easterly on Cross Street to a
projected line on the east side of Charles Street; thence south on
Charles Street to the North Orange Street Runoff Brook; thence
southerly along the east bank of said brook as it winds and turns to
a point where said brook crosses Lincoln Street; thence in a
southwesterly direction along Lincoln Street to Hamilton Street;
thence in a southerly direction along the center line of Hamilton
Street to the center line of Canal Street to the center line of Orange
Street; thence southwesterly along the center line of Orange Street
to the center line of West Main Street; thence westerly along the
center line of West Main Street to the place of beginning.
(2) Second District of the Third Ward. The Second District of the Third
Ward shall include all that part of the city lying within the following
boundaries, to wit: Beginning at a point where the Cold Brook
bisects Beach Road; thence northerly along the center line of Beach
Road to the center line of Kingston Avenue; thence westerly along
the center line of Kingston Avenue to the center line of West Street;
thence northerly along the center line of West Street to the center
line of Canal Street; northeasterly along the center line of Canal
Street to the center line of Hamilton Street; thence northerly along
the center line of Hamilton Street to the center line of Lincoln
Street; thence northeasterly along the center line of Lincoln Street
to the North Orange Street Runoff Brook; thence northerly along
the east bank of said brook as it winds and turns to a point where
said brook crosses Charles Street; thence northerly on Charles
Street and a projected line on the east side of Charles Street to
Cross Street; thence westerly on Cross Street to North Orange
Street; thence northerly on North Orange Street to the city
boundary line; thence due east along the city boundary line to a
monument; thence along the city line in a southeasterly direction to
a monument on the north side of Van Avenue; thence along the
§ C1-4 PORT JERVIS CODE § C1-4
C:8
north side of Van Avenue in a southerly direction to a point at the
junction of the New York, Ontario and Western Railroad right-ofway
and Cold Brook; thence along the east bank of said brook in a
southerly direction as it winds and turns to Beach Road, the place
of beginning.
D. The Fourth Ward. The Fourth Ward shall include all that part of the city
lying within the boundaries, to wit: Beginning at a point where a
projected center line of Church Street bisects the Erie-Lackawanna
Railroad track, thence in a northwesterly direction along the center line
of Church Street to the center line of East Main Street; thence
southeast along the center line of East Main Street to the center line of
the abandoned New York, Ontario and Western Railroad right-of-way;
thence continue on a projected line in the same direction to the east
bank of the Neversink River or the city boundary line; thence in a
southerly direction along the east bank of the Neversink River and city
boundary line as it winds and turns a distance of twenty-seven hundred
feet; thence southeast along the city boundary line a distance of two
thousand feet; thence southwesterly a distance of nine hundred feet
along said city line to the intersection of New York State Routes 6 and
23; thence due west along the city boundary line to the east bank of the
Neversink River; thence along the east bank of said river in a southerly
direction to the Tri-States monument; thence along the city line in the
center of the Delaware River in a northerly direction to a projected
center line of Wagner Place; thence along said projected center line to
the center line of the Erie-Lackawanna Railroad track; thence west
along the center line of said track to the point of beginning.
(1) First District of the Fourth Ward. The First District of the Fourth
Ward shall include all that part of the city lying within the following
boundaries, to wit: Beginning at a point where a projected center
line of Church Street bisects the center line of the Erie-
Lackawanna Railroad track; thence in a northwesterly direction
along the center line of Church Street to East Main Street; thence
in a southeasterly direction along the center line of East Main
Street to the abandoned New York, Ontario and Western Railroad
right-of-way; thence southwesterly along the center line of said
right-of-way to a point where a projected center line of Owen Street
bisects the said right-of-way; thence in a southwesterly direction
along a projected line of Owen Street to Owen Street proper
continuing on said center line to the center line of Jersey Avenue;
thence continuing along Owen Street center projected line to the
center line of the Erie-Lackawanna Railroad track; thence in a
northwesterly direction along said track to the point of beginning.
(2) Second District of the Fourth Ward. The Second District of the
Fourth Ward shall include all that part of the city lying within the
following boundaries, to wit: Beginning at a point where the center
line of the Erie-Lackawanna Railroad track and a projected line of
the center line of Owen Street intersects; thence in a northeasterly
§ C1-4 CHARTER § C1-4
C:9
§ C1-5. Definitions.
For the purposes of this Charter, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
PERSON — Includes all persons, firms, corporations and associations.
RESOLUTION — Includes all motions, orders, rules, regulations and bylaws
other than ordinances and local laws.
STREETS — Includes highways, alleys, avenues and lanes.
direction along said projected line to Owen Street proper and
continuing along said center line extending along the projected
center line to the abandoned New York, Ontario and Western
Railroad right-of-way; thence north along said center line of rightof-
way to the center line of East Main Street; thence southeast, a
distance of nine hundred feet to the east bank of the Neversink
River and the city boundary line; thence in a southerly direction
along the east bank of the Neversink River as it winds and turns
a distance of twenty-seven hundred feet; thence southeast along
the city boundary a distance of two thousand feet; thence
southwesterly a distance of nine hundred feet along said city line
to the intersection of New York State Routes 6 and 23; thence
due west along said city line to the east bank of the Neversink
River; thence along the east bank of the Neversink River in a
southerly direction to the Tri-State monument; thence along the
city boundary line, being the center line of the Delaware River in
a northerly direction to a projected center line of Wagner Place;
thence along said projected line in a northeasterly direction to the
center line of the Erie-Lackawanna Railroad track; thence west
along center line of said track to the point of beginning.
§ C1-4 PORT JERVIS CODE § C1-5
C:10
ARTICLE II
City Officers: Eligibility; Elections; Appointments; Terms of Office;
Compensation; Filling Vacancies1
§ C2-1. City officers enumerated. [Amended 9-25-1978 by L.L. No.
1-1978, approved 9-25-1978; 12-8-1980 by L.L. No. 3-1980,
approved 12-8-1980; 12-12-1988 by L.L. No. 10-1988, approved
12-12-1988; 8-15-1990 by L.L. No. 13-1990, approved 8-15-1990;
9-14-2009 by L.L. No. 8-2009, approved 9-14-2009]
The officers of the city shall be a Mayor, a Councilman at Large, two (2)
Councilmen from each ward, a City Judge, a City Clerk-Treasurer, a Deputy
City Clerk-Treasurer, an Assessor, an Acting City Judge, two (2) or more
Marshals, a Corporation Counsel, a Director of Public Works, an Assistant
Director of Public Works, a Superintendent of Water, a Chief of Police, Police
Lieutenants, a Fire Chief, a Building Official, an Assistant Building Official,
a Director of Recreation, a Plumbing Inspector, an Electrical Inspector, a
Fire Inspector and such other officers as may be authorized and required by
general law.
§ C2-2. Eligibility to city offices.
No person shall be elected or appointed to any city office unless he shall
at the same time be a resident of said city,2 nor to any ward office unless
he shall at the time be a resident of the ward for which he is elected or
appointed. Whenever any officer of said city shall cease to be a resident of
said city, or of the ward for which he was elected or appointed, his office
shall thereby become vacant.
A. The requirement that the Deputy City Clerk-Treasurer be a resident of
the City of Port Jervis, New York, may be waived and a nonresident of
this city appointed, provided the waiver be exercised by a majority vote
of the Common Council. [Added 9-10-1979 by L.L. No. 3-1979,
approved 9-10-1979]
B. No person shall, at the same time, hold more than one (1) city office,
except upon the recommendation of the Mayor and the approval of twothirds
(2/3) of the entire membership of the Common Council.
[Amended 1-25-1982 by L.L. No. 1-1982, approved 2-10-1982;
5-11-1983 by L.L. No. 7-1983; approved 5-12-1983]
C. The Acting City Court Judge need not be a resident of the City of Port
Jervis, provided that he or she be a resident of Orange or Sullivan
Counties.3 [Added 3-25-1985 by L.L. No. 2-1985, approved
4-23-1985]
1. Editor's Note: For additional provisions concerning city officers, see Ch. 115, Officers and
Employees.
2. Editor's Note: For residency requirements as to other employees, see Ch. 115, Officers and
Employees, Art. II.
3. Editor's Note: Former Subsection C, which provided that the residency requirement may
be waived for the Administrator, Community Development and Administrative Services,
§ C2-1 CHARTER § C2-2
C:11
§ C2-3. Elective city officers enumerated; term of office.
§ C2-4. Appointive city officers enumerated; by whom appointed;
term of office.
D. The requirements that the Corporation Counsel be a resident of the City
of Port Jervis may be waived and a nonresident of the city appointed,
provided the waiver be exercised by a majority vote of the Common
Council. A Corporation Counsel, whether a resident or a nonresident,
shall meet the following qualifications to be eligible for appointment:
(1) That the appointee be an attorney and counselor at law in all the
courts of the State of New York. [Amended 3-27-1995 by L.L.
No. 9-1995, approved 3-27-1995]
(2) That the appointee be actively engaged in the practice of law at the
time of, and for a period of not less than two (2) years immediately
prior to, said appointment. [Amended 3-27-1995 by L.L. No.
9-1995, approved 3-27-1995]
E. The residency requirement for the Superintendent of Water may be
waived by a two-thirds (2/3) vote of the entire membership of the
Common Council, provided that said officer must maintain a residence
in the State of New York within fifteen (15) miles of the City of Port
Jervis. [Added 6-10-1985 by L.L. No. 5-1985, approved 6-24-1985]
F. The Common Council may waive the residency requirement for any
appointive City officers enumerated in Section C2-4 of Article II of the
Port Jervis City Charter nominated by the Mayor provided the waiver be
exercised by a majority vote of the Common Council. [Amended
3-28-2016 by L.L. No. 7-2016, approved 3-28-2016]
A. The elective city officers to be elected by the city at large shall be a
Mayor, a Councilman at Large and a City Judge. The elective officers of
the city to be elected by each ward shall be two (2) Councilmen.
B. Terms of elective officers. The term of office of the Mayor shall be two
(2) years; Councilman at Large, two (2) years; City Judge, four (4) years;
and Councilman, two (2) years.
A. The appointive city officers shall be a City Clerk-Treasurer, a Deputy
City Clerk-Treasurer, an Assessor, an Acting City Judge, two (2) or more
Marshals, a Corporation Counsel, a Director of Public Works, an
Assistant Director of Public Works, a Superintendent of Water, a Chief
of Police, a Fire Chief, a Building Official, a Plumbing Inspector, an
Electrical Inspector, a Fire Inspector and such other officers as may be
authorized and required by general law. The appointive officers shall be
nominated by the Mayor and appointed by the Common Council, five (5)
votes being necessary for an appointment; if after thirty (30) days the
added 9-25-1978 by L.L. No. 1-1978, approved 9-25-1978, was repealed 12-8-1980 by L.L.
No. 3-1980, approved 12-8-1980.
§ C2-2 PORT JERVIS CODE § C2-4
C:12
§ C2-5. Compensation of city officers and employees. [Amended
11-23-1987 by L.L. No. 12-1987, approved 11-23-1987]
All city officers and employees, including the Mayor and all members of
the Common Council, shall receive such compensation as is authorized and
approved by the Common Council.
§ C2-6. Commencement and expiration of terms of office.
The term of office of each officer elected at a general election shall
commence the first day of January following his election. The terms of
each officer appointed for a full term shall, other than as herein provided,
commence on the first day of February of the year in which the appointment
is required to be made.
§ C2-7. City elections.
All regular city elections shall be held on the day of general election
in every odd-numbered year. The Common Council shall provide polling
places, ballot boxes and other necessary apparatus and material in each
election district in said city for each election within said city, and the
manner of conducting such elections shall, in all respects, conform to and
be governed by the Election Law of the State of New York.
§ C2-8. Canvass of votes at city election.
The Common Council of said city shall meet as a Board of City Canvassers
on the next Thursday after each city election. The City Clerk-Treasurer
shall present to the Common Council at such meeting certified statements
of the result of such election in the several election districts of the city,
Mayor shall not have nominated a person to fill any city office, the
Common Council may nominate and appoint a person to fill such office,
five (5) votes being necessary for appointment. [Amended 9-25-1978
by L.L. No. 1-1978, approved 9-25-1978; 12-8-1980 by L.L. No.
3-1980, approved 12-8-1980; 1-25-1982 by L.L. No. 1-1982,
approved 2-10-1982; 8-15-1990 by L.L. No. 13-1990, approved
8-15-1990]
B. Term of office of appointive officers. When the appointment of a city
officer is authorized and required by general law, the term shall be as is
prescribed by the general law under which said officer is appointed,
subject to removal for cause by the Common Council or such alternate
removal procedure as prescribed by said general law. Any and all city
officers appointed subsequent to the effective date of this Charter
provision, and for whom a term is not otherwise provided herein or by
general law, shall serve for a term of not less than one (1) year and not
more than ten (10) years as the Common Council may fix, subject to
removal for cause by the Common Council. [Amended 7-9-1979 by
L.L. No. 1-1979, approved 7-9-1979; 6-10-1985 by L.L. No.
4-1985, approved 6-24-1985]
§ C2-4 CHARTER § C2-8
C:13
as delivered to him by the Inspectors of Election of such districts. The
Common Council shall canvass such certified statements and determine
and declare the total number of votes cast for each candidate for each
office to be filled at such election, and the number of votes cast for and
against each proposition or question. The persons having the greatest
number of votes for the respective offices to be filled shall be declared duly
elected. In case of a tie vote, the Common Council shall fill such office by
appointment until the next general election. The City Clerk-Treasurer shall
enter such determinations and declarations in the minutes of the meeting of
the Common Council.
§ C2-9. Suspensions and removals of appointive city officers.
The Common Council, by a vote of two-thirds (2/3) of the entire
membership, may reprimand, suspend or remove any city officer appointed
by it, for dishonesty, incapacity, neglect of duty or other irregularity, giving
such officer reasonable notice thereof, which shall contain the specifications
of the charges and a reasonable opportunity to be heard; such officer may
be suspended pending such investigation. This section shall not apply to
those city officers governed by the Civil Service Law of the State of New
York.
§ C2-10. Filling vacancies in city offices. [Amended 5-27-1975 by
L.L. No. 2-1975, approved 6-10-1975]
Except as otherwise provided for in this Charter, if a vacancy shall occur in
any elective office of the city, the Common Council shall appoint a person to
fill such vacancy for the balance of the unexpired term. Such appointment
shall be made by a majority vote of those Council members present at either
the regular or special meeting during which such business is transacted.
§ C2-8 PORT JERVIS CODE § C2-10
C:14
ARTICLE III
City Officers: Their General Powers and Duties4
§ C3-1. Official oath of all city officers.
Each officer of the city shall take and file the oath of office required by
law before he shall be entitled to enter upon the discharge of any of his
official duties pursuant to Article XIII of the New York State Constitution
and Section 10 of the Public Officers Law. The Mayor, the Councilman at
Large, each Councilman, the City Judge and all appointive officers shall
forthwith, upon their election or appointment, file a certificate of election
or appointment with the City Clerk-Treasurer. The City Judge, Acting City
Judge and City Clerk-Treasurer shall also take and subscribe the
constitutional oath of office before the Clerk of the County of Orange.
§ C3-2. Official bond of city officers.5
The City Clerk-Treasurer, Deputy City Clerk-Treasurer, Director of Public
Works, Superintendent of Water and such other city officers as the Common
Council may require shall execute and file an official undertaking before
they enter upon the duties of their respective offices. The amount of said
undertaking for each city officer shall be prescribed by the Common
Council. In lieu of individual undertakings the Common Council may
authorize a blanket undertaking for all such city officers. By omitting to
execute and file said bond a city officer shall be subject to those penalties
prescribed by law.
§ C3-3. Liability of city officers for unauthorized expenditures and
other official misconduct.
No city officer shall have the authority to make any purchase on behalf of
the city, or contract any debt or liability against the city, unless authorized
to do so pursuant to the provisions of this Charter or general law. No claim
or demand of any kind shall be allowed or paid unless so authorized. If
any officer of the city shall knowingly vote for any appropriation or for
the expenditure of any moneys not property authorized, such officer shall
be subject to those penalties as provided by the laws of the State of New
York. If the Common Council shall pass any resolution authorizing any
improper expenditure of money for any purpose, each officer voting for
such resolution shall be personally liable for the amount thereof, unless his
dissent thereto is entered upon the minutes of the meeting at which such
resolution was passed. If any officer of the city authorized to make any
contract in his official capacity, or to take part in making any such contract,
becomes voluntarily interested in such contract, he may be proceeded
against under either Article 18 of the General Municipal Law or the Code
of Ethics of the City of Port Jervis.6 If any person having been an officer of
4. Editor's Note: The powers and duties of other city officers and employees may be provided
for in Ch. 115, Officers and Employees.
5. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 115, Officers and Employees.
§ C3-1 CHARTER § C3-3
C:15
said city, whose term of office has expired, has not, within five (5) days after
notification and request, delivered to his successor in office all property,
papers and effects of every description in his possession or under his control
belonging to the said city or appertaining to such office, he shall be liable to
a penalty of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.), to be recovered
by the city in a civil action, together with all damages caused by his neglect
or refusal, and he may also be proceeded against as provided in Section
5228 of the Civil Practice Law and Rules, Sections 175.20 and 175.25 of the
Penal Law and any other applicable laws now or hereafter in effect.
§ C3-4. (Reserved)7
§ C3-5. General powers and duties of the Mayor.
The Mayor of the City of Port Jervis shall be the chief executive officer
thereof. It shall be his duty generally, to maintain the peace, good order
and prosperity of the city; to take care that within the city the laws of the
state and the local laws, ordinances and resolutions passed by the Common
Council of the city are faithfully executed, and cause to be arrested all
persons violating the same. He shall have power and authority to call out
and command the police and firemen of the city whenever in his discretion
he shall deem it necessary, and such command shall be in all respects
obeyed. Whenever necessary for the prevention or suppression of public
disturbances, mobs or riots, it shall be his duty to take such action as is
authorized by law. It shall be his duty to exercise a constant supervision
and control over the conduct of all city officers, and he shall have power
and authority to examine at all times the books, vouchers and papers of any
officer or employee of said city, and to take and hear testimony and proofs
in relation thereto and to require the attendance of witnesses to give such
testimony and proof as provided by law. It shall be the duty of the Mayor
to communicate to the Common Council during the month of January in
each year, and at such other times as he shall deem expedient, a general
statement of the affairs of the city in relation to its finances, government
and improvement, with such recommendations as he may deem proper.
He may designate, after obtaining prior approval of the Common Council
expressed in the form of a simple resolution, the place in said city where he
shall keep his office.
§ C3-6. General powers and duties of the City Clerk-Treasurer.
The City Clerk-Treasurer shall be Clerk of the Common Council and
Collector of Taxes in and for the City of Port Jervis. He shall devote his
time wholly to the duties of his office and shall perform such duties incident
to this office as may be required by the Common Council. He shall be in
attendance at his office each and every business day in the year during
such business hours as shall have been established by the Common Council.
6. Editor's Note: See Ch. 47, Ethics, Code of.
7. Editor's Note: Former § C3-4, Required surety for competitive bids, was repealed
3-28-1983 by L.L. No. 5-1983, approved 4-28-1983.
§ C3-3 PORT JERVIS CODE § C3-6
C:16
He shall keep or cause to be kept the minutes of the Common Council and
shall record in a book to be provided for the purpose all proceedings of
the Common Council. He shall have the charge, custody and control of the
corporate seal, books, papers, documents, official oaths of office, official
minutes and other files and records of the city, and shall keep the same
properly arranged for ready reference. He shall keep safe any bond or
bonds of city officials and employees and any other bond running to the
city, as may be prescribed from time to time by the Common Council. He
shall keep up-to-date the Code of the City of Port Jervis, and keep such
other records of ordinances and local laws as are now or may hereafter
be required by law or by the Common Council. He shall, upon request and
upon payment of the fee set by the Common Council therefor, make certified
copies of all public records and documents in his office or under his control,
and may affix the corporate seal of the city to any such copies. Such seal
shall be deemed to be his official seal, and any such certified copy shall
be evidence in any court as provided by law. He shall be the custodian of
all moneys the city shall receive from any source whatever, and all moneys
set apart by this Charter or by any resolution of the Common Council, or
by the provisions of any general law for any board, commission or officer.
He shall also keep an accurate account of all receipts and expenditures
in such manner and deposit the receipts in such banking institutions as
the Common Council may direct. Except for petty cash, city indebtedness
and mandated payments, no moneys shall be drawn out or paid out of the
city treasury unless authorized by the Common Council and upon warrants
signed by the Mayor or Acting Mayor and the City Clerk-Treasurer or
Deputy City Clerk-Treasurer, which warrants shall specify from what fund
the amount therein named is to be paid. He shall report to the Common
Council quarterly the aggregate amount drawn by him on each fund during
the current fiscal year, and said report shall also specify the unexpended
balance of the several funds; and he shall also make a report and financial
statement of all said accounts whenever directed by the Mayor or Common
Council. He shall, at the first regular meeting of the Common Council
held in February of each year, present to said Council an annual report
which shall include a summary of all budgeted and actual receipts and
disbursements for the preceding fiscal year and a statement of the current
financial condition of the city. When such annual report shall have been
examined and accepted as correct by the Common Council, it shall be filed
and be preserved as part of the city records. The City Clerk-Treasurer shall
have the power to administer oaths and affirmations and take affidavits
within said city. He shall serve as Collector of Taxes and Assessments and
Registrar of Vital Statistics for the City of Port Jervis and shall perform such
duties and have such powers as are prescribed by law.
§ C3-7. General powers and duties of the Deputy City Clerk-
Treasurer.
The Deputy City Clerk-Treasurer shall perform such duties as the City
Clerk-Treasurer may direct. When the City Clerk-Treasurer shall be absent
from his office or shall be incapable of performing the duties thereof, or
when the office of City Clerk-Treasurer shall be vacant, the Deputy City
§ C3-6 CHARTER § C3-7
C:17
Clerk-Treasurer shall possess all the powers and shall perform all the duties
of the City Clerk.
§ C3-8. General powers and duties of the Corporation Counsel.
A. The Corporation Counsel shall be the legal adviser of the Mayor,
Common Council and other city officers, boards and agencies. It shall
be the duty of the Corporation Counsel of said city to prosecute all civil
actions and proceedings by, and to defend all civil actions and
proceedings against, said city and every board, agency or officer
thereof and to discharge all other legal services as the Mayor or
Common Council may direct. It shall also be the duty of the Corporation
Counsel to prosecute all cases of violations of local laws and ordinances
before the City Court or other appropriate court. The Corporation
Counsel shall prosecute or defend all matters as directed by state law.
No action or proceeding shall be commenced by the Corporation
Counsel unless directed by the Common Council.
B. The Corporation Counsel, when authorized by the Common Council,
may employ counsel to assist him in the conduct of cases or
proceedings in which the city is interested or a party. The Corporation
Counsel shall be entitled, in actions and proceedings in which the city
shall be successful, to receive all costs and allowances which may be
collected from the adverse party, and he shall pay over the City Clerk-
Treasurer all such amounts received, whenever and as soon as such
amounts are collected. The Corporation Counsel shall, whenever he
considers that the best interests of the city will be served, enter into an
agreement, subject to the approval of the Common Council, to
compromise and settle any claim against the city. When approved by the
Common Council the same shall constitute a valid claim against the city.
The amount of any judgment recoverable against the city shall be
reported to the Common Council by the Corporation Counsel
immediately after the same shall have become payable. The
Corporation Counsel shall keep a record of all suits and proceedings
under his charge and at the expiration of his term of office shall deliver
such records to his successor and shall also sign stipulations
substituting such successor as attorney for the city in such suits or
proceedings.
C. In the event it shall be necessary for the Corporation Counsel to
prosecute or defend any appeal from any action or proceeding involving
the City of Port Jervis, he shall be allowed such additional compensation
as may be determined by the Common Council.
D. The Corporation Counsel shall not appear for or represent a defendant
charged with any violation, misdemeanor or felony in the City Court of
the City of Port Jervis.
E. The Corporation Counsel may, in his discretion, prosecute offenses
defined in the Vehicle and Traffic Law of the State of New York other
than misdemeanors and felonies with the consent of the Common
§ C3-7 PORT JERVIS CODE § C3-8
C:18
§ C3-9. General powers and duties of the Director of Public Works.
The Director of Public Works shall, under the direction of the Mayor, direct
the construction, maintenance, alteration, repair, cleaning, paving, flagging,
lighting, snow and ice removal and the improving of the streets, highways,
public sidewalks and places of the city; direct the construction of new
municipal buildings and the alteration and repairs of existing city buildings;
exercise control of the practical furnishing for use of rooms and the outside
areas of public buildings, including the obtaining of chairs and benches
for approved activities as they may arise; supervise the maintenance,
extension, repair and care of the city watershed and waterworks and the
distribution of potable water to the citizens of the city; direct the
maintenance, extension, repair and care of the municipal sewage system,
including sanitary and surface sewage; direct the collection and disposal
of ash, garbage and refuse and is responsible for the operation of the
sanitary landfill or such other disposal method that may be determined;
formulate all city specifications for local improvement projects or purchases
of authorized apparatus and equipment for the Public Works Department;
issue final certificates of approval to contractors upon their satisfactory
completion of public contracts; supervise the installation and maintenance
of traffic signals and other lighting operations and programs; purchase
and authorize the purchase of all materials and equipment needed for
the operation of the Public Works Department; investigate and correct
the complaints of taxpayers in regard to functions of the Public Works
Department; notify property owners of their responsibility to eliminate a
weed nuisance and/or correct a hazardous tree or branch condition; forward
notices to property owners to alleviate their existent snow or ice problem
on their sidewalks in the public interest; devise methods and procedures
for the efficient operation of the Public Works Department; prepare an
annual budget of funds necessary for the operation of the Public Works
Department; supervise and furnish manpower and technical assistance to
other departments when properly authorized and requested; inspect cityowned
buildings and render a written report to the Mayor and Common
Council with recommendations for major repairs and/or reconstruction of
existing buildings or facilities; render monthly report of the activities and
operations of the Public Works Department.8
Council and the District Attorney of Orange County. The Police
Department shall furnish such assistance as the Corporation Counsel
may require in prosecuting such offenses, and arresting officers may
prosecute in the City Court of Port Jervis in order to assist the
Corporation Counsel. [Added 7-14-1975 by L.L. No. 3-1975,
approved 7-21-1975]
8. Editor's Note: By resolution adopted 2-13-1979, the Common Council authorized the
Director of Public Works, with the approval of the Mayor, to hire temporary laborers as
required, the term of employment for any one individual not to extend any further than
the next meeting of the Common Council, provided that the Director of Public Works not
expend funds exceeding the total amount budgeted for personnel services, except where
emergencies exist.
§ C3-8 CHARTER § C3-9.1
C:19
§ C3-9.1. Assistant Director of Public Works. [Added 8-15-1990 by
L.L. No. 13-1990, approved 8-15-1990]
The Assistant Director of Public Works shall assist the Director of Public
Works in such duties and responsibilities as may be delegated by said
Director of Public Works and shall, in the absence or inability to act of the
Director of Public Works, perform all of the general powers and duties of
said Director.
§ C3-10. General powers and duties of the Superintendent of Water.
The Superintendent of Water shall have, under the direction of the Director
of Public Works, the supervision, care, management and control of the
Water Department and waterworks system of the city. It shall be his duty
to see that the city has an abundant supply of pure and wholesome water
for public and private use; to devise plans and sources of water supply;
to plan and supervise the construction, maintenance and extension of the
water system and the distribution of water throughout the city; to protect
it from contamination; and to prescribe rules and regulations for its use,
which, when ratified by the Common Council, shall have the same force and
effect as city ordinances.9
§ C3-11. General powers and duties of the Councilmen.
It shall be the duty of the Councilman at Large and every Councilman to
attend the regular and special meetings of the Common Council; to act upon
committees when thereunto appointed by the Mayor or Common Council; to
cause to be arrested all persons violating the laws of this state or local laws,
ordinances or resolutions of the city when such violations are committed in
their presence; to report to the Mayor all subordinate officers who are guilty
of any official misconduct or neglect of duty; to aid in maintaining peace and
good order in the city; and to perform or assist in performing all such duties
as are by this Charter enjoined upon the Councilmen of said city separately
or upon the Common Council thereof.
§ C3-12. General powers and duties of the Marshals.
The Marshals shall be enforcement officers of the City of Port Jervis and
shall possess all the powers and perform all the duties set forth in the
Uniform City Court Act of the State of New York.
§ C3-13. General powers and duties of the City Assessor.
The City Assessor shall perform all the duties required of him by the Real
Property Tax Law or any amendment thereto or substitution thereof.10
9. Editor's Note: For current rules and regulation relating to the water system, see Ch. A615,
Water Rules and Regulations.
10.Editor's Note: As to taxation generally, see Ch. 475, Taxation.
§ C3-9.1 PORT JERVIS CODE § C3-14
C:20
§ C3-14. General powers and duties of other city officers.
The powers and duties of all other city officers shall be such as are
hereinafter provided in this Charter, or when not so provided, as prescribed
by existing general laws applicable to such officers.
§ C3-15. General powers and duties of the Director of Insurance.11
[Added 1-25-1982 by L.L. No. 1-1982, approved 2-10-1982]
A. The Director of Insurance shall, under the direction of the Mayor:
(1) Maintain all files and records concerning any and all policies of
insurance covering the City of Port Jervis or any of its agencies or
boards or departments.
(2) Act as liaison and representative of the City of Port Jervis in dealing
with and contacting insurance companies on behalf of the city or
any of its agencies, boards or departments.
(3) File and process any and all claims on behalf of the city or any of its
agencies, boards or departments.
(4) Submit and file a monthly report to the Insurance Committee of the
Common Council.
(5) Undertake a study and analysis each year of all policies covering
the city, its agencies, boards or departments and make
recommendations no later than October 15th of each year of
changes required in the city's insurance coverage.
(6) If required, prepare specifications for obtaining competitive bids
on the city's insurance coverage.
(7) Cooperate with the Corporation Counsel's office and any other
attorney representing the city or its agencies, boards or
departments in any matters dealing with insurance coverage.
B. The City Clerk-Treasurer functions as the Director of Insurance.12
11.Editor's Note: Former § C3-15, General powers and duties of the Administrator,
Community Development and Administrative Services, added 9-25-1978 by L.L. No.
1-1978, approved 9-25-1978, was repealed 12-8-1980 by L.L. No. 3-1980, approved
12-8-1980.
12.Editor's Note: Added during codification (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. III).
§ C3-14 CHARTER § C3-15
C:21

ARTICLE IV
The Common Council
§ C4-1. Organization and procedure of the Common Council.
The Common Council shall be composed of the Councilman at Large and
two (2) Councilmen from each ward of the city. The Mayor shall preside at
meetings of the Common Council, but shall have no vote. At all meetings
of the Common Council, each Councilman present shall have one (1) vote.
While the Mayor is absent from the city or unable to perform his duties,
or upon the death or resignation of the Mayor, the Councilman at Large
shall be the Acting Mayor and have all the powers and duties and be subject
to all the obligations of the Mayor. If both the Mayor and the Councilman
at Large are absent from the city or unable to perform their duties, or
upon the death or resignation of both the Mayor and the Councilman at
Large, the Common Council, by majority vote of the entire membership of
said Common Council, shall appoint within five (5) days an Acting Mayor
until the vacancies in the offices of Mayor and/or Councilman at Large
are filled as provided by law. In case the Common Council shall be unable
to appoint an Acting Mayor, the Councilman having the longest time of
continuous service as Councilman shall become Acting Mayor and have all
the powers and duties and be subject to all the obligations of the Mayor.
The Councilman at Large or Councilman serving as Temporary President of
the Common Council shall not lose his vote as Councilman by reason of his
acting as presiding officer of the Common Council at any time, but when
he shall vote as Councilman, he shall have no additional deciding vote on
a tie. The Common Council shall hold regular meetings on the second and
fourth Monday evenings in each month, or, if any such Monday be a legal
holiday, on the Tuesday following, in the City Hall, and at such other times
as it shall designate. The Mayor, or in his absence the Acting Mayor, or any
three (3) Councilmen may call special meetings by notice, in writing, served
personally upon the other members of the Common Council, or left at their
usual place of abode or by depositing the same in the Port Jervis post office,
properly addressed to each member, enclosed in a prepaid wrapper, at
least twenty-four (24) hours before the time of such meeting. The Common
Council shall determine the rules of its own proceedings and be the judges
of the election and qualification of its own members. The attendance of
absent members may be compelled by the Common Council, or by a meeting
thereof, at which less than a quorum is present, by the entry of a resolution
and order in the minutes, directing the Chief of Police or any police officer
of the city to bring such absent member before the Common Council at the
meeting at which such member was absent, or the next or some subsequent
meeting of the Common Council, to answer for his neglect. A majority of
the Common Council shall be a quorum for the transaction of business,
but a smaller number may adjourn from time to time. A majority of the
Councilmen present and voting at any meeting of the Common Council, at
which a quorum shall be present, shall be sufficient to enact any resolution,
ordinance or local law, except that no resolution authorizing or involving
the expenditure of money or collection of money by a tax or assessment
shall pass unless it receives the assent of a majority of all the Councilmen in
§ C4-1 CHARTER § C4-1
C:23
office, or except as otherwise provided in this Charter; provided, however,
that the vote required for the authorization of the issuance of bonds or
notes shall be governed by the Local Finance Law or other applicable law.
The yeses and noes shall, upon the request of any member, be called and
recorded on all resolutions. All meetings of the Common Council shall be
public, except when the public interest shall require executive session, but
no vote shall be taken in executive session.
§ C4-2. Approval or veto by Mayor.
Every resolution ordering a tax or assessment, the construction of a local
improvement, the granting of a franchise or enacting an ordinance or local
law shall, before it takes effect, be presented, duly certified by the City
Clerk-Treasurer, to the Mayor. If the Mayor approves he shall sign it within
ten (10) days after the receipt thereof by him and file it so signed with
the City Clerk-Treasurer. If the Mayor does not approve, he shall, within
ten (10) days after the receipt thereof by him, return it to the City Clerk-
Treasurer with his objection thereto in writing, and it shall have no force or
effect. The Common Council may thereafter reconsider it and pass it over
the Mayor's veto by the concurring vote of at least two-thirds (2/3) of the
total number of Councilmen in office, which vote shall be taken by yeses and
noes and entered on the minutes, together with the objections of the Mayor.
If any such resolution, ordinance or local law so presented to the Mayor
shall not be returned by him to the City Clerk-Treasurer within ten (10) days
after the receipt thereof by the Mayor, it shall, on the expiration of such ten
(10) days, have the same force and effect as if it had been approved by him
and filed with the City Clerk-Treasurer.
§ C4-3. Publication and record of ordinances and local laws.
A. All local laws and ordinances, and all amendments thereto, as well as all
rules and regulations adopted by the Common Council, boards or
commissions, shall not take effect until after at least the title of such
local laws, ordinances, amendments, rules and regulations, together
with an explanatory statement sufficient to indicate the nature thereof
and a statement that the complete text thereof is on file and may be
examined at the office of the City Clerk, shall have been published daily,
for two (2) days in succession, in the official newspaper of the city. In
case of insurrection, riot, pestilence, conflagration, flood or other public
necessity requiring immediate operation of any local law or ordinance
or amendment thereto, or any rule or regulation adopted by the
Common Council or any board or commission, such local law,
ordinance, amendment, rule or regulation shall take effect as soon as
approval thereof has been made by the Mayor and the same has been
posted in two (2) public places in each ward of the city.
B. Whenever a local law, after its passage by the Common Council, shall be
presented to the Mayor for approval, he shall, within ten (10) days
thereafter, fix a day for a public hearing concerning such local law and
cause public notice of the time and place of such hearing to be given.
§ C4-1 PORT JERVIS CODE § C4-3
C:24
§ C4-4. Fiscal year.
The fiscal year of the city shall commence on the first day of January and
conclude on the thirty-first day of December.
§ C4-5. Budget preparation and annual reports. [Amended 5-27-86
by L.L. No. 2-198613]
The City Clerk-Treasurer shall, on or before the first day of September in
each year, notify the heads of all departments, agencies and boards of the
city, including the Mayor and Common Council, in writing, to submit to him
on or before the first day of October in each year their estimates of revenues
and expenses in such form as he may require. On or before the 15th day of
October in each year, the City Clerk-Treasurer shall submit to the Mayor a
tentative budget in such form as may be required by the Mayor or by law.
§ C4-6. Annual city tax levy; maximum amount thereof.
Such notice shall be given by publication for two (2) successive days
in the official newspaper published in the city. Such hearing shall be
held not earlier than five (5) days after the day of the last publication
of such notice. Such notice shall contain the title of the local law
and an explanatory statement concerning the same. The Mayor shall
preside at such hearing and afford an opportunity for public hearing
concerning such local law. Such hearing may be adjourned from time
to time, but an adjournment shall not operate to extend the time of the
Mayor to approve such local law or return it to the Common Council
with his objections, pursuant to the Municipal Home Rule Law. In case
of insurrection, riot, pestilence, conflagration, flood or other public
necessity requiring immediate operation of any local law, however, the
public hearing required by the provisions of this subsection may be
omitted at the discretion of the Mayor, and such local law shall take
effect as otherwise provided by this Charter or by law.
A. The Common Council may raise, by a tax upon the real and personal
property assessable in said city in each year, certain amounts which
shall be estimated and designated each year for the purpose of
defraying the general and contingent expenses of the city, including the
payment of all salaries and other expenses not otherwise provided for,
to be designated the general fund.
B. The aggregate annual tax levy for the purposes specified in Subsection
A above shall not exceed an amount equal to one and one-half percent
(1 1/2%) of the average full valuation of taxable real estate in the City of
Port Jervis for the five (5) years preceding the year for which the tax
levy is being determined. [Amended 9-27-1982 by L.L. No. 7-1982,
approved 10-11-1982; 5-29-1984 by L.L. No. 5-1984, approved
6-25-198414]
13.Editor's Note: This local law was repassed 7-14-1986 after disapproval by the Mayor.
§ C4-3 CHARTER § C4-6
C:25
§ C4-7. Adoption of budget and tax levy. [Amended 5-27-86 by L.L.
No. 2-198615; 5-22-2017 by L.L. No. 9-2017, approved 5-22-2017]
The Mayor shall, on or before the 15th day of November in each year,
present to the Common Council, a tentative budget, which shall include
an estimate of the revenues and expenses necessary to conduct the public
business of the City of Port Jervis for the ensuing fiscal year, together with
an estimate of the amount deemed necessary to be raised in the annual
city tax levy. The tentative budget shall have attached thereto a schedule
of the salaries of all city officers and employees. The tentative budget shall
be prepared in such detail as to specify the amount appropriated to each
department, agency, board and office. At any time after the tentative budget
and proposed tax levy are submitted by the Mayor to the Common Council,
the Common Council may consider such tentative budget and proposed tax
levy and revise any estimates contained therein. On or before the 10th
day of November in each year, the Common Council shall give notice of a
public hearing on the proposed budget. Such notice shall be published in
the official city newspaper once, at least five (5) days before such public
hearing is held. In no event shall the public hearing on the tentative budget
be held later than the 30th day of November in each year. On or before
the 31st day of December in each year, the Common Council shall adopt a
final budget for the ensuing fiscal year and shall finally determine the total
amount to be raised by taxes in the annual city tax levy. The total amount to
be raised by taxes shall not exceed in aggregate the amount limited therefor
by this Charter. Such adoption and determination shall be subject to a veto
of the Mayor or be passed over his veto, as is otherwise provided in the
Charter. In the event that the Common Council is unable to muster the vote
of at least two-thirds (2/3) of the total members of the Council in office so as
C. Amounts necessary to meet the principal and interest of the bonded and
other indebtedness of the city shall not be included within the maximum
levy set forth in Subsection B above. [Amended 9-27-1982 by L.L.
No. 7-1982, approved 10-11-1982]
D. Notwithstanding the provisions of Subdivision 1 of Section 11 of the
Municipal Home Rule Law or of any other general or special law, the
limitation imposed by Subsections B and C of this section on the amount
that may be raised by tax in any one (1) year may be removed or raised
by local law subject to referendum on petition in accordance with
Section 24 of the Municipal Home Rule Law, provided, however, that
such local law shall be consistent with Sections 10 and 11 of Article VIII
of the New York Constitution.
E. Nothing contained in this Charter shall prevent the city from financing
any of the above expenditures pursuant to the Local Finance Law,
except those set forth in Subsection C of this section.
14.Editor's Note: This local law was subject to permissive referendum; no valid petition
requesting said referendum having been filed, said local law was deemed duly adopted on
8-10-1984.
15.Editor's Note: This local law was repassed 7-14-1986 after disapproval by the Mayor.
§ C4-6 PORT JERVIS CODE § C4-7
C:26
to override a budget veto by the Mayor as required by Section C4-2 of the
Port Jervis City Charter, or the Common Council fails to adopt a budget for
the next ensuing fiscal year by December 31st each year, the budget for the
current fiscal year with all contractual increases and obligations for the next
ensuing fiscal year, shall become the adopted budget for the next ensuing
fiscal year.
§ C4-8. General legislative powers; funds from which expenditures
are payable.
A. The general legislative powers of said city for all proper municipal
purposes, except such powers as may be vested in other authorities,
boards or officers, shall be vested in the Common Council thereof. The
Common Council shall provide for lighting the streets, public buildings
and public places of said city; for the construction, maintenance,
improvement, repairing and cleaning of the streets, sidewalks,
crosswalks, culverts, bridges, gutters, public grounds and parks of the
city and improving the channels of all streams passing through the city;
for removing obstructions therefrom and for covering the same by
arches and keeping them in repair; and for the paving and sprinkling of
the streets; for the construction, maintenance, improvement, repairing
and cleaning of the sewers; for the maintenance of the Fire
Department, as provided in this Charter; for the maintenance of the
Police Department, as provided in this Charter; for the furnishing of
pure and wholesome water for public purposes of said city, the
expenses of which shall be payable from the Water Fund; shall provide
office room for the various officers of said city as is herein provided, and
may furnish necessary office room for any of the other officers of said
city; shall furnish necessary office furniture, books and stationery to all
the officers of said city and reimburse all officers of said city for
disbursements necessarily made for the benefit of said city; shall keep
in proper repair all the public buildings of the city; may require all
officers of the city to furnish reports and information of estimates
whenever deemed proper by the Common Council; may employ a Pound
Keeper, a Sealer of Weights and Measures and such other employees of
the city as may be necessary to execute the work which the Common
Council has authorized or required or caused to be executed, and if not
otherwise provided herein, may fix their compensation. All
expenditures made or incurred by the Common Council or any
authority, board or officer of said city, not chargeable under this Charter
to any other city fund, shall be payable from the general fund. The
expense incurred for each local improvement which is chargeable to
neighboring property owners and collectible by local assessment, if
advanced by the city in anticipation of the collection of a local
assessment, shall be payable from the general fund.
B. The Common Council shall also have power to prescribe and define
such powers and duties of officers of said city as are not specified in this
Charter, and are not inconsistent therewith; to call public hearings for
§ C4-7 CHARTER § C4-8
C:27
§ C4-9. Extraordinary expenditures.
Whenever the Common Council shall resolve, by the affirmative vote of twothirds
(2/3) of its members, that an extraordinary expenditure ought, for
the benefit of the city, to be made for any specific purpose set forth in the
resolution, including, but not limited to, the purchase of real property or
the construction by the city of a new building or buildings, it shall make
an estimate of the sum necessary therefor and for all such purposes, if
there be more than one (1), and publish such resolutions and estimate
once in each week for two (2) successive weeks in the official newspaper,
together with a notice that at a time and place therein specified a special
election of the electors of the city will be held to decide whether the
amount of such expenditures shall be raised by tax. All provisions of law
prescribing the duties of inspectors of elections and false swearing and
fraudulent voting thereat shall, so far as applicable, apply to the special
elections held hereunder, and the members of the Common Council or their
designees shall act as the inspectors of such election. Any person who
would be qualified to vote at a general election shall be qualified to vote
at such special election. The election shall be by ballot or voting machine,
and each ballot or voting machine shall contain a brief statement of each
purpose for which such expenditure is required and the amount thereof,
and be in the form required by the Election Law for holding elections
upon questions submitted. The inspectors shall, at the time and place
designated as aforesaid, sit without intermission, from 1:00 p.m. to 7:00
p.m., prevailing time, to receive the ballots cast at such special election,
and shall deposit the same in a specific ballot box to be provided by the
city or recorded on the voting machine or machines provided by the city.
If the right to vote of any person offering to vote at such special election
be challenged by any other person entitled to vote thereat, an inspector of
the election shall administer to him the following oath: "You do swear that
you are an elector of said city and that you have not voted at this election?"
After he shall take such oath, if he shall be a registered voter of the City of
Port Jervis, his vote shall be received. The Common Council shall canvass
the votes cast immediately after closing the polls and immediately make a
certificate, stating the whole number of ballots voted at such election, and
the whole number for and against each special tax, and cause the result of
the election so certified to be entered in its minutes. The Common Council
shall cause the sum or sums of money thus voted to be assessed, levied and
raised with and in addition to other taxes in and upon the next assessment
roll. No more than one (1) such election shall be held in the city in one
(1) year, except by the unanimous vote of the Common Council. After such
special tax or taxes shall have been authorized as herein provided, the
Common Council may proceed to authorize the expenditure of the amount
thereof during the fiscal year for which such tax or taxes are to be levied,
for the purpose or purposes specified in its published statement aforesaid
and sanctioned by such election.
the inhabitants of said city whenever in its judgment the public
interests require the same.
§ C4-8 PORT JERVIS CODE § C4-10
C:28
§ C4-10. Audit of claims by the Common Council and payment
thereof.
All accounts, claims and demands against said city of whatever nature shall
be made out in items and verified by the affidavit of the claimant, or his
duly authorized agent, and presented to the Common Council for audit at
least two (2) days before the regular meeting of the Common Council at
which such accounts, claims or demands are to be acted upon; and the
Mayor, the City Clerk-Treasurer and such Councilman as the Mayor may
designate are hereby constituted a Board of Audit to examine and audit all
such accounts, claims and demands; and it shall be the duty of such Board
to make such examination and audit of all accounts, claims and demands,
so filed, before the next regular meeting of such Common Council; and
for the purpose of inquiring into and ascertaining the correctness and
legality thereof, it is hereby empowered to take proofs on oath in relation
thereto, and shall report thereon to the Common Council with its reasons
for recommending or rejecting the payment of such account, claim or
demand or any item or items thereof, and the Common Council shall then
hear, examine and determine the same. The Common Council may prescribe
the form of affidavit to be annexed to any such claim, account or demand
against said city. No account, claim or demand shall be presented to said
Common Council by the City Clerk-Treasurer unless the same shall have
been filed with him at least two (2) days before the meeting at which the
same is to be acted upon, and all accounts, claims or demands, audited and
allowed by the Common Council, shall be paid by the City Clerk-Treasurer
on a warrant signed by the Mayor and City Clerk-Treasurer, specifying the
amount so audited and allowed and the fund from which it is payable. The
City Clerk-Treasurer shall keep a record of every such warrant and shall
retain and file in his office all such audited accounts, claims and demands
for which a warrant has been issued, and number the same consecutively to
correspond with the number of the warrant issued therefor, and kept for the
time required by law.
§ C4-11. Improvements and removal of nuisances at expense of
owner.
The Common Council shall have the power to direct the digging down,
draining or filling up of lots whenever deemed necessary to prevent injury
to the streets, sidewalks or crosswalks, at the expense of the owner of
such lots; to direct the sweeping and cleaning of the streets by persons
owning or occupying the premises fronting thereon; to order and regulate
the planting, removing, rearing, trimming and preserving of ornamental and
shade trees in the city at the expense of the owners of property fronting
thereon;16 to regulate and provide for the erection of a railing or guard
along the streets and sidewalks in exposed and dangerous places,17 and
to compel the payment of the expenses thereof by the abutting owners; to
require any building, fence or other erection within the lines of any street
16.Editor's Note: See Ch. 492, Trees.
17.Editor's Note: See Ch. 464, Streets, Sidewalks and Public Property, Arts. I and III.
§ C4-10 CHARTER § C4-11
C:29
to be removed therefrom by the owner or occupant of the abutting property,
and in case of his neglect so to remove the same, to cause its removal at
the expense of such owner or occupant; to compel the owner or occupant
of any building or wall which may be dangerous or in an unsafe condition
on account of fire or otherwise to render the same safe, or to take down
and remove the same, and in case of his neglect so to do, to cause it to be
taken down or removed at the expense of the owner or occupant;18 to direct
the owner or occupant of any building used for public entertainments or
other public purposes to provide the same with suitable and sufficient fire
escapes and means of exit in case of fire, in the manner provided by law,
and in case of the failure or neglect of such owner or occupant so to do,
to do such work at the expense of the owner or occupant or to cause the
discontinuance of the use of the same for such purpose; to authorize any
city officers, or any person designated by the Common Council, to inspect
any place or places, to ascertain whether the same are safe, and, if not,
to require the same to be made safe, and if the owner or occupant thereof
shall neglect or refuse so to do, to cause the same to be made safe at the
expense of the owner or occupant or to cause the discontinuance of the use
and occupation of the same. The Common Council shall also have the power
to prevent any encumbrance, encroachment or obstruction in or upon any
street, alley, sidewalk, crosswalk, highway or public ground of said city;19
to regulate or prevent the deposit of any building material in or upon such
streets, alleys, sidewalks, crosswalks, highways or public grounds;20 and
in case of neglect or refusal of any person who shall have caused such
encroachment, encumbrance, obstruction or deposit contrary to any rule,
local law or ordinance, or of the owner or occupant of any premises upon
which shall be any building, fence or other obstruction or thing encroaching
upon, encumbering or obstructing any street, alley, sidewalk, crosswalk,
highway or public ground, to remove the same after being notified so to
do, shall have power to remove the same, at the expense of such person or
such owner or occupant; to compel the owner or occupant of any premises
in said city to remove all dirt, snow and ice from the sidewalks and gutters,
including the culverts, adjoining such premises, and in case of neglect or
refusal of the owner or occupant of said premises to remove the same, to
cause the same to be done at the expense of the owner or occupant;21 to
regulate and superintend the laying of all gas and other pipes; to fix the
grade at which such pipes shall be laid; and to compel the laying or relaying
of the same in accordance with such established grade; to require any
individual, company or corporation, after laying, relaying or repairing such
pipes in any street, alley or highway in said city, to put such street, alley
or highway in good condition or repair;22 to remove without unnecessary
delay all encumbrances and obstructions which such individual, corporation
or company may have placed or caused to be placed in such street, alley
18.Editor's Note: See Ch. 234, Buildings, Dangerous.
19.Editor's Note: See Ch. 464, Streets, Sidewalks and Public Property, Arts. I and III.
20.Editor's Note: See Ch. 464, Streets, Sidewalks and Public Property, Art. III.
21.Editor's Note: See Ch. 464, Streets, Sidewalks and Public Property, Art. IV.
22.Editor's Note: See Ch. 464, Streets, Sidewalks and Public Property, Art. I.
§ C4-11 PORT JERVIS CODE § C4-11
C:30
or highway; to require such individual, corporation or company to keep
proper signal lights burning at night and proper guards at all times, at
all holes, ditches and places which shall have been rendered dangerous
to persons traveling such streets, alleys or highways; and in case such
individual, corporation or company shall neglect or refuse to do any of the
acts required of him or it by this section, after being notified to do the same,
to cause the same to be done at the expense of such individual, corporation
or company; to prevent or regulate the construction and erection of any
building, awning, leader or other structure which shall project into or over
any street or sidewalk in said city,23 and the hanging or suspending of any
goods, signs or other things in or upon any such street or sidewalk; and
in case the owner or occupant of such premises shall neglect or refuse
to remove the same, after being notified to do so, to remove the same
at the expense of the owner or occupant; to designate such portions of
said city as it may deem proper within which no building, in whole or in
part, of wood or other combustible material shall be erected or brought;
to remove or provide for the removal thereof if so erected or brought in;
to prevent or regulate the construction, erection or use in any manner
dangerous, with regard to fire, of any building, chimney or fireplace, heater,
stove, stovepipe, repository of ashes or charcoal, boiler, furnace or other
apparatus or thing; to compel the owner or occupant of any premises,
upon which shall be found anything so constructed, erected or used, to put
the same in safe condition or remove the same, and in case the owner or
occupant shall neglect to put in safe condition or remove the same after
being notified so to do, to cause the same to be done at the expense of
the said owner or occupant, and for the purpose aforesaid the Common
Council shall have the power to enter into or upon or authorize the entry
into or upon any building or premises in the city; to prevent and abate
nuisances and determine what are such, either upon view or upon the
testimony of witnesses who may be examined under oath before it; and for
these purposes to enter into or upon any building or premises in said city;
and in case the owner or occupant of any building or premises, in or upon
which such nuisance may be found, shall neglect or refuse to abate the
same, after being directed so to do, to cause the same to be removed or
abated at the expense of the owner or occupant; to prohibit the erection in
an unsafe manner of any wall or other building in said city and to compel
the owner or occupant of any building or wall therein, which may be in an
unsafe condition, to render the same safe or to remove the same, and in
case of neglect or refusal of such owner or occupant to render such building
or wall safe or to remove the same, after being notified so to do, to cause the
same to be done at the expense of such owner or occupant; to prescribe the
length of notice to be given under any of the provisions of this section and
the manner of service thereof. The costs and expenses of carrying out any
of said provisions by the city or any of its officers shall be and are hereby
made a lien upon the premises or lots mentioned or referred to in any such
provision, and shall be added to the amount assessed against such land for
23.Editor's Note: See Ch. 464, Streets, Sidewalks and Public Property, Art. II.
§ C4-11 CHARTER § C4-11
C:31
the next general city tax, and the whole amount of such assessment shall be
collected in the same manner as general city taxes.
§ C4-12. Poles and wires.
The Common Council shall have the power to regulate the erection and
placing of telegraph, telephone and electric light and other poles, and the
stretching of wires in, over or upon streets or public grounds,24 or upon,
over or in front of any building within said city, and may require that all
telegraph, telephone or electric light wires be carried under the surface
of such streets within said city as said Common Council may designate, in
subways to be constructed wholly at the expense of the person, company or
corporation owning said wires or operating the same.
§ C4-13. Control of finances and property; local laws, ordinances,
rules and regulations of the Common Council.
The Common Council shall exercise all the powers conferred by this Charter
and the Constitution and general laws of the United States of America
and of the State of New York. The Common Council shall have the power
within said city to make, establish, publish, modify, annul and repeal local
laws, ordinances, rules and regulations for any of the purposes specified
in this Charter and the Constitution and general laws of the United States
of America and the State of New York, and for the following additional
purposes:
A. To preserve peace and good order.25
B. To restrain minors from being in public places at night within specified
hours when not attended by adult persons.
C. To determine the existence, and direct the removal of, a public nuisance
in any part of the city; and if the same be not removed within such time
as the Common Council shall direct, to cause the same to be removed at
the expense of the city, and to declare such expense to be a lien on the
lot whereon such nuisance has existed, and to enforce the collection of
such expense by leasing or selling the premises, in the manner provided
in this Charter for the collection of taxes or assessments, or by action
against the owners of said lot, or any other person who may have
erected, suffered or maintained such nuisance; and in case of the
nonremoval or abatement of any nuisance, the Common Council may
impose a penalty therefor and enforce the collection thereof, as
prescribed by this Charter.
D. To regulate the use of the streets and public places by pedestrians,
vehicles, streetcars, railways and locomotives and by other means of
public transportation;26 to regulate the speed of vehicles, railway
24.Editor's Note: See Ch. 267, Electrical Standards and Requirements.
25.Editor's Note: See Ch. 398, Peace and Good Order.
26.Editor's Note: See Ch. 505, Vehicles and Traffic.
§ C4-11 PORT JERVIS CODE § C4-13
C:32
engines, cars and streetcars through the city and prevent the
obstruction of streets thereby; to regulate the length of time they may
be allowed to stand upon and impede travel upon street crossings; to
regulate traffic in the streets and public places;27 to regulate the setting
of poles and stringing of wires by telegraph, telephone, electric light
and other utility companies or by individuals,28 and the construction of
underground installations for such wires; to regulate the cleaning of
streets, alleys, lanes and public places and the sidewalks and gutters
therein; to regulate the removal of ice, hail, snow and water therefrom
and from the roofs of buildings abutting thereon;29 to regulate and
prevent the throwing of debris, dirt and garbage thereon, and to
regulate the carting, drawing away and deposit or disposal thereof;30
to regulate animals' being driven, led or ridden therein; to regulate
the use thereof for signs, signposts, awnings, awning posts and public
fountains; to regulate or prevent the driving of wagons, barrows, carts,
bicycles or other vehicles and all animals over or upon any sidewalk; to
regulate or prohibit coasting, bicycling and skating in the streets and
public places; to regulate the opening of street surfaces,31 the laying of
gas and water mains and the erection of lampposts or other devices for
lighting the streets; to prohibit or regulate the erection or construction
of any stoop, step, platform, bay window, cellar, area, stairs, descent
or ascent into any building, or any erection or projections from any
building or otherwise, in, over or upon any street or sidewalk, or the
removal of any house or building through the streets of the city; and
generally to preserve the streets and public places of the city free from
all obstructions and disturbances therein or injury thereto and from any
interference with the free peaceable use thereof by the public.32
E. To direct the location of all structures for storing combustibles and
explosive substances, and to regulate the keeping, selling and
conveyance thereof.
F. To establish and build and regulate public pounds, police and fire
stations and jails within said city.
G. To restrain the running at large of animals, and to authorize the
confining, impounding and the sale of the same, and the penalties to be
incurred therefore.33
H. To prevent the discharge of firearms and the making of any noise which
may tend to disturb the peace of the city.
27.Editor's Note: See Ch. 505, Vehicles and Traffic.
28.Editor's Note: See Ch. 267, Electrical Standards and Requirements.
29.Editor's Note: See Ch. 464, Streets, Sidewalks and Public Property, Art. IV.
30.Editor's Note: See Ch. 457, Solid Waste, and Ch. 464, Streets, Sidewalks and Public
Property, Art. IV.
31.Editor's Note: See Ch. 464, Streets, Sidewalks and Public Property, Art. I.
32.Editor's Note: See Ch. 464, Streets, Sidewalks and Public Property.
33.Editor's Note: See Ch. 215, Animals, Arts. I and III.
§ C4-13 CHARTER § C4-13
C:33
I. To direct the keeping and returning of vital statistics.
J. To supply the city with pure and wholesome water; to maintain and
regulate that supply;34 to have exclusive care, custody and control of all
the reservoirs, buildings, engines, pumps, hydrants, pipes, mains and
all other things and property now owned or hereafter acquired and
used by the city in connection with its water supply; to contract with
any water company for a supply of pure and wholesome water for said
city; to regulate and keep in repair the public fountains in said city, and
to regulate the taking and using of water for the same.
K. To regulate, license and restrain hawking and peddling in the streets
and sales from house to house,35 and the time, mode, manner and place
of holding auctions or public sales of merchandise or personal
property,36 and to prohibit such sales on any of the sidewalks or
crosswalks of said city or the streets of the same; to license sales at
auction in said city of goods or property belonging to persons not
residents of said city, or such goods as shall have been purchased with
intent to sell the same at auction, and to prevent such sales without
license, and to require the payment to the city of such sums for such
licenses as the Common Council shall provide.37
L. To license and regulate taxicabs and other means of public
transportation, porters, cartmen, hackmen and drivers, operators and
owners of taxicabs and all other vehicles for the transportation of
passengers within the city, to fix their rates of compensation and to
require them to have licenses.38
M. To regulate the planting of shade trees and ornamental trees along the
streets and sidewalks of said city and to prevent the injury or
destruction of such trees;39 and to prevent the injury or defacement of
fences, posts, buildings and other structures in said city.
N. To permit building material to be deposited on the street in front of any
lot, to such extent and for such time and under such regulations as it
may prescribe.40
O. To designate and alter the names of the streets, avenues, alleys and
public places of the city and the numbers of lots and buildings, and to
compel the owners or occupants of buildings to affix thereto the proper
numbers thereof in such manner as it may direct.
34.Editor's Note: See Ch. 513, Water, and Ch. A615, Water Rules and Regulations.
35.Editor's Note: See Ch. 403, Peddling and Soliciting.
36.Editor's Note: See Ch. 220, Auctions and Auctioneers.
37.Editor's Note: See Ch. 220, Auctions and Auctioneers.
38.Editor's Note: See Ch. 479, Taxicabs.
39.Editor's Note: See Ch. 492, Trees.
40.Editor's Note: See Ch. 464, Streets, Sidewalks and Public Property, Art. III.
§ C4-13 PORT JERVIS CODE § C4-13
C:34
§ C4-14. Licensing occupations.
Where a license is required by the general laws of the state, this Charter or
any local law or ordinance, the Common Council shall fix the fee for such
license. All applications for such license shall be made to the City Clerk-
Treasurer, who shall refer such application as may be provided by law, local
law or ordinance.
§ C4-15. Official newspaper.
The Common Council shall, at the first meeting in each year, or as soon
thereafter as practicable, designate a newspaper of general circulation
in said city, and, if there be more than one (1) newspaper of general
circulation therein, may designate two (2) such newspapers, to publish
notices, bylaws, rules, local laws, ordinances, resolutions and regulations
and such reports and other matters as the Common Council may direct
to be published in the official newspaper or newspapers of the city. The
newspaper or newspapers so designated shall be the official newspapers of
the city for the ensuing year for the purpose aforesaid and until the next
annual designation. As used in this Charter, the term "official newspapers"
means the newspaper of general circulation in said city and so designated
as the official newspaper of the city, and if there be more than one (1)
newspaper of general circulation therein, the two (2) newspapers so
designated as the official newspapers of said city. The affidavit of an officer
or employee designated by said official newspaper shall be presumptive
evidence of such publication.
§ C4-16. Transaction of business by boards, departments and
officers.
The Common Council shall have power to make such rules and regulations
and adopt such methods for the convenient transaction of the business of
the city by the several boards, departments and officers thereof as are not
inconsistent with the duties and powers given such boards, departments
and officers by this Charter and general laws.
P. To regulate and restrain the emission of smoke, soot, ashes and
offensive and deleterious gases or odors from any source whatsoever
within the city.
Q. To enact all such general local laws, ordinances, rules and regulations
not inconsistent with the provisions of this Charter, or with the
Constitution or laws of the United States or of this state as it shall deem
expedient for the good government of the city; and to provide for the
enforcement of the same by such fines, penalties, forfeitures and/or
imprisonment as may be prescribed.41
41.Editor's Note: For penalty provisions applying generally to offenses against ordinances
and local laws of the city, see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ C4-13 CHARTER § C4-16
C:35

ARTICLE V
Special Assessments
§ C5-1. Common Council to provide manner of paying expense of
improvements.
§ C5-2. District of assessment.
After the Common Council shall have declared its intention to make any
improvement, except as to sewers, before ordering the same done, the
Common Council shall establish a district of assessment, which shall
contain all the property which in the judgment of the Common Council is
likely to be benefited by such improvement, and may at any time enlarge
said district, and cause notices served upon all persons within such
enlargement as provided by § C5-3 of this Charter.
§ C5-3. Notice of proposed improvement.
If a district of assessment has been established, then upon the passage
of a resolution of the Common Council declaring its intention to make
an improvement, the expense of which is payable wholly or partly by
assessment, the City Clerk-Treasurer shall prepare and sign a written notice
of the proposed improvement, specifying therein the time during which
any person interested may file his objection thereto with the City Clerk-
Treasurer, which time shall not expire before the next regular meeting
of the Common Council, and that in case no objection is filed within the
time specified, all persons interested will be deemed to have acquiesced in
the proposed improvement. Such notice shall either be published at least
once in the official newspaper of the city at least ten (10) days before the
expiration of the time for objection thereto, or shall be served upon each
such owner of property within the district of assessment fixed for such
improvement, as follows: by delivering to him personally a copy thereof or
A. The Common Council may by resolution authorize or direct the making
of any improvement which it is empowered or required by law to make.
In any resolution authorizing or directing the making of any
improvement, or in any subsequent resolution, the Common Council
shall have power to provide that the whole of the expense of any such
improvement shall be borne by the city at large; or, subject to the
limitations provided by law, that the whole or a part or portion of such
expense (which portion shall be specified in such resolution) shall be
assessed upon the property deemed benefited.
B. No expenditures for any improvement in said city, the expense of which
is to be defrayed wholly or partially by assessment upon the property
deemed benefited, shall be incurred, unless the Common Council shall
first by resolution declare its intention to make such local improvement
and give notice thereof as provided by § C5-3 of this Charter, which
declaration shall be made without preliminary petition for or consent to
such improvement.
§ C5-1 CHARTER § C5-3
C:37
by leaving a copy thereof at his residence in said city with some member
of his family or some person of suitable age and discretion, or if he resides
elsewhere, by service as above described on his agent or other person
having the property in charge, or by depositing it in the post office properly
enclosed and the postage prepaid thereon, directed to such owner at his
last known place of residence. If there be two (2) or more owners of any
one piece of property, service on any one (1) of them shall be sufficient
notice to the owners of such piece of property. Affidavits of the service
and publication of such notice shall be filed in the office of the City Clerk-
Treasurer and the affidavits or record thereof, or a certified copy of either,
shall in all courts and places, actions or proceedings be prima facie proof of
the facts stated therein.
§ C5-4. Objections to improvements and decision thereon.
Objections to such improvement must be made in writing and filed with
the City Clerk-Treasurer within the time specified in such notice, and the
Common Council may, at any regular meeting within two (2) months after
the expiration of such ten (10) days, subject to the Mayor's veto as in other
cases, order the improvement to be made.
§ C5-5. Assessment of costs.
Upon the completion of such improvement, the Common Council shall
assess so much of the portion of such expenses as are not payable by
the city at large upon the property lying within the district of assessment
established for such improvements, if one has been established, and if not,
then in a proportion equal to the ratio of the frontage to the total frontage
affected by such improvement. Except as herein otherwise provided, the
cost or expense of any local improvement shall be deemed to include the
entire expense thereof, including inspection.
§ C5-6. Assessment roll for special assessments.
The City Clerk-Treasurer or City Assessor, whichever shall be designated
by the Common Council, shall make out an assessment roll and a duplicate
thereof, both of which shall be deemed originals, and set the amount of the
tax assessed opposite the name of the person, corporation, association or
property assessed, and shall leave the said rolls at the office of the City
Clerk-Treasurer, and thereupon give public notice in the official newspaper,
once in each week for two (2) successive weeks, and by posting a copy of
said notice in two (2) public places in said city, that such assessment rolls
have been prepared and will remain at the office of the City Clerk-Treasurer
for the term of fifteen (15) days from the date of such notice, during which
time any person interested may examine said rolls, and at the expiration of
fifteen (15) days, and on the day and hour and at the place to be specified
in such notice, a quorum of the Common Council will attend and hear any
objections to said assessment and proceed to confirm the same. At the time
and place named in said notice, or at any other time or place to which the
Common Council may from time to time adjourn said hearing, any person
§ C5-3 PORT JERVIS CODE § C5-6
C:38
interested may appear before the Common Council and apply to have said
special assessment roll altered or corrected as he may deem just. After
hearing all such applications, the Common Council may proceed to make
such alterations and corrections in said special assessment roll as it may
deem just, and when completed, shall by resolution confirm the same, and
shall thereupon sign said roll and file it with the City Clerk-Treasurer. The
said assessment shall thereupon be and become final and conclusive upon
all parties interested.
§ C5-7. Assessment payable in installments.
The Common Council may, at the time of declaring its intention to make
such improvement, as provided in § C5-1B of this Charter, or at the time
of the confirmation of the said assessment, as hereinbefore provided,
determine by resolution that the said assessment may be paid either in
five (5) equal installments or in such annual installments as would be
equivalent to the annual payments of principal and interest made by the
city upon any indebtedness which the city has incurred for the purpose
of financing the amount of the cost of such improvement assessed against
the land deemed benefited, and the amortization period of such amount
shall continue for the same length of time as the amortization period on
the city's indebtedness. If the Common Council shall determine to permit
the payment of said assessment in installments, it may provide either for
the payment of the first installment according to the provisions of § C5-8
following or that the same shall be collected at the time of the collection
of the next city tax thereafter, and the remaining annual installments at
the time of the collection of city taxes; and the City Clerk-Treasurer shall
insert in the assessment rolls for city taxes for such years the amounts
of such installments as they become due in each of such years, together
with the amount of such installments in arrears, if any, and shall collect
the same, with the interest due thereon, at the same time and in the
same manner as provided for the collection of city taxes, and the warrant
attached to such roll shall provide for the collection of such installment
or installments. Whenever payment of such assessment is permitted to be
made under the five-equal-annual-installment plan, as herein provided, each
installment, except the first, shall bear interest at the rate of not less than
six per centum (6%), to be estimated from the day following the expiration
of the forty (40) days allowed in the collection of said first installment, such
interest to be in addition to the fee, percentage or interest provided for
in § C6-17 of this Charter, provided, however, that the owner or owners
of any parcel of land or real estate, franchises, right-of-way, easement or
other property affected by said assessment may pay any or all installments
remaining unpaid, with accrued interest, fee or percentage, at any time;
and, if any such installments, including the first, shall not be paid within
the period of forty (40) days as provided in § C6-17 of this Charter, the
remaining installments of the amount assessed against said parcel of land,
real estate, franchise, easement, right-of-way or other property, together
with any accrued interest, fee or percentage, shall immediately become due
and payable and may be collected in the same manner as is provided in this
Charter for the collection of county or city taxes by sale.
§ C5-6 CHARTER § C5-8
C:39
§ C5-8. Collection of local assessments.
The Common Council shall, provided that it determines that the whole
of said assessment or the first installment thereof shall be immediately
collected, cause the proper warrant to be attached to one (1) of said
assessment rolls, and to the other a copy of such warrant. Said warrants
shall be signed by the Mayor, or a majority of the members of the Common
Council, and delivered to the City Clerk-Treasurer. Whenever the
assessment roll and the warrant for its collection for any improvement shall
be left with the City Clerk-Treasurer, he shall, as Collector of Taxes, receive
the amount of the assessment thereon, or the amount of the installment
if such assessment be collectible in installments, for the same time, and
with the same fees as directed herein for the collection of city taxes, and
shall give notice to that effect immediately upon receipt of said assessment
roll, by publication thereof in the official newspaper of the city, in the same
manner and for the same time as provided herein for the collection of city
taxes. If any such assessment or installment, as the case may be, shall
remain unpaid at the expiration of six (6) months from the time of the
delivery of said assessment roll and warrant to the City Clerk-Treasurer,
the City Clerk-Treasurer, as Collector of Taxes, shall make a return of his
warrant to the Common Council, which shall proceed in the same manner
directed in this Charter for the collection of county or city taxes by sale. The
whole amount of any such assessment shall be a lien upon the lands, real
estate, franchise, easements and rights-of-way so assessed from the day of
the confirmation of the same by the Common Council. The Common Council
may, in its discretion, sue for and recover, in a civil action, of the owner any
sum which shall remain unpaid after the expiration of six (6) months from
the date of the attachment of the warrant to the assessment roll.
§ C5-9. Application of proceeds.
The proceeds from the collection of the installments of any assessment shall
constitute a fund for the purpose of paying the expense of the improvement
for which the assessment was levied and the portion of such obligations
which shall have been applied to the financing of the share of the expense
of such improvement which was assessed upon the property benefited.
§ C5-10. Opening, altering or extending streets.42
Whenever the Common Council shall intend to lay out, alter, widen, extend,
contract or discontinue any street, lane, alley, highway or public grounds
in said city, and the lands of any person or corporation, or any right or
easement therein, will be necessary for that purpose; and whenever the
Common Council shall intend to acquire lands, rights or easements therein
for any other purpose mentioned in this Charter, it shall cause the same to
be surveyed and monuments placed showing the line thereof, and a map
of the same to be made, showing the location and depth, if underground,
of all utility installations, which shall be filed in the City Clerk-Treasurer's
42.Editor's Note: Amended during codification (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. III).
§ C5-8 PORT JERVIS CODE § C5-10
C:40
office, and a copy thereof to be filed in the County Clerk's office, showing
upon such map the lots, tracts and parcels of land and rights or easements
therein which are deemed necessary to be taken, and the commencement,
course and termination of the street, lane, alley, highway or park proposed
to be laid out, widened, extended or altered, or other work or improvement
proposed to be made in or through the land so to be taken. And for that
purpose the Common Council and those acting by its direction shall have
power to enter upon any grounds in said city. The Common Council shall
then declare, by resolution, its intention to take and appropriate the said
property for the proposed improvement, and thereafter it may purchase
the land or right or easement therein deemed necessary of the owner
or owners thereof, and make him or them such compensation as it shall
judge reasonable, upon receiving from such owner or owners a conveyance
thereof to the city. In case the Common Council is unable to agree with the
owner or owners for the purchase of any real estate or lands or right or
easement therein required for the purpose aforesaid, it shall acquire the
same by condemnation proceedings under the provisions of the Eminent
Domain Procedure Law of this state.
§ C5-11. Assessment of benefits.
After such damages shall have been ascertained and determined, said
Common Council shall declare a district of assessment therefor, and shall
then direct the commissioners making the award to assess the amount
awarded for damages, with the commissioners' fees, specifying the
aggregate amount of the same, upon the property within such district of
assessment. The commissioners shall proceed to assess such amount upon
the property benefited by such improvement in a just and equitable manner
as near as may be in proportion to the benefits received; such assessment
shall be made in the same manner as other local assessments, except that
such commissioners shall direct such part of said expenses to be assessed
upon the city, and such part locally, as they shall deem just; the powers and
duties of the commissioners shall be the same as those of assessors. When
the assessment roll shall be filed, the same proceedings shall thereupon be
had, and the Common Council shall possess the same powers in reference
thereto and proceed in the same manner as hereinbefore provided with
reference to other assessments. When there are infants or other
incompetent persons, owners whose property is affected by any such
improvement, the County or Supreme Court, or a Judge or Justice thereof,
may, on application, in behalf of such infants or incompetent persons
appoint guardians ad litem to protect their interests and prosecute appeals.
§ C5-12. Payment of compensation.
Immediately after the final determination of all proceedings in which any
award shall have been made, the Common Council shall cause to be paid
or tendered to the respective owners the amount awarded to each,
respectively, less any sum which shall have been assessed against them for
any benefits on account of such improvement. In case any such owner shall
refuse the same, or be unknown, or nonresident of the city, or for any reason
§ C5-10 CHARTER § C5-12
C:41
be incapacitated from receiving the amount, or the right thereto be disputed
or doubtful, the Common Council may make payment of the portion to the
Commissioner of Finance of the County of Orange and file a statement of
facts and circumstances in each case, and a transcript of the report of the
commissioners relating to the ascertainment of the amount so paid in, with
the Clerk of Orange County. Upon such payment or tender, or payment's to
the Commissioner of Finance being fully made, the fee of the land shall be
vested in the city.
§ C5-13. Acquisition of privileges to dispose of stagnant or surface
water.43
The Common Council shall have the power to enter upon any lands or
grounds in the city and appropriate such property for the purpose of
conveying off any stagnant or surface water within or throughout the city,
and thereafter may purchase from the owner or owners thereof the land
or right or easement, whenever deemed necessary, and make him or them
such compensation as it shall deem reasonable and just, upon receiving
from such owner or owners a conveyance thereof to the city. In case the
said Common Council is unable to agree with the owner or owners for
the purchase of any real estate or land or right or easement required
therein for the purpose aforesaid, it shall acquire the same by condemnation
proceedings under the provisions of the Eminent Domain Procedure Law
of the state, proceeding in the same manner as obtaining lands for street
purposes elsewhere specified in this Charter.
§ C5-14. Construction and repair of sidewalks, curbstones and
gutters.
It shall be the duty of the owners and occupants of lands fronting on or
adjoining any of the streets or avenues in said city to construct and keep
in repair the sidewalks, curbs and gutters in front of their respective lots,
in such manner, at such times and of such material as the Common Council
may, by a resolution, ordinance or local law for that purpose, direct.44
Whenever the Common Council shall deem it necessary that any sidewalk,
curbstone or gutter be made, constructed, reset, relaid or repaired, it shall
prescribe, by resolution, ordinance or local law, the width and length of the
sidewalk, the material to be used, the form and manner of the construction
of the sidewalk, curbstone or gutter and the time within which the work
shall be done. Such improvements shall conform to the grade established,
or to be established before which improvements are made. The Common
Council shall cause to be served, at least twenty (20) days before the
expiration of the time so specified for such work to be done, upon the
owners or occupants of the land adjoining such sidewalk, curbstone or
gutter so to be improved as aforesaid, a copy of such resolution, ordinance
or local law, with a notice that if the same is not done within the specified
time by the owner or occupant of the adjoining land, it will be ordered done
43.Editor's Note: Amended during codification (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. III).
44.Editor's Note: See Ch. 464, Streets, Sidewalks and Public Property, Art. I.
§ C5-12 PORT JERVIS CODE § C5-14
C:42
by the said Common Council, and the cost thereof charged as hereinafter
provided. Such notice shall be served upon such owner or occupant by
delivering a copy thereof to him personally, or by leaving the same in his
absence with some person of suitable age and discretion residing with him,
if he be a resident of the city, or otherwise on his agent or other person
having charge of the property, or by depositing the same in the post office,
properly enclosed and the postage prepaid thereon, and directed to such
owner at his last known place of residence; in case such owner or his
place of residence is unknown and there be no resident agent or occupant
to the knowledge of the Common Council, such service may be made by
affixing a copy of such local law, ordinance or resolution and notice upon a
conspicuous part of the premises. The Common Council shall also, in case
service of such notice shall be otherwise than personal, cause a copy of such
resolution, ordinance or local law to be published at least once in the official
newspaper of said city at least fifteen (15) days before the expiration of the
time specified for such work to be done. If there be two (2) or more owners
of any one piece of property, service upon one (1) of them shall be sufficient.
Affidavits of the publication and service of such resolutions, ordinances or
local laws shall be filed and recorded, in the office of the Clerk-Treasurer
of said city, and the affidavits or the records thereof, or a certified copy of
either, shall in all courts and places, actions and proceedings be prima facie
evidence of the facts therein stated. In case any such improvement, act or
thing so required shall not be made, done or completed as required within
the time specified, the Common Council shall have power to make, do or
complete the same, and having done so, shall, without giving an further
or other notice, upon affidavit of the Director of Public Works, showing
the actual expense thereof, which affidavit shall be made and filed with
the City Clerk-Treasurer, proceed to assess upon each parcel or lot of land
the expense of the sidewalk, curbstone or gutter immediately adjoining
it, which assessment shall be final and conclusive upon all persons and
parties interested in said real estate or affected thereby, and the amount so
assessed, together with interest thereon, as herein stated, shall be a lien
on the lands and premises against which such assessment has been made.
Thereupon the Common Council shall cause to be sent to the owner of said
property, if his address be known, an itemized statement of the expense
of such improvement, and if such expense is not paid to the City Clerk-
Treasurer within thirty (30) days, the amount thereof, with interest at the
rate of twelve per centum (12%) per annum from the time of sending such
statement, shall be added to the amount assessed against such land for
the next general city tax, and the whole amount of such assessment and
interest shall be collected in the same manner and with the next general
city tax. If any such assessment shall remain unpaid at the expiration of six
(6) months from the time of delivery of said assessment roll and warrant
to the City Clerk-Treasurer, the Common Council may proceed in the same
manner directed in this Charter for the collection of county or city taxes by
sale. The Common Council may also, in its discretion, sue for and recover in
a civil action of the owner any sum which the city may have paid in making
such improvement. The gutters in those portions of streets paved shall be
kept in repair at the expense of the city. Whenever the grade of any sidewalk
§ C5-14 CHARTER § C5-14
C:43
has been established by said city and recorded, and has been conformed to
by the owner of such property, any change of grade thereafter made by the
city shall be made at the expense of the city.
§ C5-15. Taxes and assessments under this Article; lien of.
Every tax and assessment imposed under any of the provisions of this
Article shall be a lien upon all real estate against which the same shall be
assessed, from and after the filing of such assessment roll. No clerical or
immaterial error shall invalidate said assessment roll or the assessments
therein. In case any tax or assessment shall be void or shall have failed
for want of jurisdiction and for any irregularity in the levying or assessing
thereof under this title, the Common Council shall have power, and it shall
be its duty, to cause the same to be reassessed in a proper manner; if any
person shall have paid on a former assessment the same shall be credited;
or in case the payment exceed the amount assessed, the surplus shall be
refunded. In case the amount assessed for any improvement shall not be
sufficient to defray the expenses of such improvement, the Common Council
shall cause the amount of the deficiency to be assessed as hereinbefore
provided.
§ C5-14 PORT JERVIS CODE § C5-15
C:44
ARTICLE VI
The Assessment and Collection of Taxes45
§ C6-1. Taxable status date. [Amended 9-23-1985 by L.L. No.
6-1985, approved 10-15-1985]
The taxable status date of all real property assessable in the City of Port
Jervis shall be fixed for the succeeding fiscal year on the first day of March
in each year.
§ C6-2. Preparation and completion of assessment roll. [Amended
9-23-1985 by L.L. No. 6-1985, approved 10-15-1985]
A. The Assessor shall in each year, on or before May 1, prepare and file
with the City Clerk-Treasurer a tentative assessment roll of the taxable
real property within the city. In the assessment of any such real
property within the city for any purpose, it shall be sufficient to state
the name of any one of the owners and the street and number of any
building thereon. If the land be vacant or the building not numbered,
then the name of the street on which it fronts shall be given. If in the
preparation of the roll an error or omission is made in the description of
a parcel of real property or in entering or failing to enter the name of
the owner, last known owner or reputed owner, such omission shall not
prevent the levy, collection and enforcement of the payment of the taxes
thereon if the parcel can be identified and located with reasonable
certainty.
B. The Assessor shall forthwith cause a notice, in the manner and form
required by the Real Property Tax Law of the State of New York, to be
published once in the official newspaper of the city, stating that the
tentative assessment roll has been completed and filed with the City
Clerk-Treasurer and is available for public inspection by any person
until the fourth Tuesday in May. After publication of the notice and until
the fourth Tuesday of May, the City Clerk-Treasurer shall make the
tentative assessment roll available for public inspection.46
C. On the fourth Tuesday of May, the Board of Assessment Review will
meet to hear and determine complaints in relation to assessments
according to the provisions of the Real Property Tax Law. The members
of the Board of Assessment Review, or a majority of them, shall prepare
and verify a statement showing any changes determined to be made by
them in the assessments and deliver such statement to the Assessor.47
D. On or before the first day of July, the Assessor shall finally complete the
assessment roll and file a certified copy thereof in the office of the City
Clerk-Treasurer. The Assessor shall forthwith cause a notice, in the
45.Editor's Note: For certain exemptions from taxation and the imposition of specific taxes,
see Ch. 475, Taxation.
46.Editor's Note: Amended during codification (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. III).
47.Editor's Note: Amended during codification (See Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. III).
§ C6-1 CHARTER § C6-2
C:45
§ C6-3. Equalization and levy for state and county taxes by
Legislature of Orange County.
The Legislature of Orange County, after receiving the said certified copy
of the assessment roll, shall equalize the same with other tax districts of
the county as provided by law, and by resolution declare and direct the
amount of tax to be levied in said city for county and state purposes, and
shall thereupon cause the said tax so equalized to be extended, apportioned
and spread upon the assessment roll. A warrant of the County Legislature
shall be annexed to said roll, which shall thereupon become the tax roll of
the city, authorizing the City Clerk-Treasurer, as Tax Collector of the city, to
collect from those named in the assessment roll the several sums noted in
the column opposite their respective names, and pay over the same in the
manner directed in said warrant.
§ C6-4. Bond of the City Clerk-Treasurer for collection of state and
local taxes.
Within five (5) days of the issuance of the warrant for collection of taxes by
the Orange County Legislature to the City Clerk-Treasurer, said City Clerk-
Treasurer, as Collector of Taxes, shall execute to Orange County and to the
City of Port Jervis a bond in the amount of said taxes issued by a surety
company qualified to do business in the State of New York, providing that
he will faithfully discharge his duties as Collector of Taxes, pay over all
moneys received by him and account for said sums in the manner and time
provided by law. The bond, with the approval of the Mayor and Corporation
Council endorsed thereon, shall be delivered to the County Commissioner
of Finance, and upon his approval shall be filed in the office of the Orange
County Clerk. Thereafter, said bond shall be a lien on all the real property
held jointly or severally by the City Clerk-Treasurer, or his sureties, within
the county at the time of the filing thereof, and shall continue to be such lien
until its conditions, together with all costs and charges which may accrue
from the prosecution thereof, shall be satisfied and discharged by law. The
expense of securing such bond shall be paid by the city. The bond premium
so paid by the city, shall be included in the next ensuing levy of county taxes
upon the taxable property within the city and shall be repaid to the city from
the first moneys collected pursuant to such levy.
manner and form required by the Real Property Tax Law of the State
of New York, to be published once in the official newspaper, stating
that the assessment roll has been finally completed and a certified
copy thereof so filed for public inspection. One (1) certified copy of the
assessment roll shall remain on file and available for public inspection
in the office of the City Clerk-Treasurer until the first day of October. 48
48.Editor's Note: Amended during codification (See Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. III).
§ C6-2 PORT JERVIS CODE § C6-5
C:46
§ C6-5. Notice of receiving taxes. [Amended 12-22-1997 by L.L. No.
11-1997]
Upon receiving said tax roll and warrant, the City Clerk-Treasurer, as
Collector of Taxes, shall cause a notice thereof to be published once a week
for two (2) successive weeks, in the official newspaper, stating that he will
attend at his office with said roll and warrant for the month of January,
Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays excepted, from 9:00 a.m. to 4:00
p.m., prevailing time, to receive state and county taxes. All taxes paid within
said month of January shall be payable without fee, percentage or interest
thereon. On all taxes remaining unpaid after the 31st day of January, the
City Clerk-Treasurer shall collect 6% additional up to the first day of March
ensuing, and all taxes remaining unpaid after the first day of March shall
bear, and there shall be collected thereon, in addition, interest at the rate
of one per centum (1%) per month from the said first day of March, which
percentage and interest shall belong to the city.
§ C6-6. Proceedings of City Clerk-Treasurer in collecting state and
county tax after the first day of February.
If any such tax shall remain unpaid on the first day of February after
the delivery of the tax rolls and warrants to said City Clerk-Treasurer as
Collector of Taxes, he shall thereupon cause a written notice to be given to
every person residing in the city from whom such tax may be due, specifying
the amount of tax and the interest and penalties thereon, requiring the
same to be paid on or before the 15th day of February of the same year at
his office. Such notice may be served upon any such person personally, or
by leaving at his residence in said city, or by depositing the same in the post
office in said city, properly enclosed in a postpaid wrapper, directed to him
at his last known place of residence or business.
§ C6-7. Proceedings of City Clerk-Treasurer in collecting state and
county tax after the 31st day of January.
If any such tax shall remain unpaid on the first day of February, the City
Clerk-Treasurer may proceed to levy upon any personal property in the
County of Orange and sell the same. Such levy and sale and the disposition
of the proceeds thereof shall be made in accordance with the provisions of
the Real Property Tax Law of the State of New York.
§ C6-8. Payment of unpaid taxes.
If any such taxes shall remain unpaid at the expiration of six (6) months
after the same shall have become a lien, the City Clerk-Treasurer shall
report the amount of such unpaid taxes to the Common Council as provided
in § C6-19, and the Common Council shall cause the full amount thereof,
exclusive of interest and penalties, to be paid to the Commissioner of
Finance of Orange County. The full amount of such unpaid taxes reported
to the Common Council and paid to the County Commissioner of Finance as
herein provided shall be included in the next ensuing levy of county taxes
§ C6-5 CHARTER § C6-8
C:47
upon the taxable property within the city, and any tax anticipation notes
issued in anticipation of the collection of such taxes shall be paid from the
first moneys collected pursuant to such levy.
§ C6-9. Unpaid state and county taxes deemed city taxes after
payment thereof to county.
Upon payment by the city to the County Commissioner of Finance of the full
amount of unpaid state and county taxes, as hereinbefore provided, such
unpaid taxes, as set forth upon the state and county tax roll in and for the
city, shall be due and owing to the city, shall be deemed city taxes and
shall be a lien upon the real estate against which they were levied. The city
shall collect such taxes, together with the penalties and interest thereon, in
accordance with the provisions of law relating to the collection of city taxes,
and all provisions of law relating to ordinary city taxes shall apply to all such
taxes, penalties and interest.
§ C6-10. Assessments for city taxes.
For the purpose of the assessment of city taxes, the original assessment roll
made by the Assessor and hereinbefore required to be completed and filed
with the City Clerk-Treasurer by the first day of August in each year, or a
certified copy thereof made by the City Clerk-Treasurer and not used for the
assessment of state and county taxes, shall constitute the city assessment
roll for the ensuing year.
§ C6-11. Levying of city taxes and warrant for the collection thereof.
If a special election is required to be held in that year, then immediately
after the holding of such election, the Common Council shall cause the
amounts authorized to be raised for all city purposes to be levied and
assessed upon the property of each person, company, corporation or
association appearing on said assessment rolls as the owner and to be set
opposite the name of such person, company, corporation or association,
respectively, in the column of said tax rolls to be headed "City taxes," in
proportion to the valuation therein stated. After said assessment roll has
been so completed and the taxes thereon extended, the same shall be
confirmed and adopted by a resolution of the Common Council, and filed
with the City Clerk-Treasurer, and when the warrant hereinafter provided
for is annexed thereto, shall become the tax roll of said city. At the first
Common Council meeting in March of each year, or as soon thereafter as
practicable, the Common Council shall cause to be annexed to said roll a
warrant under the corporate seal of the city, signed by the Mayor or Acting
Mayor, or a majority of the members of the Common Council, directing the
City Clerk-Treasurer, as Collector of Taxes in and for said city, to receive and
collect, from the several persons, companies, corporations and associations
named in said tax roll, the several sums mentioned and set down opposite
their respective names as taxes for general city and other purposes, in
the manner in this Charter provided. Said city tax roll shall also contain a
column headed "local assessments," and the Common Council of said city
§ C6-8 PORT JERVIS CODE § C6-11
C:48
is hereby authorized to levy and incorporate in said roll and add thereto,
opposite the name of any person, company, corporation or association liable
therefor, in said column headed "local assessments," the amount of any
such local assessment for any purpose specified in Article V of this Charter,
and thereby cause the same to be collected at the same time and in the
same manner as other city taxes are hereby authorized to be collected; or
it may cause a separate tax roll to be issued for the collection of such local
assessment as hereinbefore provided.
§ C6-12. Arrears.
In addition to said city tax roll, the City Clerk-Treasurer shall, annually,
before any taxes for the year are collected, cause to be entered the word
"arrears" or "sold," as the fact may be, opposite the assessment of any
property thereon, either on which any local assessment shall remain unpaid
which was due or confirmed during the previous fiscal year, or which may
have been sold for any tax or assessment, and yet be redeemable.
§ C6-13. Tax receipts.
Immediately upon receiving any tax or assessment, the City Clerk-
Treasurer, as Collector, shall enter in a column provided for the purpose,
and opposite the name of the person paying the same, the fact of payment
and the date thereof, and shall give the person paying the same a receipt
therefor. Such receipt shall specify the date of such payment, the name of
the person making the payment, the description of the property as shown
on the tax roll, the name of the person to whom the same is assessed, the
amount of such tax and the amount of the fees, interest or penalty collected
therewith and the date of delivery to said City Clerk-Treasurer of the tax
roll on account of which such tax was paid. Any person may pay one (1) or
more taxes or assessments upon his property, leaving others unpaid to be
enforced in the manner provided by this Charter. All receipts issued by said
City Clerk-Treasurer for taxes paid to him shall be numbered consecutively,
commencing with the number one (1) on the first receipt issued for taxes
for any one year, and he shall not receipt for more than one (1) year's taxes
on the same property, on any one tax receipt; but shall use a separate and
distinct series of numbers and receipts for the taxes of each year for which
the same are levied and assessed. The City Clerk-Treasurer shall cause all
tax receipts to be printed and numbered and firmly bound together in book
form, so arranged that when a receipt is torn therefrom a corresponding
stub will remain, and at the time of giving such receipt the City Clerk-
Treasurer shall make the same entries on the corresponding stub as are
required to be made on the receipt. Such book shall be subject to public
inspection and shall remain on file in the office of the City Clerk-Treasurer
as a part of the public records.
§ C6-14. Notice of unpaid taxes and demand of payment.
If any such tax or assessment shall remain unpaid on the first day of July
after publication of the notices hereinafter required to be given pursuant
§ C6-11 CHARTER § C6-14
C:49
to § C6-17, the City Clerk-Treasurer shall serve or cause to be served upon
the person, company, corporation or association, against whom such tax
or assessment remains charged, a written notice requiring said person,
company, corporation or association to pay the same within a time to
be therein specified. Such notice may be served upon any such person,
company, corporation or association personally or by leaving it at the last
known residence or place of business of said person, company, corporation
or association in said city, or by depositing it in the post office in said
city, properly enclosed in a postpaid wrapper, directed to said person,
company, corporation or association at the last known residence or place of
business of said person, company, corporation or association. It shall not be
necessary to make any other demand of payment of said tax.
§ C6-15. Collection of taxes by sale of personal property.
If any person, company, corporation or association shall neglect or refuse to
pay any tax or assessment charged against him, her or them within the time
specified in the preceding section, the City Clerk-Treasurer may proceed to
levy upon any personal property of such person, company, corporation or
association in the County of Orange and sell the same. Such levy and sale
and the disposition of the proceeds thereof shall be made in accordance
with the provisions of the Real Property Tax Law of the State of New York.
§ C6-16. Lien of taxes.
From the time of receipt of the tax roll and warrant by the City Clerk-
Treasurer as Collector, all taxes assessed and levied upon any real estate
set forth in such tax roll and warrant shall be a lien upon such real estate
for the amount thereof, with penalties and interest, until the same shall be
fully paid.
§ C6-17. Proceedings of City Clerk-Treasurer in collecting city
taxes. [Amended 12-22-1997 by L.L. No. 11-1997]
Upon receiving said tax roll and warrant, the City Clerk-Treasurer, as
Collector of Taxes, shall cause a notice thereof to be published in the
official newspaper once a week for two (2) successive weeks, stating that
he will attend at his office with said roll and warrant for the month of
April, Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays excepted, from 9:00 a.m. to
4:00 p.m., prevailing time, to receive such taxes and assessments, and that
during said month of April one-half (1/2) of said taxes and assessments
shall be payable without penalty or interest thereon. If said first installment
remains unpaid after the 30th day of April, the City Clerk-Treasurer shall
collect, in addition to said installment, 6% of said installment. At least five
(5) and not more than ten (10) days before the first day of June in the
same year, the City Clerk-Treasurer shall publish in the same manner a
similar notice stating that he will attend at his office with said roll and
warrant for the month of June, from 9:00 a.m. until 4:00 p.m., prevailing
time, to receive the second one-half (1/2) of said taxes and assessments,
and that during said month of June the second one-half (1/2) of said taxes
§ C6-14 PORT JERVIS CODE § C6-17
C:50
and assessments shall be payable without penalty or interest thereon. If
said second installment remains unpaid after the 30th day of June, the
City Clerk-Treasurer shall collect, in addition to said installment, 6% of the
amount of said installment. On all taxes and assessments remaining unpaid
after the 30th day of June, the City Clerk-Treasurer shall collect, in addition
to said 6%, interest at the rate of one per centum (1%) per month from
the first day of July, which percentage and interest shall belong to the city.
Payment of the second installment of any tax or assessment levied on the
annual city tax roll shall not be made until the first installment of taxes and
assessments levied on said roll against the same property, together with any
penalty and interest thereon, is paid. Such warrant shall be returnable at
such time as the Common Council shall direct, which time may be extended
from time to time by resolution of a majority of the Common Council, and
said Common Council is also hereby authorized to issue a new warrant for
the collection of any such taxes and assessments, and shall specify in such
warrant when the same shall be returned, and the same proceedings may
be had thereon as upon the first warrant. The taxes and assessments upon
any real estate occupied by any person, company, corporation or association
other than the owner may be paid by the occupant, and he shall have the
right and is hereby authorized and empowered to collect and retain the
amount thereof, if paid by him from, or set off the amount thereof against,
the claim of the owner for rent.
§ C6-18. Bond of the City Clerk-Treasurer for collection of city
taxes.
Within five (5) days of the issuance of the warrant for collection of city
taxes and assessments by the Common Council to the City Clerk-Treasurer,
said City Clerk-Treasurer, as Collector of Taxes, shall execute to the City of
Port Jervis a bond in the amount of said taxes issued by a surety company
qualified to do business in the State of New York, providing that he will
faithfully discharge his duties as Collector of Taxes, pay over all moneys
received by him and account for said sums in the manner and time provided
by said warrant and by law. The bond, with the approval of the Mayor
and Corporation Counsel endorsed thereon, shall be filed in the office of
the Orange County Clerk as are the bonds of town officers who collect or
receive taxes and assessments. Thereafter, said bond shall be a lien on all
the real property held jointly or severally by the City Clerk-Treasurer or
his sureties, within the county at the time of the filing thereof, and shall
continue to be such lien until its conditions, together with all costs and
charges which may accrue from the prosecution thereof, shall be satisfied
and discharged by law. The expense of securing such bond shall be paid by
the city.
§ C6-19. Proceedings in case of failure to collect tax on warrant.
At the expiration of six (6) months after any tax or assessment shall have
been imposed upon any real estate in said city, the City Clerk-Treasurer,
as Collector, shall make and present to the Common Council, at a regular
meeting thereof, a transcript of any and all such taxes or assessments which
§ C6-17 CHARTER § C6-19
C:51
remain unpaid, and a statement of the amount of the interest and penalties
due thereon, and to which shall be attached the certificate of said City
Clerk-Treasurer that said taxes remain unpaid; such certificate shall be
presumptive evidence of the truth of the statements therein in all courts
and places, and in all actions and proceedings, and any tax roll filed with
the City Clerk-Treasurer, or a copy of the same certified by him, shall be
presumptive evidence of the contents thereof, and the regularity of such
assessment in all courts and places, actions and proceedings, and of the
right to levy and tax or make any assessments therein mentioned. Said
Common Council shall as soon as practicable thereafter review such unpaid
taxes and assessments and correct all errors of every description, except
valuation, which have been made, either in the original assessments or
subsequent proceedings, and shall make or cause to be made a correct and
full description of the several parcels of land, giving the location thereof
and the lot number, if any, or boundaries of such parcel, and the size or
estimated quantity of land in each parcel; and in case any such lands shall
have been erroneously assessed, then said Common Council shall make,
or cause to be made, and include in said statement a correct assessment
thereof at the same valuation as fixed in the original assessment roll, after
giving at least ten (10) days' notice to the person whose land is affected
thereby in the manner hereinafter provided, and such corrected assessment
and amount of taxes levied upon such lands shall be as valid and effectual
for all purposes as though they had been originally correct. Said corrected
lists, including the descriptions of the lands upon which said taxes or
assessments remain unpaid, shall be prepared under the supervision of the
City Clerk-Treasurer, and it shall be the duty of any and all officers of said
city to render such assistance as may be necessary or required in obtaining
correct descriptions of such several parcels of land. Said Common Council
shall have power and jurisdiction and it is hereby authorized, empowered
and directed in all cases where any tax or assessment levied or imposed, or
attempted to be levied or imposed, by the Board of Trustees of the Village
of Port Jervis, on any land in said former village and now included within
said city, at any time within ten (10) years prior to the incorporation of the
City of Port Jervis, remains unpaid and in arrears, to add all such taxes
and assessments, with a description of the parcel of land against which
they were levied or attempted to be levied, to the list or statement in and
by this section directed to be prepared, upon the same notice and in the
same manner and with the same effect as herein provided for arrears of
city taxes, and shall treat the same without regard to any supposed want of
jurisdiction, irregularity or defect, imposing or confining any of said taxes
or assessments so in arrears. When there is more than one (1) tax upon
the same parcel of land, the description of said parcel shall be inserted
in said list or statement but once, and the collection of all such taxes and
assessments shall be enforced by a sale of the real estate in the manner
hereinafter provided. The notice in and by this section required to be given
to persons whose lands are affected, by reason of being placed on said list
or statement of arrears, shall designate a time when, and a place where, the
Common Council will meet to hear objections to any tax or assessment so in
arrears, and any reason why any part of such arrearages should be reduced
§ C6-19 PORT JERVIS CODE § C6-19
C:52
or remitted; and it shall be the duty of any owner or person having any
interest in or lien on said lands affected by said arrearages, and desiring to
make objections thereto, to file with the City Clerk-Treasurer, on or before
the day of such hearing, a brief and concise statement in writing of such
objections to said arrearages and their reasons why the same or any part
thereof should be reduced or remitted, and to serve a copy of said statement
on the Corporation Counsel within the same time. Said statement shall be
verified in the same manner as a pleading in an action in the Supreme
Court, and any person who shall file and serve such objections shall be
heard before said Common Council in person or by counsel, if he demand
such hearing, in a notice endorsed on or attached to said objections and
filed therewith, at the meeting herein provided for, or at such other time and
place as said Common Council may designate. Said Common Council shall
have power to call witnesses and examine them under oath, in relation to all
matters concerning said taxes and assessments so in arrears, and compel
the production of papers and documents, and it shall be the duty of the
Corporation Counsel to assist in any such examination. The notice in and
by this section required to be given shall be served on the owner, occupant,
tenant or agent of the property affected, if known, either personally or by
leaving it at his last known residence or place of business in said city, or by
depositing it in the post office in said city properly enclosed in a postpaid
wrapper, directed to him at his last known place of residence or business.
If such owner is unknown and the property is vacant and unoccupied,
service may be made by affixing said notice upon a conspicuous part of said
premises at least ten (10) days before the date of said hearing. Affidavits of
due service of the notices in this section required to be given shall be made
and filed in the office of the City Clerk-Treasurer and shall become a public
record, and shall be prima facie evidence in all courts and places of the facts
therein stated. The determination of said Common Council in reference to
said arrearages shall be final and conclusive upon all persons.
§ C6-20. Sale of lands for unpaid taxes. [Amended 7-27-2015 by L.L.
No. 5-2015, approved 7-27-2015]
Prior to the date set for the sale of land for taxes, the Common Council
may vote to exclude some of the parcels included on the list of delinquent
properties from the properties offered to the public at tax sale pursuant
to Section C6-20 of the Charter of the City of Port Jervis. The Common
Council must vote to accept a bid on behalf of the City of Port Jervis for
those excluded parcels to be retained by the City on the date designated
for the tax sale for the sums owed the City for each lot or parcel with the
result that those designated lots and parcels shall not be available or offered
to the public at the tax sale conducted by the City Clerk-Treasurer. The
City shall be designated as the sole and successful bidder for those parcels
designated in the Common Council's resolution bidding upon and retaining
said lots and parcels. Said lots so retained by the City shall still be subject
to provisions of Sections C6-24, C6-25, C6-26 and C6-27 of the Charter of
the City of Port Jervis, as amended herein, relating to redemption from tax
sale, as well as all of the remaining Sections of Article VI of the Charter of
§ C6-19 CHARTER § C6-20
C:53
the City of Port Jervis relating to the conveyance of real estate sold for taxes
or otherwise.
§ C6-21. Notice of the sale of land for taxes.
The City Clerk-Treasurer shall cause a list of all the lots and parcels of
land, the taxes on which have been returned as unpaid, and descriptions
of which have been placed on said list of arrears, together with such
descriptions, to be published in the official city newspaper once in each
week for four (4) successive weeks, next preceding a day to be hereby
specified and fixed for the sale of such lands, together with a notice, that if
such taxes, assessments, fees and penalties be not paid to the City Clerk-
Treasurer, with interest, penalties and expenses, on or before the day fixed
for such sale, such lands will be sold at public auction at the time and
place designated, to the highest bidder. If such taxes, interest, penalties
and expenses be not paid, the lands so advertised shall be sold by the City
Clerk-Treasurer. Before the sale, the owner of any parcel of land, or his
representative, or any person interested therein, may avoid the sale thereof
by paying the tax or assessment to the City Clerk-Treasurer, with all accrued
interest, penalties, fees, additions and expenses.
§ C6-22. Manner of conducting sale of land for taxes.
On the day named in the notice of sale, the City Clerk-Treasurer shall
commence the sale of such lands and shall continue such sale thereafter
from day to day successively until the whole thereof shall be sold, except
that adjournments may be made over Saturdays, Sundays and legal
holidays. Each parcel shall be sold at public auction to the highest bidder.
The purchasers at such sales shall pay the amount required to complete
their respective purchases to the City Clerk-Treasurer forthwith after each
parcel shall be struck off, and upon their failure so to do, the City Clerk-
Treasurer shall than and there reoffer the parcel for sale again without any
additional notice, as though said parcel had not been struck off. Should
there be no bid of the amount due on any lot or parcel of land to be sold,
then the City Clerk-Treasurer shall bid in the same for the city, and the
city is hereby authorized to acquire said parcels and the Common Council
shall have the care and control of all such parcels and may lease, sell or
convey the same. The City Clerk-Treasurer shall keep a record of every such
sale in a book to be kept for that purpose. As soon as practicable after
the sale, the City Clerk-Treasurer shall prepare, execute and acknowledge
three (3) certificates of sale of each parcel of land so sold; one (1) of said
certificates shall be delivered to the purchaser, one (1) filed in the City
Clerk-Treasurer's office and one (1) filed in the office of the Clerk of Orange
County within ten (10) days after the close of such sale. If there be two (2) or
more purchasers, a certificate shall be delivered to each. Such certificates
shall contain a brief general description of the parcel sold, the time of
the sale, the name of the purchaser, the amount bid and paid therefor,
the name of the person or persons against whom such tax or assessment
was levied, a statement of the fact that said premises were sold to pay a
tax or assessment and the time when such sale will become absolute and
§ C6-20 PORT JERVIS CODE § C6-22
C:54
the purchaser be entitled to a conveyance according to law. The certificate
herein required to be filed in the Orange County Clerk's office shall be
recorded by said Clerk in the same manner as deeds are required by law
to be recorded and shall be indexed against the party assessed as the
grantor, adding thereto "by the City of Port Jervis," and in the name of the
purchaser as grantee. The expense of filing and recording such certificate
shall be a part of the expenses of sale to be included therein and collected
therewith. No error in the description of lands in any list published in any
newspaper shall render any sale void or in any manner affect its validity.
If from any cause the City Clerk-Treasurer shall be unable to attend at the
time and place of the sale, the Common Council, or in case it shall not have
acted, the Mayor or Acting Mayor, shall designate some other city officer
to conduct the sale, and all sales made by any such designated officer shall
have the same force and effect as if made by the City Clerk-Treasurer. In
making sales of real estate under the provisions of this Article, the officer
making the same shall require the purchaser to pay, forthwith after a sale,
a sum sufficient to pay the tax, assessment, interest, expenses and charges
against the parcel so sold, and the terms of sale shall require the purchaser
to pay the balance of the amount bid, if any there shall be, to the City
Clerk-Treasurer within five (5) days after the time for redemption of such
real estate shall expire, according to the provisions of the Article. At the
time and place of each sale, each purchaser shall sign a memorandum of
purchase, in which shall be incorporated his agreement to pay the amount
of his bid in accordance with the terms of this section.
§ C6-23. Disposition of proceeds of sale.
The proceeds of the sale of each parcel of land sold shall be applied to the
payment of the expenses of the sale as herein provided, and the payment of
the tax, assessment and penalty or interest for which it was sold. The City
Clerk-Treasurer, after the period of redemption shall have expired, shall pay
any surplus which may be paid to him in a case where the bid exceeds
the tax, assessment, penalty or interest, and costs and expenses of sale as
hereinbefore provided, to the person or persons entitled thereto, and such
person or persons shall be ascertained in the same manner and by the same
proceedings as in the case of a surplus arising from the foreclosure of a
mortgage on real estate. In case any taxes shall be assessed and levied
on real estate which has been sold for taxes, subsequent to such sale, and
before the redemption thereof or conveyance thereof to the purchaser, and
the same shall be unpaid, the City Clerk-Treasurer may deduct the amount
thereof from any surplus in his hands of the sum bid for the sale, if there
be any surplus; if there be no surplus, or the same shall be insufficient to
pay such taxes, the person redeeming shall pay the same, otherwise the
purchaser shall pay the same before he shall receive his conveyance for the
land so sold.
§ C6-22 CHARTER § C6-24
C:55
§ C6-24. Redemption from tax sale. [Amended 7-27-2015 by L.L. No.
5-2015, approved 7-27-2015]
The owner of any real estate sold at a City Tax Sale, may redeem same
from such sale at any time within two (2) years from the date of said sale
by paying to the City Clerk-Treasurer for the use of the purchaser, his
heirs or assigns, or, if the same shall have been redeemed by any other
person than the owner thereof, then for the use of such person, such sum
or amount as may have been paid for by the purchaser at or before the
time of receiving his certificate, together with interest thereon from the
date of said certificate at the rate of twelve per centum (12%) per annum,
and all other sums which he may have paid for taxes or assessments on
said real estate, together with interest thereon from the date of any such
payments, at the rate of twelve per centum (12%) per annum. In all cases
of redemption it shall be necessary to pay, in addition to the amounts above
provided for, the amount of any other tax or assessment which has been
levied upon such property, subsequent to the sale thereof, and also the
actual and necessary expenses which have been incurred by the purchaser
in the service of notices herein provided to be given, in reference to the
redemption of said property, and also any and all expenses incurred by
the city in connection therewith since said sale; and on such payments'
being made, the title acquired by such sale shall cease and determine. In
computing interest upon any sum required to be paid to redeem any such
parcel of land, interest shall be computed for no less a period than one (1)
month. Where payments are made during any month of the period limited
for redemption, interest shall be computed for the whole of that month. In
case of the redemption of any land sold as herein provided, by the person
who was the owner thereof at the time of the sale, the City Clerk-Treasurer
shall give such owner a receipt for the amount paid by him to effect such
redemption, and on the production thereof by such owner to the County
Clerk of Orange County, and the payment of his fees therefor, such Clerk
shall cancel the certificate of sale by a proper entry upon the record of
such certificate in his office. Said sale shall likewise be canceled by the
City Clerk-Treasurer upon the record thereof kept in his office. In case such
payment is made by the owner of said real estate, then and in the event
all mortgages, judgments, decrees or claims which were a lien upon said
real estate at the time the tax or assessment for which the sale has been
made became a lien thereon, or which were liens at any time before such
sale was made, shall be and remain liens upon said real estate, anything
hereinbefore contained to the contrary notwithstanding.
§ C6-25. Lien of mortgage; when not affected by tax sale. [Amended
7-27-2015 by L.L. No. 5-2015, approved 7-27-2015]
The lien of a mortgage, duly recorded or registered at the time of the sale
of any lands for nonpayment of any tax or assessment thereon, shall not be
in any manner affected, except as provided in this section. The purchaser
at any such sale shall give to the mortgagee a written notice of such sale
within six (6) months from the expiration of the time to redeem, requiring
him to pay the amount of purchase money, with interest at the rate allowed
§ C6-24 PORT JERVIS CODE § C6-25
C:56
by law in case of redemption by occupants within six (6) months after
giving the notice. Such notice must be given by personal service upon the
mortgagee at the last known address for said mortgagee, and an Affidavit of
such service, in recordable form, shall be kept by the City. The City Clerk-
Treasurer shall receive from each Tax Sale purchaser a mortgagee search
certified as correct by a licensed New York State title insurance agent, paid
for by the Tax Sale purchaser on each parcel. Said search must contain
the last known name and address of the mortgagee on each parcel. If the
mortgagee fails to comply with the requirements of such notice within the
time herein specified, the lien of such mortgage, upon the lands so sold,
shall thereby be canceled. The City of Port Jervis shall be obligated to
comply with all of the foregoing requirements to be performed or completed
by Tax Sale purchasers as set forth in this Section for those properties
excluded from the Tax Sale and retained by the City of Port Jervis.
§ C6-26. Redemption by mortgagee.
The holder of any mortgage which is duly recorded at the time of the sale
may, at any time after the sale of all or any part of the mortgaged premises
for unpaid taxes, and before the expiration of six (6) months from the giving
of the notice mentioned in the preceding section, redeem the premises so
sold, or any part thereof, from such sale. Such redemption shall be made
by filing with the City Clerk-Treasurer a written description of his mortgage
and paying to him for the use of the purchaser, or his legal representatives,
heirs or assigns, the sum hereinbefore required to be paid for the purpose
of redeeming such lot, together with interest at the rate allowed by this
Article, and all costs and expenses which have accrued thereon. The holder
of such mortgage shall have a lien upon the premises redeemed for the
amount so paid, with interest from the time of payment, in like manner as if
it had been included in the mortgage, which sum, in case of foreclosure of
his mortgage, may be added thereto and collected therewith.
§ C6-27. Notice of redemption. [Amended 7-27-2015 by L.L. No.
5-2015, approved 7-27-2015]
During the three (3) months preceding the expiration of the time for
redemption by the owner or occupant of any parcels of lots so sold, the City
Clerk-Treasurer shall commence the publication of a notice of redemption
from such sales, which shall show the year when the sale took place and
the last day for the redemption of the lands not already redeemed by
the owners, without other or further description, and such notice shall be
published at least once in each of said three (3) months in the official
newspaper of the city. A copy of such notice shall be served personally
on the owner or occupant of the lands, or, if unoccupied, posted on the
premises, at least twenty (20) days before the expiration of such time for
final redemption. The publication and service of such notice shall bar and
preclude any and all persons except the purchaser or the City of Port Jervis,
having excluded and retained said lot or parcel from Tax Sale, on such sale,
or his assigns, or the person finally redeeming, from claiming any interest
§ C6-25 CHARTER § C6-27
C:57
in or lien upon such lands or any part thereof, in case the said lands shall
not be redeemed from such sale as hereinbefore provided.
§ C6-28. Affidavits of compliance with conditions. [Amended
7-27-2015 by L.L. No. 5-2015, approved 7-27-2015]
Every such purchaser or the City of Port Jervis, having excluded and
retained said lot or parcel from Tax Sale, or assignee of a purchaser, by
himself or agent, shall, before he shall be entitled to a deed, make an
affidavit of his having complied with the conditions of the Article, stating
particularly the facts relied upon as such compliance, to which affidavit
shall be attached proof of the service of the notices hereinbefore required
to be given. Such affidavit and proof shall be delivered to the City Clerk-
Treasurer, to be by him entered in the records of his office and carefully
preserved among the files, and such records and affidavit shall be prima
facie evidence of the facts therein stated.
§ C6-29. Conveyance of real estate sold for taxes. [Amended
7-27-2015 by L.L. No. 5-2015, approved 7-27-2015]
At any time after the expiration of two (2) years from the date of sale of any
lot or parcel of land for taxes or assessments, if the same or any part thereof
shall not have been redeemed as herein provided, the City Clerk-Treasurer,
upon request, and on the production of the certificate of purchase, and upon
compliance by the purchaser or the City of Port Jervis, having excluded
and retained said lot or parcel from Tax Sale, or his assignee with all
requirements of this Article, and filing the proof thereof as required in the
preceding section, shall execute and deliver to the purchaser, including
the City of Port Jervis, or its or his heirs, successors or assigns, a deed of
conveyance of the real estate so sold for taxes and not redeemed, under his
hand and the seal of the city, and attested by the Mayor or Acting Mayor of
the city, and such deed shall vest in the grantee, or his heirs, successors or
assigns, an absolute estate in fee simple; and such deed, when so executed,
shall be conclusive evidence that the sale was regular, and also presumptive
evidence that all previous proceedings were regular according to the law
and provisions of this Charter. After two (2) years from the date of such
conveyance, such presumption shall in every particular be conclusive. Every
certificate or conveyance executed in pursuance of this Charter may, when
acknowledged, be recorded in the same manner and with like effect as a
deed acknowledged or proved before any officer authorized by law to take
the proof and acknowledgment of deeds.
§ C6-30. Possession of premises. [Amended 7-27-2015 by L.L. No.
5-2015, approved 7-27-2015]
The purchaser or the City of Port Jervis, having excluded and retained said
lot or parcel from Tax Sale, may at any time after the delivery of the deed
of conveyance, and not before, obtain actual possession of the premises by
an action or proceeding at law, or by causing the occupant of such real
estate to be removed therefrom, and the possession thereof to be delivered
§ C6-27 PORT JERVIS CODE § C6-30
C:58
to him in the manner and by the same proceedings, by and before the same
officers, as in the case of a tenant's holding over after the expiration of his
term without the permission of his landlord.
§ C6-31. Collection of taxes by civil action.
In addition to the remedies hereinbefore provided for the collection of
unpaid taxes and assessments, the Common Council shall have power, at
any time after the expiration of six (6) months from the time when the
warrant for the same was issued to the City Clerk-Treasurer, to collect, by
civil action in the name of the City of Port Jervis, any city tax imposed for
any of the purposes in this Charter mentioned; and all assessment rolls
and certificates and special assessments filed with, or delivered to, the
City Clerk-Treasurer, or a certified copy thereof, shall be evidence in all
courts and places, and in all actions and proceedings, that the taxes and
assessments therein contained have been regularly and duly assessed and
imposed and of the right of the city for the recovery thereof. Any civil action
so brought shall not impair or affect the lien of such tax or assessment
upon any real estate against which it is assessed, or be held to constitute
a bar to any proceeding for the sale of the lands upon which such tax or
assessment is a lien. Such civil action may be brought against any person,
company, corporation or association liable for such tax or assessment, or
against their legal representatives, successors or assigns, in any court of
competent jurisdiction; and the amount collected by any such suit shall
be used and applied by said City Clerk-Treasurer in the same manner as
though the same had been collected by the sale of real estate. Any judgment
which may be recovered for such tax or assessment shall include such tax or
assessment with interest, penalties and the costs and disbursements of the
action, and may be enforced against any property of the defendant within
the state.
§ C6-32. Reimbursement of purchase money.
Whenever any purchaser under such sale, or his heirs or assigns, shall be
unable to recover or retain possession of any real estate sold to him, by
reason of irregularity or error in the assessment of any person or property,
or the levying of any tax thereon, or in any proceeding for the collection of
any tax, the Common Council shall reimburse the purchase money so paid
with interest from the time of its payment at the rate of six per centum
(6%) per annum, the amount thereof to be presented and audited as other
city charges; and thereupon the Common Council of said city shall make
a reassessment of any amount or sums so paid upon the same real estate
or against the same person, in the same manner as hereinafter provided,
which assessment shall, for all purposes of this Charter, be deemed and
taken to be an original general city tax as of the date of such assessment.
§ C6-33. Validity of tax and action to test same.
It shall be presumed that every tax levied is valid and regular, and that
all the steps as required by law were taken and had until the contrary
§ C6-30 CHARTER § C6-33
C:59
shall be made to appear. Any action or proceeding commenced by any
person or persons to test the validity or regularity of any tax levied shall
be commenced within one (1) year from the date of the delivery to the City
Clerk-Treasurer, as Collector, of the roll in which said tax is contained. The
invalidity or irregularity of any tax shall not be available as a defense to
any action or proceeding commenced after the expiration of one (1) year
from the delivery of the roll, as aforesaid, for the collection of said tax or
assessment, or for the enforcement of any right or title by virtue of any sale
thereunder, unless an action or proceeding to test the validity or regularity
of such tax shall have been commenced within the time hereinbefore limited
for commencing the same, and shall be still pending, or such tax shall have
been adjudged to be irregular or invalid.
§ C6-34. Cancellation of tax.
Where the invalidity or irregularity of any tax or assessment appears upon
the face of the proceedings, any party in interest may, after having made
application to the Common Council of the city as herein provided, apply by
petition to the Supreme Court for an order canceling the same. Said Court
shall require reasonable notice to be given to the city of such petition, and
shall hear the proofs and allegations of the parties, and shall, in case such
irregularity or invalidity is established, order such tax to be canceled, and
thereupon the same shall be canceled by the City Clerk-Treasurer.
§ C6-35. Power of Common Council as to void and erroneous
assessments.
The Common Council of the city may, at its discretion, release, discharge,
remit or commute any portion of the taxes assessed or levied against any
person or property for any error, irregularity or omission in the levying
of said taxes, or in any of the proceedings in relation to the same. In
case any assessment shall remain unpaid on account of any irregularity,
omission or error in any assessment authorized by this Charter, or the laws
in force when such tax was levied, or in case of error in the description of
lands or in the description of the owner or occupants, the Common Council
may, in its discretion, or upon the application of any person interested,
proceed to correct such irregularity, omission or error, or cancel, remit or
commute such tax, or cause the amount so unpaid to be reassessed on the
property, the assessment against which remains unpaid, or upon the owner
or occupant thereof; and the Common Council is hereby authorized and
empowered to make such reassessment upon giving ten (10) days' personal
notice thereof to the owner, agent or occupant of the property against
which the amount remains so unpaid. It may direct the City Clerk-Treasurer
to correct any irregularity, omission or error, and such reassessment or
correction shall have the same effect as if the said assessment had been
properly made. But the Common Council shall not alter any valuation made
by the Assessor. Any omission to comply with the provisions of this Charter
in making an assessment or levying a tax, or creating a lien, shall not render
such assessment, or the tax levied thereunder or the assessment made or
lien created thereby, void, but shall be treated as an irregularity merely,
§ C6-33 PORT JERVIS CODE § C6-35
C:60
and it shall be the duty of any and all courts, in case it shall appear that
such irregularity exists, to direct the same to be corrected or amended or
the omission supplied, if possible. In case any tax or assessment shall be
void, or have failed for want or jurisdiction or for any irregularity, mistake
or inadvertence in levying or assessing the same, the Common Council shall
have the power, and it shall be its duty, to cause the same to be reassessed
in a proper manner. Any sum paid thereon shall be credited upon the tax so
reassessed, and, if the sum paid shall exceed the amount so reassessed, the
excess shall be refunded to the person entitled thereto.
§ C6-36. Collection of local assessments.
Whenever an assessment shall be ordered for local improvements, if the
assessment is not added to the general city tax list, the assessment shall be
made to resemble in form, as nearly as practicable, the tax list issued for
general city purposes, and be provided with a column in which payments
can be entered by the City Clerk-Treasurer. All provisions of this Charter
relating to the collection of taxes shall be applicable to the collection of
local assessments, except so far as they are herein modified or specifically
provided for.
§ C6-35 CHARTER § C6-36
C:61

ARTICLE VII
Police Department
§ C7-1. Police Department designated.
The organization regulated herein shall be known as the "Port Jervis Police
Department."
§ C7-2. Police Department personnel.
The police force of the City of Port Jervis shall consist of a Chief of Police
and such police officers as the Common Council may deem necessary. Police
officers shall qualify and enter upon the performance of their duties within
fifteen (15) days after their appointment.
§ C7-3. Qualifications for police positions.
To be eligible for appointment as a police officer, a candidate must fulfill
the requirements of Section 58 of the Civil Service Law of the State of New
York. No police officer shall at the time of his appointment or at any time
thereafter be engaged or interested in as owner or otherwise the sale of
alcoholic beverages.
§ C7-4. Retirement members of police force.
All members of the police force shall retire or may retire as provided by
the Civil Service Law, the Retirement and Social Security Law or any other
applicable law or regulation.
§ C7-5. Vacancies in police force.
The Common Council shall, when a vacancy occurs in the police force,
appoint a successor from the civil service list prepared by the Civil Service
Commission of the City of Port Jervis.
§ C7-6. Duties of Chief of Police.
The Chief of Police, under the direction of the Mayor, shall be responsible
for the supervision and operation of the Police Department of the city.
Among his duties he shall be responsible for the maintenance and control
of all vehicles, equipment and other property of the Department. He shall
keep an official "police blotter" in which shall be made daily entries of all the
proceedings of the Department and of all the services rendered by him and
the several members of the police force. The Chief shall submit an annual
report on the activities of the Police Department and such other reports as
the Common Council may require.
§ C7-7. Charges; trials thereon.
If any member of the Police Department is charged with incompetency,
neglect of duty, insubordination, misconduct in office or conduct
§ C7-1 CHARTER § C7-7
C:63
unbecoming a police officer, the charge must be put in writing and a
copy thereof served on the accused officer and filed with the City Clerk-
Treasurer; it shall then be the duty of the Common Council to hear, try and
determine the charges according to the procedures prescribed in the Civil
Service Law of the State of New York. The accused officer shall have the
right to be present at his or her trial and to be heard in person and by
counsel and to give and furnish evidence in his or her defense. The Mayor
may issue subpoenas under his hand for witnesses to sustain or refute the
charge, and any such witness duly served with a subpoena shall be bound
to attend in obedience to the command thereof, and the Mayor shall have
the same authority to enforce obedience to the subpoena and to punish for
disobedience thereof as is possessed by the City Court Judge in like cases. If
the Common Council by a majority vote shall find the accused officer guilty
of the charge made against him or her, it may order his or her suspension
from his or her pay as a police officer, for some definite time, or impose upon
him or her a fine not exceeding two hundred fifty dollars ($250.), or reduce
his or her grade, or dismiss him or her from the police force, or discipline
him or her in any manner prescribed in the rules of the Police Department
which is not inconsistent with the laws of the state or of the United States.
§ C7-8. Exemption from jury duty.
No member of the Police Department is liable to jury duty, nor shall be or
she hold any other office or be employed in any other department of the city,
county, state or federal government.
§ C7-9. Political activity.
No member of the police force shall engage in any political activity
prohibited by law.
§ C7-10. Powers and duties of police.
The members of the police force of said city shall possess in every part of
the State of New York all the common-law and statutory powers of police
officers, except for the service of civil process, and any warrant for search
or arrest issued by any magistrate of the State of New York may be executed
in said city by any member of the police force of said city without any
endorsement of said warrant according to the terms thereof; they shall also
have the same power and authority which a marshal possesses in civil cases
and special proceedings, so far as serving and executing all process and
papers in any action or proceeding in behalf of the City of Port Jervis or any
officer of such city suing as such. In all cases in which they are authorized
to act, they shall possess the same powers, perform the same duties and
be subject to the same liabilities as marshals. They shall execute the orders
and commitments of the City Court Judge. They shall convey all persons
sentenced by said Judge to confinement in any jail or place of confinement,
and they shall serve and execute all civil process or proceedings issued or
directed by any officer or court in said city in favor of said city, or in which
§ C7-7 PORT JERVIS CODE § C7-10
C:64
said city shall be a party. They shall enforce all local laws, ordinances and
resolutions of the City of Port Jervis and the laws of the State of New York.
§ C7-11. Service of criminal process.
All criminal process for any offense committed within said city, issued
out of any court within said city, and all process, subpoenas. warrants
or otherwise, issued by the District Attorney of the County of Orange or
the Corporation Counsel of the City of Port Jervis relating to any offense
committed within said city, may be served by a member of said police force.
§ C7-12. Expenses in execution of process.
The necessary expenses incurred in the execution of criminal process shall
be a charge against the city. No fees or compensation whatever shall be
charged or received by any officer or member of the said police force for the
arrest, confinement or discharge of any person or for mileage and travel, or
for serving any warrant, subpoena or process, or for discharging any other
duty required by this Charter; nor shall any such fee or compensation be
charged or received by any officer or citizen for the arrest of any person
charged with crime, or for the service of any warrant, subpoena or other
process in any criminal case, other than as herein provided.
§ C7-13. Presents or awards.
No member of the police force shall accept any present or award for
services rendered, unless with the consent of the Common Council, such
consent to be given in writing and filed with the City Clerk-Treasurer; and
any violation of these provisions shall be cause for a forfeiture of his or her
office or position. It shall be the duty of the Common Council to declare
such office or position vacant, and enter for the record the cause of such
forfeiture.
§ C7-14. Police Department bylaws, rules and regulations.
The Common Council may make such bylaws, rules and regulations as
may be necessary for the government of the police force, for regulating
the powers and duties of the officers, for uniforming them and for the
maintenance of good law and order in the city.
§ C7-10 CHARTER § C7-14
C:65

ARTICLE VIII
Fire Department49
§ C8-1. Fire Department designated.
The organization regulated herein shall be known as the "Port Jervis Fire
Department."
§ C8-2. The Fire Department function.
The Fire Department shall be responsible for the preservation of life and
property within the city and for responding to fires and other emergencies
as may occur within the city and in such other territory to which and Chief
of the Fire Department may be authorized to dispatch assistance.
§ C8-3. Powers of Common Council as to Fire Department.
The Common Council shall have power to appoint one (1) or more
companies of firemen, which shall constitute the Fire Department of the
city. It shall have the power to determine the number of members which
shall compose each company; to appoint and to remove any member of any
company and to make rules and regulations for the operation of the Fire
Department and its respective companies.50
§ C8-4. Officers of Fire Department.
The officers of the Fire Department shall consist of a Chief, First Assistant
Chief, Second Assistant Chief, Treasurer and Secretary of the Department,
and the Captain, First Lieutenant and Second Lieutenant of each of the
fire companies. The Chief, First Assistant Chief, Second Assistant Chief,
Treasurer and Secretary shall be elected by the members of the Fire
Department at such time, for such term and in such manner as the Common
Council shall prescribe.
§ C8-5. Duties of the Fire Chief.
The Chief shall, under the direction of the Mayor, be responsible for
supervision, maintenance and control of all apparatus, equipment and other
property of the Fire Department. He shall make and keep an accurate
inventory of all the property of the Department. The Chief shall submit an
annual report which shall include a list of all fires which have occurred
during the preceding year, together with an explanation of the cause so
far as has been ascertained. The annual report shall contain such other
information relative to the Fire Department as the Chief shall deem
important. He shall also render such other reports at such times as the
Common Council may require. It shall also be the duty of the Chief or his
designee to be present at all fires and other emergencies within said city,
to take command of the several companies belonging to the Department.
49.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 55, Fire Department.
50.Editor's Note: See Ch. 55, Fire Department.
§ C8-1 CHARTER § C8-5
C:67
He shall also have power to suspend any officer or member of the Fire
Department for incapacity, intoxication, disorderly conduct, insubordination
or neglect of duty. When the Chief shall suspend any member or officer,
he shall forthwith report this in writing to the Mayor, who shall present
the same to the Common Council. The Common Council shall thereupon
proceed to hear and determine the matter, and shall either restore such
officer or member or reprimand, suspend, censure or remove him. The Chief
shall also have such other powers and perform such other duties as the
Common Council by local law, ordinance or resolution may prescribe.51 The
Assistant Chiefs shall aid the Chief in the execution of his duties as he shall
direct and in his absence assume the powers and duties of his office.
§ C8-6. The firemen and their duties.
It shall be the duty of the members of the Fire Department to respond
to every fire alarm or other emergency. Every member shall be declared
exempt from prosecution or indictment for any act done in the reasonable
discharge of his duties. Any officer or member of the Fire Department may
be reprimanded, suspended, censured or removed by the Common Council
for incapacity, intoxication, disorderly conduct, insubordination, neglect of
duty or other misconduct tending to destroy the efficiency or discipline of
the Department. Any officer or member so charged within five (5) days after
written notice by the Common Council shall be afforded the opportunity for
a hearing to show cause why he should not be so disciplined. During such
period he may be suspended without written notice.
§ C8-7. Exemption from jury duty.
Every member of the Fire Department in said city shall be exempt from
jury duty. Every such member who shall have faithfully served as a fireman
for the term of five (5) years in the Fire Department shall thereafter be
exempt from service on juries, and the Common Council shall furnish to
every member who shall have so served said period of five (5) years a proper
certificate, signed by the Mayor and City Clerk-Treasurer as evidence of
such service.
§ C8-8. Rules and regulations of Fire Department.
All rules and regulations pertaining to the government of the Fire
Department of the City of Port Jervis in force at the time of the adoption
of the Charter shall be and continue in force.52 The Common Council may
repeal and modify such rules and regulations, and make such other rules
and other regulations as it deems best for the government of the Fire
Department, providing such rules and regulations shall not conflict with the
laws of the state or the United States.
51.Editor's Note: See Ch. 55, Fire Department.
52.Editor's Note: See Ch. 55, Fire Department.
§ C8-5 PORT JERVIS CODE § C8-8
C:68
ARTICLE IX
City Court53
§ C9-1. Court continued; its character.
The City Court of the City of Port Jervis is continued under this Charter, and
shall be known as the "City Court of Port Jervis." It shall be an inferior local
court of civil and criminal jurisdiction.
§ C9-2. Definitions.
For the purposes of this Article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CITY — The City of Port Jervis.
CLERK — Includes the Clerk, Deputy Clerk or Assistant Clerk of the Court.
COMMON COUNCIL — The Common Council of the City of Port Jervis.
COUNTY — The County of Orange.
COURT — The City Court or one (1) of the Judges thereof.
JUDGE — Includes the City Judge or Acting City Judge.
MAYOR — The Mayor of the City of Port Jervis.
RULES — The rules adopted pursuant to Section 2103 of the Uniform City
Court Act, as amended from time to time, supplemented and in effect.
§ C9-3. Judges; number.
The Court shall consist of a City Judge and an Acting City Judge. The Acting
City Judge shall possess all of the qualifications, have all the powers and
perform all of the duties of the City Judge whenever such Judge is absent,
disqualified or unable to act.
§ C9-4. Judges: election; qualifications; vacancy in office; temporary
appointment.
A. The City Judge shall be elected in the same manner and at the same
time as other city officers are elected, and shall take office on the first
day of January next following such election. Except as herein provided,
the term of office of the City Judge shall be four (4) years.
B. No person shall be eligible for the office of Judge of the City Court of
Port Jervis unless he be an attorney and counselor of the State of New
York of at least five (5) years' standing and a resident elector of the City
of Port Jervis.
C. A vacancy in the office of Judge, occurring otherwise than by expiration
of term, shall be filled for a full term of four (4) years at the next general
53.Editor's Note: The City currently operates under the Unified Court System.
§ C9-1 CHARTER § C9-4
C:69
§ C9-5. City Judge to hold sessions.
The sessions of the City Court shall be held by the City Judge or, in the cases
provided for herein, by the Acting City Judge.
§ C9-6. Acting City Judge.
During the absence of the City Judge from the city, or his disability or
inability to act, or if he is incapable to act for the reasons given by Section
14 of the Judiciary Law, or if he deems himself disqualified to act because
of his professional relations with any party or counsel to an action or
special proceeding pending before the Court, the City Judge must make,
and file with the Clerk of the City Court, a certificate to that effect, and
thereupon the Acting City Judge, if not also disqualified, must act as Judge
in such action or proceeding, and if disqualified, then the action or special
proceeding shall by an order of the appropriate court be removed to the
County Court of Orange County. In all actions or proceedings so transferred
to the Acting City Judge, the Acting City Judge shall exercise all the
authority and perform all the duties of the City Judge. In the case of the
disability of the City Judge to an extent rendering him unable to file such
certificate, said Acting City Judge may then act without such certificate.
§ C9-7. Powers, jurisdiction and procedural standards of Court.
The City Court and City Judge of the City of Port Jervis shall have and
exercise such powers and civil and criminal jurisdiction as may be granted
by, and be subject to all other provisions of, the Uniform City Court Act,
being Chapter 497 of the Laws of 1964, as amended from time to time,
supplemented and in effect, and by such other laws and rules and
regulations as now are or may hereafter be in effect.54
§ C9-8. Parties and attorneys.
A party to an action or proceeding before the City Court or the City Judge
may prosecute or defend the same person, or by attorney duly licensed
to practice as an attorney and counselor at law, or by his guardian or
committee if an infant or incompetent; but a person not interested in the
subject matter in dispute and who is not an attorney and counselor at
election held after the next 20th day of September after such vacancy
occurs; and until the vacancy shall be so filled, the Acting City Judge
shall have and assume all the powers, duties and responsibilities of
City Judge until and including the last day of December next after the
election at which the vacancy shall be filled.
D. The Mayor, with the consent of a majority of the Common Council, shall
appoint to hold office for a term of one (1) year, except as otherwise
provided by law, an Acting City Judge with the same qualifications
required of the City Judge.
54.Editor's Note: See Ch. 170, Traffic Violations Bureau.
§ C9-4 PORT JERVIS CODE § C9-8
C:70
law shall not be permitted to prosecute or defend in any such action or
proceeding, unless the City Judge, for cause shown, shall first make and
enter in his minutes an order granting leave to do so.
§ C9-9. Employees: appointment; supervision; removal.
The Common Council shall appoint a Clerk, Stenographer and such other
employees as may be provided by the Common Council. The City Judge
shall supervise the employees and the Common Council may remove any
employee for cause as provided by law.
§ C9-10. Employees: powers and duties.
A. Clerk.
(1) The Clerk shall act as Stenographer of the Court if provision is not
otherwise made for a Stenographer.
(2) The Clerk shall keep the seal of the Court and affix it to such papers
and documents as he or she shall be required to certify.
(3) The Clerk shall be custodian of and deliver to his or her successor
in office all books, records and papers filed in his or her office, and
the official seal of the Court.
(4) The Clerk shall attend the sittings of the Court. The Clerk shall
have power to administer oaths, to take depositions and
acknowledgments, to receive verdicts of juries and in proper cases
to adjourn causes, and when no Judge appears he or she shall
adjourn to the next judicial day.
(5) The Clerk shall take information for the issuance of warrants of
arrest by a Judge, issue and sign subpoenas and precepts and make
and sign transcripts of judgment, executions, commitments and
certificates of conviction.
(6) The Clerk shall collect and receive all fees, fines and penalties paid
into the Court. He or she shall each month account for and pay the
same to the fiscal officer of the city or the State of New York,
together with a sworn statement containing the amounts collected
therein and such other information as may be required by law or
applicable regulation.
(7) The Clerk shall perform all other duties inherent in the position of
Clerk, and when necessary file certificate provided in § C9-6.
B. Stenographer. A Stenographer of the Court shall take stenographic
notes, or by mechanical device take the testimony and other
proceedings in all cases heard or tried before the Court, unless
otherwise directed by the Judge. Such notes or records shall be filed
with the Clerk and shall be kept by him or her for a period of two (2)
years. The Stenographer shall furnish without charge a copy or copies
§ C9-8 CHARTER § C9-10
C:71
§ C9-11. Employees: compensation; oath; bond.
§ C9-12. Interpreters.
Whenever it shall be necessary in the conduct of any trial or proceeding
before the City Court or the City Judge to interpret a foreign language, the
City Judge is authorized to employ a suitable person as interpreter. Claims
for such services shall be presented to and audited by the Common Council,
and paid as other claims against the city.
§ C9-13. Expenses.
The Common Council shall provide suitable rooms, light, heat, furnishings
and necessary books and supplies for the use of the Court, and shall
provide for the payment of the salaries and compensation of the Judges
of the transcript of such notes to the Court, upon request of the Judge,
and shall furnish to all other persons a transcript when requested, upon
payment of the prescribed fees.
C. Marshals. The City Marshals shall have the same power to serve and
execute all process and mandates of the Court as a sheriff. They shall
keep a record of their official acts in such manner as shall be prescribed
by the City Judge. The police officers of the city shall execute all
criminal process issued out of the Court when required to do so by the
Court. Neither a Marshal nor a police officer shall receive any fee or
compensation for the service of any criminal process issued out of the
court.
D. Duties of employees generally. In addition to the duties herein
prescribed, the officers and employees of the Court shall perform such
other duties as they are directed to perform by the Judge.
E. Court officer. The court officer shall be a city police officer appointed by
the Chief of Police, and shall perform all the duties of a police officer in
court as may be required by the City Judge.
A. The compensation of employees of the Court shall be fixed by the
Common Council. The Marshals shall be entitled to the same fees as the
Sheriff of Orange County for like services, to be paid by the party
requiring said services.
B. Before entering upon the discharge of his official duties, each employee
shall take the oath of office prescribed by law and file such oath in the
office of the City Clerk-Treasurer.
C. The Clerk and Marshals of the Court and such other employees as shall
be required to do so by the City Judge shall execute and file in the office
of the City Clerk-Treasurer a bond, in an amount fixed by the Common
Council, to be approved by the City Judge and conditioned for the
faithful performance of their duties.
§ C9-10 PORT JERVIS CODE § C9-13
C:72
and employees of the Court, and for whatever may be necessary for the
transaction of its business.
§ C9-14. When Court open.
The City Court shall be open for the transaction of business on such days
and at such hours as may be designated by the City Judge.
§ C9-13 CHARTER § C9-14
C:73

ARTICLE X
Bonds and Other Obligations of the City
§ C10-1. Mandatory referendum on bond resolutions. [Added
2-19-1991 by L.L. No. 1-1991, approved 2-28-199155]
A. Any bond resolution of the Common Council creating a city debt to be
evidenced by the issuance of bonds, other than the bonds hereinafter
expressly excepted, shall be adopted subject to a mandatory
referendum for the express purpose of approval or disapproval of the
bond resolution by a majority of the qualified voters voting thereon at a
special election held not less than twenty (20) nor more than thirty (30)
days after such bond resolution shall have been adopted by the
Common Council.
B. The Common Council shall, by resolution, determine the date and place
thereof and the hours of opening and closing of the polls and shall cause
a notice of such election to be published by the City Clerk-Treasurer in
the official newspaper at least twice, the first publication to be not less
than ten (10) days nor more than thirty (30) days prior to the election.
Such notice shall also contain an abstract of the bond resolution,
concisely stating the purpose and effect thereof. Such special election
shall be held at one (1) central place, to be designated in the resolution,
by and under the supervision of the City Clerk-Treasurer or his deputy.
The Common Council shall canvass the votes cast immediately after the
closing of the polls and shall forthwith make a certificate stating the
whole number of ballots voted at such election and the number of votes
cast for and against the proposition and shall cause the result of the
election so certified to be entered in its minutes. If a majority of the
qualified voters voting on the proposition vote in favor of the approval
of the bond resolution, the bonds may thereupon be issued to such
resolution. To be qualified to vote at such election, the voter must be a
registered voter of the City of Port Jervis.
C. The provisions of this section shall not apply to bond resolutions
authorizing the issuance of refunding bonds, or bonds for payment of
judgments or compromised or settled claims against such city, or
awards or sums payable by such city pursuant to a determination by a
court or an officer, body or agency acting in an administrative or quasijudicial
capacity or bonds to be issued to finance public improvements
which the Common Council has determined by resolution are necessary
for the public health or safety and/or which are mandated or otherwise
required by the County of Orange, State of New York, or the United
States of America or any agencies, public corporations or departments
of the foregoing which possess the power to mandate or require such
work and/or improvements at city expense. [Amended 6-12-2000 by
L.L. No. 5-2000, approved 6-12-2000]
55.Editor's Note: This local law also repealed former § C10-1, Right to incur indebtedness,
added 3-12-1984 by L.L. No. 2-1984, approved 4-9-1984.
§ C10-1 CHARTER § C10-2
C:75
§ C10-2. Deposit of proceeds of bonds.
The proceeds of bonds and notes, other than tax or revenue anticipation
notes, shall be deposited with the City Clerk-Treasurer, and shall be
disbursed by the City Clerk-Treasurer only upon order of the Common
Council or department or board of the city having charge of the
expenditures thereof.
§ C10-3. City Clerk-Treasurer to give bond.
The Common Council shall prescribe the amount of the bond which the
City Clerk-Treasurer shall give to the City of Port Jervis, conditioned for the
proper discharge of his duties in receiving and disbursing the proceeds of
the sale of any bonds or notes of the city; such bond shall be approved by
the Common Council.
§ C10-4. Payment of principal and interest.
The principal of and the interest on bonds, notes or other obligations, when
due and payable, shall be paid by the City Clerk-Treasurer from any funds
in his possession applicable to that purpose.
§ C10-2 PORT JERVIS CODE § C10-4
C:76
ARTICLE XI
Actions By and Against the City
§ C11-1. Limitations of actions against the city.
No action or proceeding to recover or enforce any claim, debt or demand
against the city shall be brought until the expiration of ninety (90) days
after the claim, debt or demand shall have been presented to the Common
Council for audit. All actions brought against the city upon any contract
liability, express or implied, must be commenced within one (1) year from
the time that the cause of action accrued, or if for injuries to the person
or property, caused by negligence, within one (1) year from the time of
receiving the injuries, and in other cases within six (6) months after the
refusal of the Common Council to allow the claim. The place of trial of
all actions or proceedings against the city, or any of its officers, boards or
departments, shall be the County of Orange.
§ C11-2. Liability of city in certain actions.56
No civil action shall be maintained against the city for damages or injuries
to person or property sustained in consequence of any street, highway,
bridge, culvert, sidewalk or crosswalk being out of repair, unsafe,
dangerous or obstructed, or in consequence of the existence of snow or ice
thereon, unless it appears that prior to the occurrence resulting in such
damages or injuries written notice of the defective, unsafe, dangerous or
obstructed condition, or of the existence of the snow or ice, was filed in the
office of the Director of Public Works of the city, relating to the particular
place, and that there was a failure or neglect to remedy such condition
within a reasonable time after the filing of such notice. The city shall not
be liable in a civil action for damages or injuries to person or property, or
invasion of personal or property rights, of any name or nature whatsoever,
whether casual or continuing, arising at law or in equity, alleged to have
been caused or sustained, in whole or in part, by or because of any omission
of duty, wrongful act, fault, neglect, misfeasance or negligence on the part
of the city, or any of its departments, agencies, boards or offices, unless a
claim therefor in writing, verified by the oath of the claimant containing a
statement of the place of residence of the claimant, by street and number,
if any, otherwise such facts as will disclose such place of residence with
reasonable certainty, and describing the time when, the particular place
where and the circumstances under which the damages or injuries were
sustained, the cause thereof and, so far as then practicable, the nature
and extent thereof, or a copy of such claim, shall within ninety (90) days
after the happening of the accident or injury or the occurrence of the act,
omission, fault or neglect out of which or on account of which the claim
arose, be presented to the Common Council and served upon the Mayor
or City Clerk-Treasurer, and notice of intention to commence an action
thereon be served upon the Corporation Counsel, nor unless an action shall
be commenced thereon within one (1) year after the happening of such
56.Editor's Note: Amended during codification (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. III).
§ C11-1 CHARTER § C11-2
C:77
accident or injury or the occurrence of such act, omission, fault or neglect;
but no action shall be commenced to recover upon or enforce any such claim
against the city until the expiration of three (3) months after the service
of said notice upon the Corporation Counsel. Nothing herein contained,
however, shall be held to revive any claim or cause of action now barred by
any existing requirement or statute of limitations, nor to waive any existing
limitation which is applicable to any claim or cause of action against the
city.
§ C11-3. No disqualifications of Judge or jury because of residence
in the city.
No person shall be disqualified from acting as Judge or juror, by reason of
being an inhabitant or freeholder in the City of Port Jervis, in any action or
proceeding in which the city is a party or is interested.
§ C11-4. Civil actions to recover penalties.
Civil actions to recover any penalties or forfeitures incurred under this
Charter shall be brought in the corporate name of said city as provided by
law.
§ C11-2 PORT JERVIS CODE § C11-4
C:78
ARTICLE XII
Miscellaneous Provisions
§ C12-1. Continuance of property and obligations of the city.
The corporation known as the City of Port Jervis, and included within the
boundaries of said city as fixed by the provisions of this Charter, and
all property real and personal, rights, powers, privileges and contracts,
possessed, owned, occupied, exercised or enjoyed by, and all duties,
contracts, obligations and liabilities imposed upon, said City of Port Jervis,
are hereby vested in, and imposed upon, the City of Port Jervis. The
Common Council of the City of Port Jervis is hereby authorized and
empowered in the name of, and for and in behalf of, the City of Port Jervis to
enforce all such rights, powers, privileges and contracts; and the rights and
privileges of all persons or parties that may have arisen or accrued under,
pursuant to or by reason of any such contracts, obligations or liabilities on
the part of said city shall remain and be the same under this Charter as they
would have been under the previous Charter of said city. All actions and
special proceedings heretofore commenced by or against said city, and now
pending undetermined, may be continued. The City of Port Jervis shall be
liable for the bonded and other indebtedness of the city previously incurred.
§ C12-2. Continuance of city local laws, ordinances and resolutions.
All existing local laws, ordinances, resolutions, rules and regulations of the
City of Port Jervis shall be and continue in force in the City of Port Jervis
with the same force and effect as if duly adopted and published by the
Common Council, except as the Common Council shall modify, amend or
repeal the same, subject to the provisions of this Charter.
§ C12-3. Payments of money to be made from and into the general
fund when not otherwise provided.
Except as herein otherwise provided, all moneys belonging to said city shall
be paid to the City Clerk-Treasurer thereof and deposited to the credit of
the general fund, and all payments of moneys made by said city, or by any
department, agency, board or officer of said city, when authorized by or in
pursuance of law, and the fund from which such payment is to be made is
not otherwise designated, shall be made from the general fund.
§ C12-4. Payment of city moneys to the City Clerk-Treasurer.
All officers or other persons, with the exception of the City Court, who shall
receive any money for or belonging to the city, by or under the provisions
of this Charter, or otherwise, shall, by not later than the next business day
after its receipt, pay the same over to the Clerk-Treasurer of the city and
take his receipt therefor, except as otherwise provided in this Charter.
§ C12-1 CHARTER § C12-5
C:79
§ C12-5. Maintenance of bridges partly within the city.
Highway bridges within the City of Port Jervis shall be constructed and
maintained by said city, and highway bridges within the Town of Deerpark
shall be constructed and maintained by said town. The expense of the
construction and maintenance of highway bridges within the said city and
the said town shall, by the Common Council of the said city and the Town
Board of said town, respectively, be annually reported to and audited by
the County Legislature of Orange County, and apportioned by said County
Legislature between the said city and the said town in proportion to their
assessed valuation, as the same shall appear on their respective assessment
rolls as annually equalized by the said County Legislature; provided,
however, that no item of expense for the construction or maintenance of
a highway bridge within said town exceeding one thousand five hundred
dollars ($1,500.) shall be chargeable to or payable by said city unless the
same shall have been previously approved by the Common Council thereof.
§ C12-6. Reading of Charter, local laws and ordinances in evidence.
The Charter of the City of Port Jervis may be read in evidence from the
volume containing such Charter printed by authority of the Common
Council, or from a copy certified by the City Clerk-Treasurer. Every local
law, ordinance or resolution of the Common Council may be read in
evidence either from a certified copy made by the City Clerk-Treasurer
or from the volume of local laws, ordinances and resolutions printed by
authority of the Common Council.
§ C12-7. Repeal of conflicting legislation; saving provision.
From and after the time when this Charter shall take effect, all legislation
and parts of legislation inconsistent with or repugnant to this Charter are
hereby repealed; but nothing herein contained shall be constructed so as
to destroy or take away any right or remedy acquired or given by any
legislation hereby repealed; and all proceedings commenced under any
such former legislation shall, and may be, carried out and completed, and all
prosecutions for any offense committed, or penalty or forfeiture incurred,
shall be carried on with the same effect as though this Charter had not been
adopted. But such repeal shall not revive any legislation or part thereof
heretofore repealed.
§ C12-8. Severability.
If any provision or provisions of this Charter are held to be invalid,
ineffective, unconstitutional in whole or in part or inapplicable to any
person or situation, it is the purpose and intent of this Charter that such
determination shall not affect the validity, force and effect of any other
provision or provisions thereof.
§ C12-5 PORT JERVIS CODE § C12-9
C:80
§ C12-9. Amendments authorized.
The Common Council may, at any time, repeal, modify or amend this
Charter.
§ C12-10. When effective.
This Charter shall take effect January 1, 1974.
§ C12-9 CHARTER § C12-10
C:81
The Code
Part I, Administrative Legislation
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ C12-10 PORT JERVIS CODE § C12-10
1:82
ARTICLE I
General Penalty
[Adopted 9-28-1981 by L.L. No. 4-1981 (Ch. 1, Art. II of the 1981
Code)]
§ 1-1. Penalties for offenses.
Except where specific maximum penalties are provided elsewhere in the
Code of the City of Port Jervis, in a state law or in another ordinance or
local law of the City for a particular offense, unlawful act or prohibited
act, any person who shall commit an offense against any provision of the
Code of the City of Port Jervis, or any provision of any other City ordinance
or local law referring to these general penalty provisions, or against any
regulation duly authorized and adopted pursuant to an ordinance or local
law of the City of Port Jervis, by doing any act prohibited or declared to be
unlawful thereby or declared to be an offense, unlawful act or prohibited
act thereby, or who shall engage in or exercise any business or occupation
or do anything for which a license or permit is required thereby without
having a valid license or permit therefor as required, or who shall fail to do
any act when such provision declares such failure to be an offense, unlawful
act or prohibited act, shall, upon conviction thereof, be deemed guilty of a
violation as defined by the Penal Law of the State of New York, punishable
by a fine not exceeding $250 or by imprisonment for not more than 15 days,
or by both such fine and imprisonment.
§ 1-2. Continuing offenses.
The continuation of an offense for each successive day shall, unless
provided otherwise, constitute a separate violation, and the person or
persons allowing or permitting the continuation of the offense may be
punished as provided above for each such separate violation.
§ 1-3. Additional remedies.
The imposition of a penalty as provided above, or as specifically provided in
any chapter of the Code of the City of Port Jervis or other ordinance or local
law of the City, shall be in addition to any injunctive or remedial relief or any
civil penalty which is authorized under the laws of the State of New York or
the ordinances and local laws of the City of Port Jervis, with the same force
and effect as though provided for herein. Any penalty or relief shall not be
deemed to be in lieu of any provision for revocation or suspension of any
license or permit.
§ 1-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-3
1:83

ARTICLE II
Adoption of Code
[Adopted 2-26-2007 by L.L. No. 2-2007]
§ 1-4. Legislative intent.
In accordance with Subdivision 3 of § 20 of the Municipal Home Rule
Law, the local laws, ordinances and certain resolutions of the City of Port
Jervis, as codified by General Code, LLC, and consisting of the Charter
and Chapters 1 through 535, together with an Appendix, shall be known
collectively as the "Code of the City of Port Jervis," hereafter termed the
"Code." Wherever reference is made in any of the local laws, ordinances and
resolutions contained in the "Code of the City of Port Jervis" to any other
local law, ordinance or resolution appearing in said Code, such reference
shall be changed to the appropriate chapter title, chapter number, article
number or section number where such legislation appears in the Code, as
if such local law, ordinance or resolution had been formally amended to so
read.
§ 1-5. Continuation of existing provisions.
The provisions of the Code, insofar as they are substantively the same as
those of local laws, ordinances and resolutions in force immediately prior to
the enactment of the Code by this local law, are intended as a continuation
of such local laws, ordinances and resolutions and not as new enactments,
and the effectiveness of such provisions shall date from the date of adoption
of the prior local law, ordinance or resolution. All such provisions are hereby
continued in full force and effect and are hereby reaffirmed as to their
adoption by the Common Council of the City of Port Jervis, and it is the
intention of said Council that each such provision contained within the Code
is hereby reaffirmed as it appears in said Code. Only such provisions of
former local laws and ordinances as are omitted from this Code shall be
deemed repealed or abrogated by the provisions of § 1-6 below.
§ 1-6. Repeal of enactments not included in Code.
All local laws and ordinances of a general and permanent nature of the City
of Port Jervis in force on the date of the adoption of this local law and not
contained in such Code or recognized and continued in force by reference
therein are hereby repealed from and after the effective date of this local
law.
§ 1-7. Enactments saved from repeal; matters not affected.
The repeal of local laws and ordinances provided for in § 1-6 of this local law
shall not affect the following classes of local laws, ordinances, rights and
obligations, which are hereby expressly saved from repeal:
A. Any right or liability established, accrued or incurred under any
legislative provision of the City of Port Jervis prior to the effective date
§ 1-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-7
1:85
§ 1-8. Severability.
If any clause, sentence, paragraph, section, article, chapter or part of
this local law or of any local law, ordinance or resolution included in this
of this local law or any action or proceeding brought for the
enforcement of such right or liability.
B. Any offense or act committed or done before the effective date of this
local law in violation of any legislative provision of the City of Port Jervis
or any penalty, punishment or forfeiture which may result therefrom.
C. Any prosecution, indictment, action, suit or other proceeding pending
or any judgment rendered prior to the effective date of this local law
brought pursuant to any legislative provision of the City of Port Jervis.
D. Any agreement entered into or any franchise, license, right, easement
or privilege heretofore granted or conferred by the City of Port Jervis.
E. Any local law or ordinance of the City of Port Jervis providing for the
laying out, opening, altering, widening, relocating, straightening,
establishing grade, changing name, improvement, acceptance or
vacation of any right-of-way, easement, street, road, highway, park or
other public place within the City of Port Jervis or any portion thereof.
F. Any local law or ordinance of the City of Port Jervis appropriating
money or transferring funds, promising or guaranteeing the payment of
money or authorizing the issuance and delivery of any bond of the City
of Port Jervis or other instruments or evidence of the City's
indebtedness.
G. Local laws or ordinances authorizing the purchase, sale, lease or
transfer of property or any lawful contract, agreement or obligation.
H. The levy or imposition of special assessments or charges.
I. The annexation or dedication of property.
J. Any local law or ordinance relating to salaries and compensation.
K. Any local law or ordinance amending the Zoning Map.
L. Any local law or ordinance relating to or establishing a pension plan or
pension fund for City employees.
M. Any local law or ordinance or portion of a local law or ordinance
establishing a specific fee amount for any license, permit or service
obtained from the City.
N. Any local law adopted subsequent to July 10, 2006.
O. Police Department regulations.
P. Subdivision Regulations.
§ 1-7 PORT JERVIS CODE § 1-8
1:86
Code now or through supplementation shall be adjudged by any court of
competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such judgment shall not affect, impair
or invalidate the remainder thereof but shall be confined in its operation
to the clause, sentence, paragraph, section, article, chapter or part thereof
directly involved in the controversy in which such judgment shall have been
rendered.
§ 1-9. Copy of Code on file.
A copy of the Code, in loose-leaf form, has been filed in the office of the City
Clerk-Treasurer of the City of Port Jervis and shall remain there for use and
examination by the public until final action is taken on this local law; and,
if this local law shall be adopted, such copy shall be certified to by the City
Clerk-Treasurer of the City of Port Jervis by impressing thereon the Seal of
the City of Port Jervis, and such certified copy shall remain on file in the
office of said City Clerk-Treasurer to be made available to persons desiring
to examine the same during all times while the said Code is in effect. The
enactment and publication of this local law, coupled with the availability of
a copy of the Code for inspection by the public, shall be deemed, held and
considered to be due and legal publication of all provisions of the Code for
all purposes.
§ 1-10. Amendments to Code.
Any and all additions, deletions, amendments or supplements to any of the
local laws, ordinances and resolutions known collectively as the "Code of
the City of Port Jervis" or any new local laws, ordinances or resolutions,
when enacted or adopted in such form as to indicate the intention of the
Common Council to be a part thereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated
into such Code so that reference to the Code shall be understood and
intended to include such additions, deletions, amendments or supplements.
Whenever such additions, deletions, amendments or supplements to the
Code shall be enacted or adopted, they shall thereafter be printed and, as
provided hereunder, inserted in the loose-leaf book containing said Code as
amendments and supplements thereto. Nothing contained in this local law
shall affect the status of any local law, ordinance or resolution contained
herein, and such local laws, ordinances or resolutions may be amended,
deleted or changed from time to time as the Common Council deems
desirable.
§ 1-11. Code book to be kept up-to-date.
It shall be the duty of the City Clerk-Treasurer to keep up-to-date the
certified copy of the book containing the Code of the City of Port Jervis
required to be filed in the office of the City Clerk-Treasurer for use by
the public. All changes in said Code and all local laws, ordinances and
resolutions adopted by the Common Council subsequent to the enactment
of this local law in such form as to indicate the intention of said Common
Council to be a part of said Code shall, when finally enacted or adopted, be
included therein by temporary attachment of copies of such changes, local
§ 1-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-11
1:87
laws, ordinances or resolutions until such changes, local laws, ordinances
or resolutions are printed as supplements to said Code book, at which time
such supplements shall be inserted therein.
§ 1-12. Sale of Code book; supplementation.
Copies of the Code, or any chapter or portion of it, may be purchased from
the City Clerk-Treasurer, or an authorized agent of the Clerk-Treasurer,
upon the payment of a fee to be set by resolution of the Common Council.
The Clerk-Treasurer may also arrange for procedures for the periodic
supplementation of the Code.
§ 1-13. Penalties for tampering with Code.
Any person who, without authorization from the City Clerk-Treasurer,
changes or amends, by additions or deletions, any part or portion of the
Code of the City of Port Jervis or who alters or tampers with such Code in
any manner whatsoever which will cause the legislation of the City of Port
Jervis to be misrepresented thereby or who violates any other provision of
this local law shall be guilty of an offense and shall, upon conviction thereof,
be subject to a fine of not more than $250 or imprisonment for a term of not
more than 15 days, or both.
§ 1-14. Changes in previously adopted legislation; new provisions.
A. In compiling and preparing the local laws, ordinances and resolutions
for publication as the Code of the City of Port Jervis, no changes in the
meaning or intent of such local laws, ordinances and resolutions have
been made, except as provided for in Subsections B and C hereof.
Certain grammatical changes and other minor nonsubstantive changes
were made in one or more of said pieces of legislation. It is the intention
of the Common Council that all such changes be adopted as part of the
Code as if the local laws, ordinances and resolutions had been
previously formally amended to read as such.
B. The following changes are made throughout the Code:
(1) References to the "City Council" are amended to read "Common
Council."
(2) References to the "Clerk" and "Treasurer" are amended to read
"Clerk-Treasurer."
(3) References to the "Superintendent of Water," "Water
Superintendent," "Superintendent of Streets and Sewers" and
"Superintendent of Public Works" are amended to read "Director of
Public Works."
(4) References to the New York State Statutes are updated to reflect
the current numbering of the statutes as of the publication of the
Code.
§ 1-11 PORT JERVIS CODE § 1-14
1:88
§ 1-15. Incorporation of provisions into Code.
The provisions of this local law are hereby made Article II of Chapter 1 of
the Code of the City of Port Jervis, such local law to be entitled "General
Provisions, Article II, Adoption of Code," and the sections of this local law
shall be numbered §§ 1-4 to 1-16, inclusive.
§ 1-16. When effective.
This local law shall take effect immediately upon filing with the Secretary of
State of the State of New York.
C. In addition, the amendments and/or additions as set forth in Schedule A
attached hereto and made a part hereof are made herewith, to become
effective upon the effective date of this local law. (Chapter and section
number references are to the local laws, ordinances and resolutions as
they have been renumbered and appear in the Code.)57
57.Editor’s Note: In accordance with § 1-14C, the chapters, parts and sections which were
added, amended, adopted or deleted by this local law are indicated throughout the Code
by a footnote referring to Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II. During routine
supplementation, footnotes indicating amendments, additions or deletions will be
replaced with the following history: “Amended (added, deleted) 2-26-2007 by L.L. No.
2-2007.” Schedule A, which contains a complete description of all changes, is on file in the
City offices.
§ 1-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-16
1:89

ARTICLE III
Adoption of Charter Revisions
[During the process of codification, the City identified certain
changes needed to the City Charter. A local law to adopt these
changes is presently proposed before the Common Council. Upon
final adoption, the local law number and adoption date will be noted
here. Affected sections in the Charter are noted as "amended (or
added) during codification; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. III."]
GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-16
1:91
Chapter 8
APPEARANCE TICKETS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Police Department — See Ch. 130. Traffic Violations Bureau — See Ch. 170.
§ 8-1. Purpose; statutory authority; intent.
§ 8-2. Definition and procedure.
For the purposes of this chapter, the term "appearance ticket" shall have
the same meaning as provided in Article 150, § 150.10, of the Criminal
Procedure Law of the State of New York, and the procedure governing the
use of appearance tickets shall conform in all respects to the requirements
of Article 150 and other applicable articles of said law.
§ 8-3. Persons authorized to issue tickets.58
The following persons, in the performance of their respective duties, are
hereby authorized to issue appearance tickets under the provisions of
A. The purpose of this chapter is to authorize certain officers and
employees of the City of Port Jervis, hereinafter designated, to issue
and serve in the City of Port Jervis appearance tickets, returnable in
City Court, with respect to designated offenses of less than felony
grade, upon persons when such City officers or employees have
reasonable cause to believe that such persons have committed one or
more misdemeanors or petty offenses in the presence of any such City
officers or employees.
B. The authorization and designations herein made are pursuant to the
power vested in the Common Council under and by virtue of Chapter
495 of the Laws of 1978, amending the Criminal Procedure Law and the
Municipal Home Rule Law.
C. In granting such authority to the City officers or employees so
designated herein, it is the intention of the Common Council to
supplement, and not in any way to substitute for or diminish or replace,
any existing enforcement authority or practice now vested in or
exercised by any duly authorized law enforcement agency or officer
with respect to the offenses hereinafter mentioned, nor shall the
authority to issue appearance tickets imply any restraint upon the
power of the City of Port Jervis or any officer or employee thereof to
utilize any alternative method of enforcement or prosecution which may
be provided by law.
58.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 1-16 PORT JERVIS CODE § 8-3
8:92
§§ 150.10 and 150.20 of the Criminal Procedure Law and § 10, Subdivision
4(a), of the Municipal Home Rule Law of the State of New York for offenses
against the ordinances and local laws of the City of Port Jervis:
§ 8-4. Contents of ticket; distribution of copies.
Chapter 21
CITY PROPERTY, SALE OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Sale of lands for unpaid taxes — See Charter,
§ C6-20.
A. Code Enforcement Officers.
B. Director and Assistant Director of the Department of Public Works.
C. Chief of the Fire Department.
D. Fire Inspector.
E. Animal Control Officer.
A. Every appearance ticket that is issued pursuant to the provisions of this
chapter shall include the following:
(1) The name and address of party(ies) to whom the ticket is issued.
(2) A citation of the law(s) or ordinance(s) and the appropriate sections
allegedly violated.
(3) The place and date of the alleged violation(s).
(4) The place, date and time that the party(ies) is (are) required to
appear in court.
(5) The date of issuance of the appearance ticket(s).
(6) The title and signature of the issuing officer(s).
B. Each appearance ticket shall recite the following: "Upon your failure to
appear, a warrant may be issued for your arrest" and shall be in
triplicate, with the original being served upon the offender, the second
copy being sent to the Court and the third being kept in the files of the
issuing office.
§ 8-3 CITY PROPERTY, SALE OF § 21-1
21:93
§ 21-1. Applicability.
This chapter shall govern the sale of all City-owned real estate except where
said real estate was acquired pursuant to an urban renewal program as
authorized by the General Municipal Law of the State of New York.
§ 21-2. Method of sale.
Sale of City-owned real property may be made in any of the following ways:
§ 21-3. Approvals needed.
§ 21-4. Referendum.
No sale of property pursuant to this chapter shall be subject to a
referendum.
Chapter 30
DEFENSE AND INDEMNIFICATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Code of Ethics — See Ch. 47. Officers and employees — See Ch. 115.
§ 30-1. Findings.
It was found and declared that:
A. Private negotiated sale between the City and purchaser; or
B. Public auction, with or without a minimum price.
A. Any sale of City real estate, whether by private sale or public auction,
must be approved by a three-fourths vote of the membership of the
Common Council.
B. Any sale of real property made pursuant to this chapter shall be subject
to a veto by the Mayor, to be made within 10 days of the Council's
approval of the terms of a private sale or within 10 days of the sale at
public auction.
A. The City of Port Jervis has always adhered to the long-standing public
policy of indemnifying and saving harmless from financial loss its
officers and employees for the exercise or performance or in good faith
purporting to exercise or perform their powers and duties.
B. This long-standing public policy is necessary to enable public officers
and employees of the City to conscientiously and thoroughly perform
their powers and duties to the fullest extent.
§ 21-1 PORT JERVIS CODE § 30-1
30:94
§ 30-2. Application of Public Officers Law.
The full benefits of § 18 of the Public Officers Law of the State of New
York are hereby conferred upon all of the officers and employees of the
City of Port Jervis, and the City of Port Jervis shall be liable for all of the
costs incurred under that section, as well as the costs incurred under the
following section hereof.
§ 30-3. Procedures and conditions.
C. The State of New York has also adopted this public policy of
indemnification and saving harmless from financial loss its officers and
employees.
D. The City of Port Jervis, through the provisions hereinafter set forth,
seeks to codify its long-standing policy as mentioned above while
keeping in harmony with the statutory philosophy espoused by the
State of New York by conferring upon its officers and employees all of
the benefits of § 18 of the Public Officers Law.
E. The City of Port Jervis wishes to confirm its ongoing confidence in the
City officers and employers in carrying out their respective
responsibilities and duties in good faith and in the best interest of the
City, and to ensure that City officers and employees acting within the
scope of their employment shall be fully defended and indemnified by
the City against claims brought against them by enacting defense and
indemnification benefits in supplement to those provided under § 18 of
the Public Officers Law.
A. Definitions. As used in this section, unless the context otherwise
requires, the following terms shall have the meaning indicated:
CITY — The City of Port Jervis, its departments and agencies.
EMPLOYEE — Any member of a public board or commission, director,
officer, employee, volunteer expressly authorized to participate in a
publicly sponsored volunteer program or any other person holding a
position by election, appointment or employment in the service of the
City, whether or not compensated. The term "employee" shall include
a former employee, his/her estate or judicially appointed personal
representative but shall not include an independent contractor.59
B. Supplemental defense. Upon compliance by the employee with the
provisions of Subsection D of this section, the City shall provide for the
defense of the employee in any civil or administrative action or
proceeding, state or federal, arising out of any alleged act or omission
which occurred or allegedly occurred while the employee was acting
within the scope of his/her public employment or duties. This duty to
59.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 30-1 DEFENSE AND INDEMNIFICATION § 30-3
30:95
provide for a defense shall not arise where such civil administrative
action or proceeding is brought by or at the behest of the City.
C. Supplemental indemnification.
(1) The City shall indemnify and save harmless its employees in the
amount of any judgment obtained against such employees in a state
or federal civil or administrative action or proceeding or in the
amount of any settlement of a claim, provided that the act or
omission from which such judgment or claim arose occurred while
the employee was acting within the scope of his/her public
employment or duties; provided, further, that in the case of a
settlement, the duty to indemnify and save harmless shall be
conditioned upon the approval of the amount of settlement by the
City. The duty to indemnify and save harmless prescribed by this
section shall not arise where the injury or damage resulted from
intentional wrongdoing, maliciousness or recklessness on the part
of the employee.
(2) The City shall indemnify and save harmless its employees in the
amount of any costs, attorneys' fees, damages, fines or penalties
which may be imposed by any reason of an adjudication that any
employee acting within the scope of his/her public employment or
duties has, without willfulness or intent on his/her part, violated a
prior order, judgment, consent decree or stipulation of settlement
entered in any administrative action or proceeding of this state or
of the United States.
(3) The City shall also indemnify and save harmless its employees in
the amount of any punitive damages in accordance with the
following procedure and such additional procedures as may be
established by the Corporation Counsel:
(a) Within 20 days of an employee's delivery of a summons or
complaint, process, notice, demand or pleading containing a
demand for punitive damages, the Corporation Counsel shall
make findings and an initial determination whether the
employee should or should not be indemnified against any
punitive damages based upon the facts and circumstances then
known to the Corporation Counsel as follows:
[1] Whether the employee's actions were or were not within
the scope of his/her employment.
[2] Whether the employee's actions were or were not reckless,
malicious, grossly negligent or otherwise outside of the
standards required for employees holding comparable
positions with the City.
[3] Whether the employee's actions were or were not made in
good faith and in the best interests of the City.
§ 30-3 PORT JERVIS CODE § 30-3
30:96
[4] Whether the employee did or did not willfully violate a
clearly established provision of law or City policy.
(b) In the event that the Corporation Counsel is named defendant
in an action or proceeding or cannot serve for any other
reason, the Common Council shall appoint an individual to
serve instead of the Corporation Counsel on the matter under
review.
(c) In the event of a final judgment of punitive damages against
the employee, the employee shall serve copies of such
judgment personally or by certified or registered mail within
10 days of the date of entry upon the Corporation Counsel and
upon the City Clerk-Treasurer on behalf of the Common
Council. The Common Council shall meet as soon as
practicable in executive session to review and make findings,
taking into consideration and giving weight to the initial and
additional findings made by the Corporation Counsel, provided
that the employee did not formerly misrepresent or omit
material facts evidenced at trial, and determine if the following
have been met and, if so met, shall appropriate the funds
necessary to pay such punitive damages:
[1] The judgment of punitive damages is based on an act or
omission of an employee acting within the scope of his/her
employment.
[2] At the time of the action or omission giving rise to the
liability, the employee acted:
[a] Without recklessness;
[b] Without maliciousness;
[c] Without gross negligence; and
[d] Otherwise within the standards required for
employees holding comparable positions with the City.
[3] At the time of the act or omission, the employee acted in
good faith and in the best interest of the City.
[4] At the time of the act or omission, the employee did not
willfully violate a clearly established provision of law or
City policy.
(d) The deliberations, findings and determinations of the
Corporation Counsel and Common Council shall remain
confidential.
D. The duty to defend or indemnify and save harmless prescribed by this
chapter shall be conditioned upon:
§ 30-3 DEFENSE AND INDEMNIFICATION § 30-3
30:97
(1) Delivery by the employee to the Corporation Counsel of a written
request to provide for his/her defense together with the original or
a copy of any summons, complaint, process, notice, demand or
pleading within 10 days after he/she is served with such document.
(2) The full cooperation of the employee in the defense of such action
or proceeding and in defense of any action or proceeding against
the City based upon the same act or omission and in the
prosecution of any appeal.
E. The benefits of this chapter shall inure only to employees as defined
herein and shall not enlarge or diminish the rights of any party, nor
shall any provision of this chapter be construed to affect, alter or repeal
any provision of the Workers' Compensation Law.
F. This chapter shall not in any way affect the obligation of any claimant to
give notice to the City under § 10 of the Court of Claims Act, § 50-e of
the General Municipal Law or any other provision of law.
G. The Common Council is hereby authorized and empowered to purchase
insurance from any insurance company created by or under the laws of
this state, or authorized by law to transact business in this state,
against any liability imposed by the provisions of this chapter, or to act
as a self-insurer with respect thereto.
H. All payments made under the terms of this chapter, whether for
insurance or otherwise, shall be deemed to be for a public purpose and
shall be audited and paid in the same manner as other public charges.
I. The provisions of this chapter shall not be construed to impair, alter,
limit or modify the rights and obligations of any insurer under any
policy of insurance.
J. Except as otherwise specifically provided in this chapter, the provisions
of this chapter shall not be construed in any way to impair, alter, modify,
abrogate or restrict any immunity to liability available to or conferred
upon any unit, entity, officer or employee of the City by, in accordance
with or by reason of any provision of state or federal statutory or
common law.
K. Benefits accorded to employees under this chapter shall be in
supplement to defense or indemnification protection accorded the same
employees by other enactment.
L. If any provision of this chapter or the application thereof to any person
or circumstance is held unconstitutional or invalid, in whole or part, by
any court, such holding of unconstitutionality or invalidity shall in no
way affect or impair any other provision of this chapter or the
application of any such provision to any other person or circumstance.
M. This chapter shall apply to all actions or proceedings in which final
judgment has not yet been entered.
§ 30-3 PORT JERVIS CODE § 30-3
30:98
Chapter 42
ELECTIONS
§ 30-3 ELECTIONS § 30-3
42:99

ARTICLE I
Special Elections
[Adopted 8-2-1982 by L.L. No. 6-1982 (Ch. 15, Art. I of the 1981
Code)]
§ 42-1. Applicability.
This article shall apply to all special elections held within the City of Port
Jervis under authority of the City Charter, Code of the City of Port Jervis, the
Municipal Home Rule Law of the State of New York or any other legislation
permitting or requiring a special election.
§ 42-2. Eligible voters.
Only those persons who are duly qualified and registered voters in
accordance with Article 5 of the Election Law of the State of New York and
residents of the City of Port Jervis shall be eligible to vote in any special
election held in and for the City of Port Jervis.
§ 42-3. Polling places.
Polling places for all special elections shall be those designated by the
Common Council pursuant to § 4-104 of the Election Law.
§ 42-4. Hours for voting.
Polling places shall be open to voting from 12:00 noon to 9:00 p.m. on the
special election date, except when the special election is held together with
a primary or general election, in which case the polls shall be open the same
hours as for the primary or general election.
§ 42-1 ELECTIONS § 42-4
42:101
Chapter 47
ETHICS, CODE OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Officers and employees — See Ch. 115.
§ 47-1. Declaration of policy.
Pursuant to the provisions of § 806 of the General Municipal Law, the
Common Council of the City of Port Jervis recognizes that there are rules of
ethical conduct for public officers and employees which must be observed
if a high degree of moral conduct is to be obtained and if public confidence
is to be maintained in our unit of local government. It is the purpose of
this chapter to promulgate these rules of ethical conduct for the officers
and employees of the City of Port Jervis. These rules shall serve as a guide
for official conduct of the officers and employees of the City of Port Jervis.
The rules of ethical conduct of this chapter, as adopted, shall not conflict
with but shall be in addition to any prohibition of Article 18 of the General
Municipal Law or any other general or special law relating to ethical
conduct and interest in contracts of municipal officers and employees.
§ 47-2. Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words shall have the meaning
indicated:
INTEREST — A direct or indirect pecuniary or material benefit accruing
to a municipal officer or employee as the result of a contract with the
municipality which such officer or employee serves. For the purposes of this
chapter, a municipal officer or employee shall be deemed to have an interest
in the contract of:60
His or her spouse, minor children and dependents, except a contract
of employment with the municipality which such officer or employee
serves.
A.
A firm, partnership or association of which such officer or employee is
a member or employee.
B.
A corporation of which such officer or employee is an officer, director
or employee.
C.
A corporation any stock of which is owned or controlled directly or
indirectly by such officer or employee
D.
60.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 42-4 PORT JERVIS CODE § 47-2
47:102
MUNICIPAL OFFICER OR EMPLOYEE — An officer or employee of the
City of Port Jervis, whether paid or unpaid, including members of any
administrative board, commission or other agency thereof. No person shall
be deemed to be a municipal officer or employee solely by reason of being
a volunteer fireman or civil defense volunteer, except a chief engineer or
assistant chief engineer.
§ 47-3. Standards of conduct.61
Every officer or employee of the City of Port Jervis shall be subject to and
abide by the following standards of conduct:
A. Gifts. He shall not, directly or indirectly, solicit any gift, or accept or
receive any gift having a value in excess of the limit prescribed by
Subdivision 1 of § 805-a of the General Municipal Law, as amended,
whether in the form of money, services, loan, travel, entertainment,
hospitality, thing or promise or any other form, under circumstances in
which it could reasonably be inferred that the gift was intended to
influence him or could reasonably be expected to influence him in the
performance of his official duties or was intended as a reward for any
official action on his part.62
B. Confidential information. He shall not disclose confidential information
acquired by him in the course of his official duties or use such
information to further his personal interest.
C. Representation before one's own agency. He shall not receive or enter
into any agreement, express or implied, for compensation for services
to be rendered in relation to any matter before any municipal agency of
which he is an officer, member or employee or before any municipal
agency over which he has jurisdiction or to which he has the power to
appoint any member, officer or employee.
D. Representation before any agency for a contingent fee. He shall not
receive or enter into any agreement, express or implied, for
compensation for services to be rendered in relation to any matter
before any agency of this municipality whereby his compensation is to
be dependent or contingent upon any action by such agency with
respect to such matter, provided that this subsection shall not prohibit
the fixing at any time of fees based upon the reasonable value of the
services rendered.
E. Disclosure of interest in legislation. To the extent that he knows thereof,
a member of the Common Council and any officer or employee of the
City of Port Jervis, whether paid or unpaid, who participates in the
discussion or gives official opinion to the Common Council on any
legislation before the Common Council shall publicly disclose on the
61.Editor's Note: See the Charter, § C3-3, for provisions concerning the liability of officers for
official misconduct.
62.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 47-2 ETHICS, CODE OF § 47-3
47:103
§ 47-4. Right to file claims preserved.
Nothing herein shall be deemed to bar or prevent the timely filing by a
present or former municipal officer or employee of any claim, account,
demand or suit against the City of Port Jervis or any agency thereof on
behalf of himself or any member of his family arising out of any personal
injury or property damage or for any lawful benefit authorized or permitted
by law.
§ 47-5. Distribution of code.63
The Mayor of the City of Port Jervis shall cause a copy of this Code of
Ethics to be distributed to every officer and employee of the City of Port
Jervis within 30 days after the effective date of this chapter. Each officer and
employee elected or appointed thereafter shall be furnished a copy before
entering upon the duties of his office or employment. Failure to distribute
any such copy or failure of any officer or employee to receive such copy
shall have no effect on the duty of compliance with such code, nor the
enforcement of provisions thereof.
§ 47-6. Penalties for offenses.
In addition to any penalty contained in any other provision of law, any
person who shall knowingly and intentionally violate any of the provisions of
this code may be fined, suspended or removed from office or employment,
as the case may be, in the manner provided by law.
Chapter 55
official record the nature and extent of any direct or indirect financial
or other private interest he has in such legislation.
F. Investments in conflict with official duties. He shall not invest or hold
any investment directly or indirectly in any financial, business,
commercial or other private transaction which creates a conflict with
his official duties.
G. Private employment. He shall not engage in, solicit, negotiate for or
promise to accept private employment or render services for private
interests when such employment or service creates a conflict with or
impairs the proper discharge of his official duties.
H. Future employment. He shall not, after the termination of service or
employment with such municipality, appear before any board or agency
of the City of Port Jervis in relation to any case, proceeding or
application in which he personally participated during the period of his
service or employment or which was under his active consideration.
63.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 47-3 PORT JERVIS CODE § 47-6
55:104
FIRE DEPARTMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire Department — See Charter, Art. VIII.
§ 47-6 FIRE DEPARTMENT § 47-6
55:105

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 55-1. Designation; tax exempt status.
§ 55-2. Function.
Its object shall be the preservation and protection of life and property from
and during such fires and other emergencies as may occur in the City and
in such other territory to which the Chief of the Fire Department may be
authorized to dispatch assistance.
§ 55-3. Composition.
The Department shall be composed of those fire companies appointed by
the Common Council under § C8-3 of the Charter, and each company shall
contain not more than 75 men on the active roll or such other number as
may be determined by the Common Council under the authority vested in
that body.
§ 55-4. Active members to constitute membership.
The members of the Fire Department shall be the active members of each
company.
§ 55-5. Adoption procedure for Department bylaws.
Adoption of bylaws by the Fire Department shall be subject to procedure
as follows: After having been read at a regular meeting of the Board of
Officers, a vote shall be taken at the next regular meeting of the Board of
Officers following the period of time during which each fire company shall
have held a regular meeting, and if then approved by 75% of the votes cast,
the bylaws shall become effective as of the date approved by the Common
Council.
A. The organization regulated herein shall be known as the "Port Jervis
Fire Department."
B. The Port Jervis Fire Department is organized exclusively for one or
more exempt purposes within the meaning of Section 501(c)(3) of the
Internal Revenue Code, or corresponding section of any future federal
tax code. Upon the dissolution of the Port Jervis Fire Department,
assets shall be distributed for one or more exempt purposes within the
meaning of Section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code, or
corresponding section of any future federal tax code, or shall be
distributed to the federal government or to a state or local government
for a public purpose. [Added 7-23-2007 by L.L. No. 7-2007]
§ 55-1 FIRE DEPARTMENT § 55-6
55:107
§ 55-6. Amendments to Department bylaws.
Any amendment to the bylaws of the Fire Department shall be made only in
the following manner: An amendment may be proposed by any member of
the Board of Officers at a regular meeting. It shall then be held in abeyance
during such time as shall give each of the fire companies opportunity to
have considered it at the next regular meeting of such fire company. It shall
then be submitted at the next regular meeting of the Board of Officers, in
writing, and if approved by 75% of the members present, such amendment
shall be drawn in proper form by the proposer in conjunction with the Bylaw
Committee so as to become part of the bylaws, subject to the approval of
the Common Council.
§ 55-7. Designation of officers.64
The officers of the Department shall consist of a Chief, First Assistant,
Second Assistant, Treasurer, Secretary, and the Captain, First Lieutenant
and Second Lieutenant of each of the fire companies.
§ 55-8. Election of officers.
The Chief, First Assistant, Second Assistant, Treasurer and Secretary shall
be elected by the active members of the Fire Department at such time, for
such terms and in such manner as the Common Council may prescribe or as
may hereinafter be set forth, subject to approval of the Common Council.
§ 55-9. Submission of voting list to Common Council.
Each fire company of the City shall furnish the Common Council a list
of active members eligible to vote for Department officers, said list to be
furnished at least one week prior to the date fixed for such election.
§ 55-10. Duties of officers.
The duties of the Department officers shall be those duties set forth in
Article VIII of the Charter of the City of Port Jervis.
§ 55-11. Duty of officers upon expiration of term.
Each officer of the Fire Department, upon the expiration of his term or
upon his removal from the City, shall deliver all books, papers, writings and
property of every kind and description to his successor in office or to such
person or persons as the Mayor and Common Council may appoint for that
purpose.65
64.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
65.Editor's Note: Original § 19-12, Annual report by Chief required; contents, which
immediately followed this section, was deleted at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. II).
§ 55-6 PORT JERVIS CODE § 55-12
55:108
§ 55-12. Annual report by Chief; contents.
It shall be the duty of the Chief of the Fire Department to file an annual
report with the City Clerk-Treasurer wherein shall be set forth the
following:
§ 55-13. Composition of Board of Officers.
The officers set out in § 55-7 of this chapter and the Chief of Fire Police shall
comprise the Board of Officers of the Fire Department.
§ 55-14. Meetings of Board of Officers.
The Board of Officers as designated in § 55-7 of this chapter shall meet once
a month at such time and place as may be designated by the Chief and in
addition shall convene for such special meetings as may be ordered by the
Chief.
§ 55-15. Chief to preside at Board meetings; succession to Chair.
The Chief shall preside at meetings of the Board of Officers. The order of
succession to the Chair in the absence of the Chief or other officers shall be
as follows: First Assistant, Second Assistant, Treasurer and Secretary.
§ 55-16. Quorum for Board meetings.
A quorum shall consist of 1/3 of the members of the Board of Officers,
and no meeting of the Board of Officers shall be held nor any business
transacted if there is less than a quorum present at the appointed time and
place.
§ 55-17. Order of business at Board meetings.
The order of business for meetings of the Board of Officers shall be as
follows:
A. A list of all the members in the respective companies, distinguishing the
honorary from the active members.
B. The number and names of those added during the preceding year.
C. The number and names of those who have been dropped by reason of
death, removal, resignation, expiration of service and discharge.
D. A full, minute inventory of all property of the Department in the hands
of the company and its officers.
E. The number of times which the respective companies have turned out,
whether for extinguishing fires, for false alarms, for exercise and
practice or for parades, and the condition of their several engines, hook
and ladder and hose trucks, with all their appurtenances and
apparatus.
§ 55-12 FIRE DEPARTMENT § 55-17
55:109
§ 55-18. Voting procedure at Board meetings.
Matters brought to vote before the Board of Officers shall be decided by a
simple majority vote of members present except in such cases as may be
otherwise provided for in the bylaws. A written vote shall be taken when
requested by any three members present.
§ 55-19. Disposition of funds raised by cooperative action.
§ 55-20. Assessments against fire companies by Board;
limitations.66
Assessments by the Board of Officers against the companies shall not
exceed two per calendar year, and the amount of assessment against each
A. Roll call.
B. Reading of minutes of previous meeting.
C. Report of special committees.
D. Report of Secretary.
E. Report of Treasurer.
F. Unfinished business.
G. New and miscellaneous business.
H. Second roll call.
I. Presentation of bills.
J. Adjournment.
A. Deposit. Funds raised by cooperative action of the companies in the
name of the Fire Department through means established by their
representatives acting as the Board of Officers shall be deposited in the
treasury of the Board of Officers.
B. Division. Division of funds which are to be allocated to the various
companies shall be on an equal basis to all companies, except that in
the event of any company or companies failing to cooperate in the
raising of such funds or to abide by the decisions of the Board of
Officers arrived at in prescribed form, the Board of Officers may, by
vote of not less than 75% of the members present, resolve to deny that
company or those companies an equal share in such division of funds.
C. Applicability of section. Moneys received from insurance companies
shall not be deemed to be included under this section.
66.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 55-17 PORT JERVIS CODE § 55-20
55:110
company or the value of tickets so assessed shall not exceed $100 for any
one assessment.
§ 55-21. Submission of written complaints to City Clerk-Treasurer.
Every complaint for the violation of any of the provisions regulating the Fire
Department made by any person, except the Mayor and Common Council,
must be made in writing and filed with the Clerk-Treasurer of said City and
must be subscribed with the name of the complainant and must state the
names of the witnesses by whom the offense can be proved.
§ 55-22. Old age and survivors' insurance.
§ 55-23. Workers' compensation insurance.
The City shall provide workers' compensation insurance for volunteer
firemen in accordance with said Chapter 794 of the Laws of 194767 and the
provisions of the General Municipal Law.
§ 55-24. Expense allowances.68
The expense allowance for the indicated members of the Fire Department
will be set annually as part of the City's annual budget:
§ 55-25. Authority and responsibility for Department property.
The several fire engines, hose carriages and ladder trucks, together with
their appurtenances and all other property belonging to the Fire
Department, shall be placed and kept under the control and immediate
direction of the Chief, subject only to the superintendence of the Mayor or
A. Provided. The City, pursuant to Section 218 of the Federal Social
Security Act and Article 3 of the Retirement and Social Security Law,
shall provide old age and survivors' insurance coverage for eligible
firemen.
B. Eligibility. Such coverage shall be provided for those firemen covered
by the New York State Employees' Retirement System or by a local
retirement system or pension plan.
A. Fire Chief.
B. First Assistant Fire Chief.
C. Second Assistant Fire Chief.
D. Secretary and Treasurer of the Fire Department.
E. Membership Chairman of the Fire Department.
67.Editor's Note: See § 2 et seq. of the Workmen's Compensation Law.
68.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 55-20 FIRE DEPARTMENT § 55-25
55:111
such person or persons as the Mayor or Common Council may appoint for
that purpose.
§ 55-26. Powers and duties of certain officers at fires generally.
§ 55-27. Duty of certain officers as to equipment during
emergencies.
It shall be the duty of the Chief, together with the Assistants, in case of
fire or other emergency, to see that the general equipment is stationed,
arranged, used and worked in the most orderly and efficient manner for
the extinguishment of the same and also to enforce the observance of good
order and sobriety amongst the members of the several fire companies
while on duty.
§ 55-28. Assumption of duties of Chief.
In the event of absence of the Chief or inability to act, the First Assistant,
or in the event of absence of both the Chief and First Assistant or inability
of both, then the Second Assistant, shall be invested with the powers and
authority of, and shall assume and perform the duties belonging to, the
office of Chief.
A. Generally. On the occasion of a fire or an alarm, it shall be the duty of
the Chief of the Department and his Assistants to be present thereat, to
assume complete control of the Department and apparatus, to issue all
orders and directions and see that they are obeyed with precision and
alacrity. Should the Chief and his Assistants be absent, then the Captain
of the first company which may arrive upon the grounds shall be
invested with powers and authority and may assume and perform the
duties belonging to the office of Chief until that officer or an Assistant
shall arrive.
B. First Assistant. At a fire it shall be the duty of the First Assistant to take
his position between the Chief and the working companies so that he
can hear and repeat all orders and can pass and repass to and from the
burning building to observe that the means used are effective. In the
absence of the First Assistant, this duty devolves upon the Second
Assistant.
C. Second Assistant. At a fire it shall be the duty of the Second Assistant to
take his position at the place where water is obtained; to assume the
direction of engines as they arrive upon the ground; to assign them
their respective positions; to direct and assist the Captain in getting
them at work; to communicate with the First Assistant; and to repeat
his orders to the officers of companies and see that they are obeyed
with precision and dispatch. In case of his absence or inability, the duty
may be performed by the Captain of the company first to arrive upon
the ground.
§ 55-25 PORT JERVIS CODE § 55-29
55:112
§ 55-29. Duties of remaining officers and firemen at fires.
At a fire it shall be the duty of every officer not mentioned above and every
member of the Department to station himself with his company if the same
is upon the ground and, if not, to report himself to the Captain of some
other company and obey his orders until the arrival of the company to which
he may be attached. No officer or member shall leave his engine under
any circumstances without permission from the officer in command at the
time. No member shall give any order or direction, nor need he obey any,
excepting those of the Chief, Assistants or of his own officers. No member
shall make any noise unnecessarily which shall tend to prevent the hearing
of orders, and at all times he shall be observant that no injury be done to
the property of the Department without reporting the same to the Captain.
§ 55-30. Equipment use to be supervised by certain officers.
[Amended 9-28-1981 by L.L. No. 4-1981]
No equipment shall, on the alarm of fire or at any other time or for any
other purpose, be taken out of its house unless by the direction of the Chief
or Assistant or at least one of said officers shall be present and consent
thereto.
§ 55-31. Equipment repairs; report to Chief.
If any equipment or apparatus connected with the Department shall require
any attention or repair, it shall be the duty of the person having charge of
the same forthwith to report the particulars thereof to the Chief or, in case
of his absence or inability, then to either of the Assistants.
§ 55-32. Equipment inspections.
It shall be the duty of the officer in charge of the company equipment to
examine and inspect the engine house and all things connected with the
Department at least once in four weeks and always immediately after the
same or any part thereof has been used, as in case of fire or an alarm, to
the end that if necessary they may be put in repair for instant and effective
service.
§ 55-33. Placement of equipment on sidewalks restricted. [Amended
9-28-1981 by L.L. No. 4-1981]
No equipment shall be drawn, wheeled or placed upon the sidewalks of any
street in the City except by the express order of the Chief, his Assistants or
Captain.
§ 55-34. Unauthorized uses of equipment.
No fire company belonging to the Fire Department of the City shall, with an
engine, ladder truck, hose cart or other property of the Department, join in
any public parade or visit any other town, city, village or place unless with
§ 55-29 FIRE DEPARTMENT § 55-34
55:113
the permission or consent of the Common Council for that purpose first had
and obtained.
§ 55-34 PORT JERVIS CODE § 55-34
55:114
ARTICLE II
Fire Companies
§ 55-35. Election and terms of officers.
To each company organized and enrolled according to law, there shall
be one Captain, a First Lieutenant, a Second Lieutenant, Secretary and
Treasurer, to be elected annually by the members of each company, such
officers to hold their respective places for one year and until their
successors are elected, and it shall be the duty of the Secretary within three
days after such election to make out under his hand and deliver to the Clerk-
Treasurer of the City a certificate of such election, to be laid before the
Common Council at its next regular meeting.
§ 55-36. Duties of Captains.
§ 55-37. Duties of Lieutenants.
A. Generally. It shall be the duty of each Captain to preserve order and
discipline in the company at all times when on duty and enforce on the
part of his company strict compliance with the City ordinances and the
orders of the Chief; to see that the engine, apparatus and all the
property under his charge are kept in good order and repair, and
immediately when repair is needed, to report the particulars thereof to
the Chief; to take command of his company upon the alarm of fire in the
City or when ordered out by the Chief; and in case of fire, to enforce the
utmost diligence and sobriety on the part of each individual member, to
bring his engine and apparatus into operation as speedily as possible,
and on return from a fire, to see that the engine, hose and apparatus
under his charge are well washed, cleaned, oiled when necessary,
securely housed and arranged for inspection of the Chief.
B. At fires. At a fire it shall be the duty of the Captain to proceed first to
water, unless otherwise directed, and personally superintend the
operation of getting his company at work, after which he will report
himself to the Chief for further orders. In the absence of the Captain,
this duty will be performed by the officer provided in the bylaws of the
respective companies.
A. Generally. It shall be the duty of the Lieutenants to cooperate with the
Captain in the discharge of all duties imposed on him by this chapter,
and in case of his absence or inability to act, then the duties of Captain
shall devolve upon and be performed by the Lieutenant.
B. First Lieutenant. At a fire it shall be the duty of the First Lieutenant to
remain in position with his engine, and after the same has been put at
work by the Captain, to take command, communicate with the Captain
and Chief Assistants, repeat their orders to the company and see them
obeyed with precision and dispatch. This duty, in case of his absence,
devolves upon the person named in the bylaws of the respective
companies, unless otherwise provided.
§ 55-35 FIRE DEPARTMENT § 55-37
55:115
§ 55-38. Duties of hook and ladder officers.
§ 55-39. False assumption of officers' duties.
If any person, not being duly elected, shall act or attempt to act as Captain
or Lieutenant of any company, he shall, upon conviction thereof, be
punished as provided in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article I, provided
that this section does not apply to any person who may, in the temporary
absence of the Captain or Lieutenant of any company, act as such.
§ 55-40. Selection of firemen; certificates of membership.
C. Second Lieutenant. At a fire it shall be the duty of the Second
Lieutenant to take the management and direction of stretching,
arranging and connecting the lines of hose, and under his direction,
after the engine is at work, are the pipemen, near whom he will
maintain a position. In case of his absence or disability, the place will be
filled as provided in § 55-39 below, unless otherwise provided.
A. Hook and ladder Captain. At a fire it shall be the duty of the Captain of
the hook and ladder company to bring his truck on the ground, as near
to the burning building as safety will permit, and report himself to the
Chief without delay for orders. In case of his absence or inability, the
First Lieutenant shall perform his duties.
B. Hook and ladder Lieutenants. At a fire it shall be the duty of the
Lieutenant of the hook and ladder company to take position at the truck
and to see that all orders from the Chief, his Assistants or Captains for
equipment are obeyed with precision and dispatch. In case of the
absence or inability of the Lieutenant, his duty will devolve upon the
person named by the bylaws of the company.
A. Before becoming a member of any company of the Fire Department, a
person shall be elected by the company to which he desires to become
such member, and his name shall then be presented at the next regular
meeting of the Common Council for approval, and if approved, there
shall be issued to him a certificate of membership to the following
effect:
"This is to certify that __________________________ is appointed and
enrolled a member of the Fire Department of the City of Port Jervis,
to be attached to ________________________ Company No. __________ by
order of the Mayor and Common Council of the City of Port Jervis,
____________ Dated Port Jervis, New York ___________"
B. Before delivery thereof, said certificate shall be recorded by the Clerk-
Treasurer of the City in a book provided for that purpose, and the Clerk-
Treasurer shall certify on such certificate the day, month and year of
recording the same and the number of the page and book, and the
Mayor and Common Council shall have power to revoke and annul said
certificate of membership so granted as aforesaid, in case any such
§ 55-37 PORT JERVIS CODE § 55-40
55:116
§ 55-41. Expulsion of members.
§ 55-42. Scheduling of outside events.
§ 55-43. Firemen's Fund Society.
The members of the several companies may associate themselves together
for the purpose of forming a Firemen's Fund Society under such rules and
regulations as they may hereafter adopt, not inconsistent with the laws
of the state and City ordinances, said association to be under the general
control of a Board of Direction composed of the Chief Engineer, Assistant
Chiefs and not more than three representatives from each company. The
object of such society shall be to raise a fund for the benefit of disabled
firemen and to promote generally the interest of the Department.
member shall offend against the provisions of these regulations or
become disobedient to the orders and directions of the Chief or either
of the Assistant Engineers or any officer of the company to which such
member may belong.
A. Authority. Each company shall have the power to expel a member for
disobedience or noncompliance with the bylaws of the company, said
bylaws having first been approved by the Mayor and Common Council.
B. Reinstatement. Any member so expelled shall not again be admitted to
membership in any branch of the Department until he shall have made
himself good upon the books of the company from which he was
expelled.
C. Nonpayment of dues or fines. Any member expelled for nonpayment of
dues or fines may be reinstated, provided that the same is paid or
tendered within three months from the date of such expulsion.
A. Date. No company shall be allowed to schedule any event outside the
truck house or involving outside sale or solicitation unless the date
requested is more than seven days prior to a date already granted
another company.
B. Waiver of date requirement. If a company which has been granted a
date states its agreement to waive this rule, permission to another
company to schedule a date may be granted at the discretion of the
Board of Officers.
C. Cooperation in single event. If two or more companies cooperate in a
single event, the rules shall apply in the same manner as though the
event were considered held by one company, with permission being
granted jointly to the companies involved.
§ 55-40 FIRE DEPARTMENT § 55-43
55:117

ARTICLE III
Fire Police and Emergency Squads
§ 55-44. Creation of Fire Police Squad.
A Fire Police Squad of the Fire Department of the City is hereby created and
organized pursuant to § 209-c of the General Municipal Law of the State of
New York.
§ 55-45. Appointment and terms of Fire Police Squad members.
The Fire Police Squad shall be composed of five members from each of
the fire companies of the Fire Department of the City of Port Jervis, to be
appointed by the Mayor with the approval of the Common Council. The term
of each member of the Fire Police Squad shall be one year and shall begin
on the first day of February of the year in which the appointment is made.
The appointment of any member of said Fire Police Squad may be revoked
at any time by the Mayor with the approval of the Common Council, and
pending such approval of the Common Council, the Mayor may suspend any
such member from duty.
§ 55-46. Recommendations by Captains.
The Captain of each fire company shall, on the second day of January in
each year, in writing, recommend to the Mayor five members of said fire
company for appointment as members of said Fire Police Squad. At the
regular meeting of the Common Council in said month, the Mayor shall
submit to the Common Council for ratification the names of those whom he
has appointed to be members of said Fire Police Squad.
§ 55-47. Vacancies in Fire Police Squad.
In case of a vacancy in said Fire Police Squad, the Captain of the fire
company in which such vacancy occurs shall recommend for appointment a
member of said fire company in the manner hereinbefore required, and the
vacancy shall be filled for the unexpired term by appointment by the Mayor
with the approval of the Common Council.
§ 55-48. Officers and bylaws of Fire Police Squad.
There shall be a Chief, an Assistant Chief and a Secretary of said Fire Police
Squad, to be elected by the majority vote of the members of said Fire Police
Squad. Said Fire Police Squad shall be authorized to adopt bylaws, which
shall take effect when approved by the Fire Department and the Common
Council.
§ 55-44 FIRE DEPARTMENT § 55-49
55:119
§ 55-49. Powers and duties of Fire Police Squad.69
The members of said Fire Police Squad shall have the powers of and
render service as peace officers at such times as the Fire Department, any
fire company of the Fire Department or any Emergency Rescue and First
Aid Squad of the Fire Department is on duty, and the authority of said
members of the Fire Police Squad shall continue for the duration of a fire or
emergency and until released by the Fire Department officer in charge. At
all such times the members of said Fire Police Squad shall be subject to the
orders of the Fire Department officer in charge.
§ 55-50. Emergency Rescue and First Aid Squad.70
A. Constituted. The members of each fire company of the Fire Department
of the City are hereby organized as Emergency Rescue and First Aid
Squads pursuant to § 209-b of the General Municipal Law of the State of
New York.
B. Purpose. Each such Emergency Rescue and First Aid Squad may render
service in case of accidents, public calamities or other emergencies in
connection with which their services may be required, as well as in case
of alarms of fire.71
69.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
70.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
71.Editor's Note: Original Art. IV, Insurance During Fund-Raising Activities, which
immediately followed this section and was added 12-13-1971, was repealed 10-24-1983 by
L.L. No. 11-1983.
§ 55-49 PORT JERVIS CODE § 55-50
55:120
Chapter 70
HUMAN RIGHTS, COMMISSION ON
§ 70-1. Creation; statutory authority.
Pursuant to Article 12-D, § 239-o, of the General Municipal Law, this Council
does hereby create a Commission on Human Rights to function in
accordance with law within the City of Port Jervis.
§ 70-2. Composition; terms; vacancies. [Amended 2-14-1967]
Said Commission shall be comprised of seven members to be appointed by
the Mayor of the City of Port Jervis, subject to the approval of the Common
Council, to serve for a term of two years, with any vacancies occurring upon
the Commission either by death, disability or resignation to be filled by the
appointment of the Mayor of the City of Port Jervis, subject to the approval
of the Common Council, for the unexpired term.
§ 70-3. Appointments from local clergy. [Added 2-14-1967]
Three memberships on the Commission shall be appointed from the clergy
of the various religious faiths and denominations within the City of Port
Jervis.
§ 70-4. Appointment of Chairman by Mayor.
The Chairman of said Commission shall be appointed from the members of
the same by the Mayor, subject to the approval of the Common Council.
§ 70-5. Powers and duties.
The Commission on Human Rights herein and hereby created shall have the
powers, perform the functions and bear the responsibilities enumerated in
said Article 12-D, §§ 239-o, 239-p, 239-q and 239-r, of the General Municipal
Law.
Chapter 115
OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Officers — See Charter Arts. II and III.
Defense and indemnification — See Ch. 30.
Code of Ethics — See Ch. 47.
Fire Department — See Ch. 55.
Police Department — See Ch. 130.
§ 55-50 HUMAN RIGHTS, COMMISSION ON § 70-5
70:121

ARTICLE I
General Policies and Regulations72
[Adopted 7-27-1964 as part of Ch. 7 of the 1964 Code of Ordinances
(Ch. 32, Art. I of the 1981 Code)]
§ 115-1. Definitions.73
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meaning
indicated:
FULL-TIME OFFICER OR EMPLOYEE — One who works a normal fortyhour
work week for the City each workweek of the year, whether such
person is paid an hourly wage or is salaried.
§ 115-2. Bonding required.74
The following City officers and employees are required to be bonded and
shall be bonded in amounts as set from time to time by the Common
Council:
A. City Clerk-Treasurer.
B. City Clerk-Treasurer as Tax Collector.
C. Deputy Clerk-Treasurer.
D. Account Clerk-Stenographer.
E. Constables.
F. Corporation Counsel.
G. Water Department.
(1) Senior Account Clerk.
(2) Account Clerk-Typist.
H. City Service Officer, Welfare.
I. Public Health Officer.
J. Director of Public Works.
K. Assessor.
L. Sealer of Weights and Measures.
72.Editor's Note: Many City employees are now subject to the policies and regulations of the
civil service administration of the City. This chapter applies to the extent that its
provisions are not covered by negotiated collective bargaining agreement.
73.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
74.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 115-1 OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES § 115-2
115:123
§ 115-3. Physical examinations.
§ 115-4. Sick leave.
M. Parking Meter Collector.
N. Fire Department Treasurer.
A. When required by the appropriate head of a department, physical
examinations of employees within such department shall be conducted
in order to determine their respective physical capacity to perform the
work assigned to them.
B. Each person hired by the City shall submit to a physical examination by
a physician to determine his physical fitness for the position desired.75
C. Any employee absent from his duties for any reason for more than 30
days shall undergo a physical examination to determine his fitness to
resume his active duties.
A. Computation of sick leave; use of credits.
(1) Maximum credits. Each employee of the City, exclusive of the
employees of the Police Department, shall be allowed sick leave
credits up to a maximum amount as specified in negotiated labor
contracts and/or policies. After this maximum is reached, no
additional sick leave credits may be earned by the employee except
to the extent of restoring credits subsequently drawn for sick leave
and thereby building up accruals again to the maximum.76
(2) Unit for computation. The unit for computation of sick leave shall
not be less than one hour. Credits cannot be earned for the period
an employee is on leave of absence without pay. For the calculation
of sick leave credits, the time recorded on the payroll at the full
rate of pay shall be considered as time "served" by the employee.77
(3) Exceeding accrued credits. Sick leave with full pay shall not be
granted beyond accrued credits.
(4) Procedure. In order that absence because of personal illness may
be charged to accumulated sick leave, it must be reported by the
employee on the first working day of such absence within such time
limit as the department head may fix.
B. Obtaining benefits for sick leave. In order to qualify for sick leave, proof
of disability must be provided by the employee satisfactory to the
75.Editor's Note: Original § 32-5, Age limit for new employees, which immediately followed
this subsection, was deleted at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions,
Art. II).
76.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
77.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 115-2 PORT JERVIS CODE § 115-4
115:124
§ 115-5. Bereavement leave.79
Regular compensation shall be rendered any officer or employee of the City
while absent because of death in his or her immediate family or household,
but not because of illness, for a maximum as specified in negotiated labor
contracts and/or policies, upon satisfactory competent evidence of such
death.
§ 115-6. Vacations.80
Regular City employees shall receive a paid vacation as specified in
negotiated labor contracts and/or policies. Vacation rights cannot be
accumulated by employees from one year to another. All vacation requests
shall be approved by the heads of the departments involved before being
granted. Employees on vacation leave shall be subject to immediate recall
in the event of an emergency.
§ 115-7. Payment for unused vacation and sick leave.81
The City Clerk-Treasurer shall be authorized to compensate any City officer
or employee who may retire or, upon the death of such full-time individual
while in City service, shall pay to his designated beneficiary all unused
vacation time for that particular year due, but not for prior years, and all
accumulated sick time earned to a maximum as specified in negotiated
Common Council. Presentation of a physician's certificate in the
prescribed form may be waived for absences up to one week. Such
certificate is mandatory for absences over one week and, in cases of
protracted disability, should be presented to the Common Council at the
end of each month of continued absence.
C. Sick leave for occupational disease or injury. Any employee who is
necessarily absent from duty because of occupational injury or disease
as defined by the Workers' Compensation Law may use his accumulated
sick leave or accept such compensation as may be awarded by the
Workers' Compensation Board. In the event that accumulated sick leave
is used for such absence, the compensation awarded shall be credited
to the City.
D. Sick leave payments computed monthly. Payment for sick leave shall be
computed each calendar month and payment shall be made for such
sick leave after an employee establishes the required proof of illness.78
78.Editor's Note: Original § 32-11, Payment of hospitalization by city, which immediately
followed this section, was deleted at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. II).
79.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
80.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
81.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 115-4 OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES § 115-7
115:125
labor contracts and/or policies. This benefit is not to be construed as being
applicable to a person voluntarily resigning or being forced to resign for
cause. Funds shall be made available for this benefit from the Emergency
Contingency Fund of the year needed for such purpose, and if not available
from such fund, funds shall be obtained as the Common Council may
propose or determine.
§ 115-8. Additional holidays.82
The employees of the Street, Sanitation and Water Departments (not
receiving) shall be granted holidays each year as specified in negotiated
labor contracts and/or policies, in addition to those granted to other City
employees.
§ 115-9. Designation of paydays.83
Paydays shall be designated as specified in negotiated labor contracts and/
or policies.
§ 115-10. Reimbursement for court appearance.
The City shall reimburse any City officer or employee who must appear in
court during his time off from work at his normal rate of salary or wages, at
the discretion of the appropriate head of department. Such reimbursement
shall not exceed 1/2 day's pay or 1/2 day off for a court appearance from one
to four hours, or one day's pay or one day off for a court appearance from
four to eight hours.
§ 115-11. Street and Water Department employees.84
A. Employees of the Street or Water Department who are classified as
laborers shall be paid overtime at the rate of time and 1/2 when it is
necessary for them to work after they have completed their regular
week's work unless otherwise specified in the negotiated labor
contracts and/or policies.
B. Whenever an hourly employee of the Street or Water Department is
called for emergency work, said employee shall receive a minimum of
three hours' pay and shall be compensated at 1 1/2 times his regular
rate of pay after two hours of work on each occasion called, unless
otherwise specified in the negotiated labor contracts and/or policies.
82.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
83.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
84.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 115-7 PORT JERVIS CODE § 115-12
115:126
§ 115-12. Appropriation for fringe benefits.
Sufficient funds shall be and are duly appropriated for those authorized
purposes commonly termed "fringe benefits," which are applicable to and
restricted to full-time officers and employees of the City.
§ 115-13. Retirement and social security.85
The City hereby elects to come under the provisions of Chapter 339, Laws
of 1960, titled "An Act to Amend the Retirement and Social Security Law,
in Relation to the Addition of Pensions Providing for Increased Take-Home
Pay, Death Benefits, and Reopening of a Plan for Retirement at Age 55," as
amended,86 for the purpose of providing death benefits and pensions and
providing for increased take-home pay.
§ 115-14. Employee Grievance Committee.
An Employee Grievance Committee, consisting of the Chairman of the
Street Committee of the Council as Chairman, and the Chairmen of the
Finance, Police and Water Committees of the Council as members, is hereby
constituted to investigate and inquire into employee complaints and
grievances.
A. Social security insurance benefits provided.
(1) The City, pursuant to § 218 of the Federal Social Security Act and
Article 3 of the Retirement and Social Security Law, shall provide
social security insurance coverage for eligible officers and
employees.
(2) The City Clerk-Treasurer shall be authorized to represent the City
and shall comply with the regulations of the Director of the State
Social Security Agency designed to extend social security
insurance coverage to positions of officers and employees pursuant
to § 218 of the Federal Social Security Act and Article 3 of the
Retirement and Social Security Law.
B. Retirement age for laborers. All employees in the labor class in the City
departments who are not members of the New York State Employees'
Retirement System shall be retired as specified in negotiated labor
contracts and/or policies.
85.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
86.Editor's Note: See § 70-a of the Retirement and Social Security Law.
§ 115-12 OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES § 115-14
115:127

ARTICLE II
Residency Requirements
[Adopted 8-26-1968 (Ch. 32, Art. II of the 1981 Code)]
§ 115-15. Certain proximity to City required.
Employees of the City of Port Jervis, other than those employees specifically
set forth in § C2-2 of the Charter of the City of Port Jervis, shall be eligible
for employment by the City of Port Jervis provided that they reside within
15 miles of said City of Port Jervis as measured from the nearest boundary
line of said City. In case such employee, after employment, shall cease to
be a resident within the limits hereinbefore set forth, his employment shall
thereby be terminated.
§ 115-15 OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES § 115-15
115:129

ARTICLE III
Leaves of Absence
[Adopted 12-28-1970 (Ch. 32, Art. III of the 1981 Code)]
§ 115-16. Written request and approval required.
Leave of absence with pay will be granted only after written request
therefor has been made by the employee and only after formal approval by
motion duly made by the Common Council of the City of Port Jervis.
§ 115-17. Term of leave; limit on pay and benefits.
In no event shall leave of absence with pay exceed six months, and in
no event shall the amount of pay that the employee receives for a leave
of absence with pay exceed 50% of his salary. In the event of an hourly
employee, it shall not exceed 50% of the employee's base salary and shall
not include any additional pay or benefits, including but not limited to
overtime, holidays, standby time, etc.
§ 115-16 OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES § 115-17
115:131

ARTICLE IV
Industrial Commissioner
[Adopted 3-26-1962 by L.L. No. 2-1962 (Ch. 32, Art. IV of the 1981
Code)]
§ 115-18. Office created.
The office of an Industrial Commissioner for the City of Port Jervis is hereby
created.
§ 115-19. Appointment; term.
The Industrial Commissioner shall be appointed by the Mayor and approved
by the majority of members of the Common Council and shall hold office
until January 31, 1963, unless sooner removed by the Mayor for any cause
whatsoever. Thereafter the term of office of said Industrial Commissioner
shall be for one year and each appointment shall expire on the 31st day of
January following the appointment.
§ 115-20. Salary; funding.
§ 115-21. Powers and duties.
§ 115-22. Industrial Committee.
There is hereby created a committee to be known as the "Industrial
Committee of the City of Port Jervis," consisting of four members who
shall work and cooperate with and under the direction of the Industrial
Commissioner. Said Committee shall be appointed by the Mayor and
approved by the majority of the members of the Common Council and shall
hold office until January 31, 1963, unless sooner removed by the Mayor
A. The salary of said Industrial Commissioner shall be determined and
fixed by the Common Council of the City of Port Jervis at the time of the
appointment.
B. Said Industrial Commissioner shall have for disbursements such sums
as may be set aside in the annual estimates of the City of Port Jervis.
A. It shall be the duty of the Industrial Commissioner to make surveys and
inquiries into the industrial and business conditions in the City of Port
Jervis; to engage in and cooperate with other civic bodies in efforts to
secure new industries for the City of Port Jervis; to contact concerns
interested in locating in the City of Port Jervis and to offer them such
inducements to locate here as may be approved by the Common Council
of the City of Port Jervis; to improve business conditions; and to
promote the general welfare by encouragement of methods and policies
designed to better industrial and business conditions of the City.
B. The Industrial Commissioner shall have no power or authority to
contract debts or obligations for or against the City of Port Jervis.
§ 115-18 OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES § 115-22
115:133
for any cause whatsoever. Thereafter the term of office of the members of
the Industrial Committee shall be for one year and each appointment shall
expire on the 31st day of January following the appointment. The members
of the Committee shall serve without salary and shall be under the direction
and supervision of the Industrial Commissioner.
§ 115-22 PORT JERVIS CODE § 115-22
115:134
ARTICLE V
Building Official
[Adopted 7-27-1964 as part of Ch. 5 of the 1964 Code of Ordinances
(Ch. 32, Art. V of the 1981 Code)]
§ 115-23. Appointment and compensation.
There is hereby designated in the City a public official to be known as the
"Building Official," who shall be appointed by the Common Council at a
compensation to be fixed by it.
§ 115-24. Acting Building Official.
In the absence of the Building Official or in the case of his inability to act
for any reason, the Mayor shall have the power, with the consent of the
Common Council, to designate a person to act in behalf of the Building
Official and to exercise all the powers conferred upon him by this Code.
§ 115-25. Building inspectors.
The Common Council may appoint one or more building inspectors as the
need may appear, to act under the supervision of the Building Official and
to exercise any portion of his powers and duties. The compensation of such
building inspectors shall be fixed by the Common Council.
§ 115-26. Restrictions on employees of Building Department.
No officer or employee of the Building Department shall engage in any
activity inconsistent with his duties or with the interests of the Building
Department, nor shall he, during the term of his employment, be engaged
directly or indirectly in any building business, in the furnishing of labor,
materials or appliances for the construction, alteration or maintenance of
a building or the preparation of plans or specifications thereof within the
City, except that this provision shall not prohibit any employee from such
activities in connection with the construction of a building or structure
owned by him and not constructed for sale.
§ 115-27. Powers and duties.
A. Building laws. Except as otherwise specifically provided by law,
ordinance or regulation, or except as herein otherwise provided, the
Building Official shall administer and enforce all of the provisions of
laws, ordinances and regulations applicable to the construction,
alteration, repair, removal and demolition of buildings and structures,
and the installation and use of materials and equipment therein, and
the location, use, occupancy and maintenance thereof.
B. Rules. He shall have the power to adopt rules, with the consent of the
Common Council, to secure the intent and purposes of this article and a
proper enforcement of the laws, ordinances and regulations governing
building construction.
§ 115-23 OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES § 115-27
115:135
§ 115-28. Records and reports.
§ 115-29. Cooperation of other departments.
The Building Official may request and shall receive, so far as may be
necessary in the discharge of his duties, the assistance and cooperation
of the Police, Fire and Health Departments and of all municipal officials
exercising any jurisdiction over the construction, use or occupancy of
buildings or the installation of equipment therein.
C. Authority as to applications and permits. He shall receive applications
and issue permits for the erection, alteration, removal and demolition of
buildings or structures or parts thereof and shall examine the premises
for which such applications have been received or such permits have
been issued for the purpose of ensuring compliance with laws,
ordinances and regulations governing building construction.
D. Notices; orders; inspections. He shall issue all appropriate notices or
orders to remove illegal or unsafe conditions, to require the necessary
safeguards during construction and to ensure compliance during the
entire course of construction with the requirements of such laws,
ordinances and regulations. He shall make all inspections which are
necessary or proper for the carrying out of his duties, except that he
may accept written reports of inspection from building inspectors or
other employees or from generally recognized and authoritative service
and inspection bureaus, provided that the same are certified by a
responsible official thereof.
E. Tests. Whenever the same may be necessary or appropriate to assure
compliance with the provisions of applicable laws, ordinances and
regulations covering building construction, he may require the
performance of tests in the field by experienced, professional persons
or by accredited and authoritative testing laboratories or service
bureaus or agencies.
A. Contents of records. The Building Official shall keep permanent official
records of all transactions and activities conducted by him, including all
applications received, permits and certificates issued, fees charged and
collected, inspection reports, and notices and orders issued. All such
records shall be public records, open to public inspection during
business hours.
B. Annual report; contents. The Building Official shall annually submit to
the Common Council a written report and summary of all business
conducted by him, including permits and certificates issued, fees
collected, orders and notices promulgated, inspections and tests made
and appeals or litigation pending.
§ 115-27 PORT JERVIS CODE § 115-29
115:136
ARTICLE VI
Promulgation of Rules
[Adopted 1-13-1975 (Ch. 32, Art. VI of the 1981 Code)]
§ 115-30. Statement of intent and finding.
The Common Council of the City of Port Jervis has assessed the needs of the
various departments, as specified in the Charter of the City of Port Jervis,
and has determined that the highest degree of efficiency can be maintained
by specifying the authority of each department head, as that term is defined
by the City Charter, to promulgate rules of procedure to govern the day-today
operation of his respective department.
§ 115-31. Department heads authorized to promulgate rules;
distribution; filing.
The various department heads are hereby authorized to promulgate rules
of procedure governing the conduct of personnel within the respective
departments, such rules of procedure to be in writing, a copy of which shall
be delivered to each employee of the respective department for which rules
have been promulgated and a copy to be filed in the office of the City Clerk-
Treasurer.
§ 115-32. Right of Common Council and Mayor preserved.
Nothing contained in this article shall alter or diminish the right of the
Common Council and the Mayor of the City of Port Jervis to promulgate
additional rules and regulations for the various department heads and
personnel, nor shall anything contained in this article restrict the right of
the Mayor of the City of Port Jervis to alter, at his discretion, any rule
adopted by a respective department head.
§ 115-30 OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES § 115-32
115:137
Chapter 126
PLANNING BOARD
GENERAL REFERENCES
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 470. Zoning — See Ch. 535.
§ 126-1. Membership; terms; vacancies.
There shall be a City Planning Board appointed by the Mayor, which Board
shall consist of seven members with no more than a minority holding any
other public office or position. The terms of the officials or employees of the
City shall terminate with the term of the Mayor. The initial appointments of
as nearly as possible 1/3 of the other members of the Board shall be for a
term of one year, 1/3 for a term of two years and 1/3 for a term of three
years, and terms of their successors shall be for three years. Vacancies,
other than by expiration of term, shall be filled by the Mayor.
§ 126-2. Compensation; rights of municipal officials retained.
Such members shall receive no payment for their services as members of
the Planning Board. The municipal officials on such Board shall not, by
reason of membership thereon, forfeit their right to exercise the powers,
perform the duties or receive the compensation of the municipal office held
by them during such membership.
§ 126-3. Chairman.
The Chairman of the Planning Board shall be designated by the Mayor.
§ 126-4. Employment of personnel; expenses.
The Planning Board shall have the power and authority to employ experts
and a staff and to pay for their services and such other expenses as may
be necessary and proper, not exceeding in all the appropriation that may be
made for such Board.
§ 126-5. Adoption of rules and regulations.
The Planning Board may adopt rules and regulations in respect to
procedure before it and in respect to any subject matter over which it has
jurisdiction under this chapter or any other statute, after public hearing by
the Planning Board and subject to the approval of the Common Council.
§ 126-6. Powers and duties.
The Planning Board shall have and exercise the following powers and
duties:
§ 115-32 PORT JERVIS CODE § 126-6
126:138
§ 126-7. Appearance requests; scope of authority; reports and
recommendations.
§ 126-8. Public hearings.
A. Planning generally; maps and reports. To prepare and change a master
plan for the development of the entire area of the City; to make
investigations, maps, reports and recommendations relating to the
planning of the City and its growth and affording adequate facilities for
the housing, transportation, distribution, comfort, convenience, safety,
health and welfare of its population.
B. Approval of plats; duty of City Clerk-Treasurer. To approve all plats
showing any streets or highways within the City, and the City Clerk-
Treasurer is hereby authorized and charged with the duty of filing in
the office of the Clerk of the County of Orange a certificate showing that
the Planning Board has been authorized to approve the plats, and the
City Clerk-Treasurer shall issue in behalf of the Planning Board the
certificate of failure to take action in accordance with the provisions of
§ 32 of the General City Law.
C. Subdivision plats; action on street changes. To approve or disapprove
changes in the lines of existing streets, highways or public areas shown
on subdivision plats or maps filed in the County Clerk's office.
D. Subdivision plats; action on zoning regulations. Simultaneously with
the approval of any such plat, to confirm and make changes in the
zoning regulations applicable to the land included in any such plat in
accordance with the provisions of § 37 of the General City Law and
amendments thereto.
E. Other powers; conduct of hearings. The Planning Board shall also
exercise all other powers conferred upon it by the provisions of the
General City Law and shall pass upon all matters which may be referred
to it from time to time by resolution of the Common Council. It shall
conduct hearings and perform its duties in accordance with such
procedure as provided in §§ 29 to 34 of the General City Law and acts
amendatory thereof.
A. Written request. For the convenient and orderly transaction of all
business before the Board, a written request will be extended or
accepted, as the need arises, for any person to appear before the Board.
B. Scope of authority. The Board, on its own motion, may consider all
matters within its power and authority; all other matters shall be
referred to it by the Common Council except the approval of plats,
application for which shall be made directly to the Board.
C. Reports and recommendations. Reports and recommendations of the
Board will be in writing.
§ 126-6 PLANNING BOARD § 126-8
126:139
§ 126-9. Fees. [Added 3-24-1986 by L.L. No. 1-1986; amended
7-27-1987 by L.L. No. 6-1987]
A. Notice to be published. Notice of a public hearing to be held by the
Board shall be advertised at least once in an official newspaper or in a
newspaper of general circulation in the City at least five days before
each such hearing.
B. Contents of notice. The notice of public hearing shall include the date
and time when and the place where said hearing is to be held, together
with a brief statement of the purpose of the hearing.
C. Presiding officer. The Chairman of the Planning Board shall preside at
each public hearing unless he designates some other Board member to
preside. If the Chairman is unwilling or unable to preside and fails to
designate a substitute, a quorum of the Board shall designate one of its
members to preside.
D. Notice to be read; list prepared. At each public hearing the published
notice thereof with proof of publication shall be read, and the presiding
officer shall then cause a written list to be prepared of the name and
address of each person who desires to be heard and on whose behalf he
appears, and it shall be proper for the presiding officer to indicate the
amount of time available for each speaker.
E. Minutes. Minutes of each public hearing shall be kept by the Board, and
it shall be permissible to record verbatim the remarks of any person
who speaks at said hearing.
A. Every application for either site development plan approval or
subdivision approval shall be accompanied by a fee, payable to the City
Clerk-Treasurer, in accordance with the fee schedule set forth herein.
B. In order to determine the proper fee, the applicant shall submit an
affidavit to the Building Official setting forth the estimated value of the
project.
C. Applications for approval of conditional uses shall be subject to the
same fee as would be imposed pursuant to Subsection A above.
D. The fee to be charged pursuant to Subsections A and C above shall be
as per § 535-72J of Chapter 535, Zoning.87
E. If the actual cost of construction differs from the value set forth in the
affidavit submitted pursuant to Subsection B, the applicant shall pay
the additional fee due prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy.
F. No public hearing shall be scheduled unless and until the appropriate
fee is paid.
87.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 126-8 PORT JERVIS CODE § 126-10
126:140
§ 126-10. Alternate members.88
Chapter 130
POLICE DEPARTMENT
Chapter 142
RECORDS
A. Pursuant to § 27 of the General City Law, alternate Planning Board
positions for the City of Port Jervis Planning Board are hereby
established for use when a regular member cannot participate due to a
conflict of interest.
B. Pursuant to the Municipal Home Rule Law, alternate Planning Board
members may also serve in place of a regular member who is absent.
C. The term for the alternate Planning Board members shall run
concurrently with the terms of current members.
D. Alternate members of the Planning Board shall be appointed by the
Mayor.
E. The Mayor may appoint up to three alternate Planning Board members.
88.Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
§ 126-10 POLICE DEPARTMENT § 126-10
130:141

ARTICLE I
Retention and Disposition.
[Adopted 1-13-1975]
§ 142-1. Schedule adopted.
Records Retention and Disposition Schedule No. 11-City-1, containing
records retention periods for City records, established pursuant to Part 185,
Title 8 of the Official Compilation of Codes, Rules and Regulations of the
State of New York, is hereby adopted for use by the City Clerk-Treasurer of
this City.
§ 142-2. Disposition of records authorized.
This Council authorizes the disposition of records in accordance with
retention periods set forth in the adopted Records Retention and
Disposition Schedule
§ 142-1 RECORDS § 142-2
142:143

ARTICLE II
Public Access
[Adopted 2-27-1978 (Ch. 40 of the 1981 Code)]
§ 142-3. Statutory authority.
Pursuant to the requirements set forth in § 87(1)(a) of the Public Officers
Law of the State of New York, the Common Council of the City of Port
Jervis, New York, has promulgated the following regulations governing
public access to records.
§ 142-4. Records access officer designated; general duty.
The Common Council of the City of Port Jervis, New York, designates the
City Clerk-Treasurer of the City of Port Jervis, New York, as records access
officer for the City. As records access officer, the City Clerk-Treasurer shall
have the duty of coordinating the City's response to public requests for
access to records.
§ 142-5. Requests for access to be written.
It is required that any request for public access to records be made to the
City Clerk-Treasurer in writing by the requester.
§ 142-6. Place of access.
Requests for access to public records shall be received and records made
available at the office of the City Clerk-Treasurer, which is located in the
Municipal Building at the corner of Sussex and Hammond Streets in the City
of Port Jervis, Orange County, New York.
§ 142-7. Time of accepting requests; records available.
The City Clerk-Treasurer will accept requests for public access to records
and produce records during all hours that said office is regularly open for
business.
§ 142-8. Description required of requested records.
All written requests for access to public records shall reasonably describe
the record or records sought. Whenever possible, a person requesting
records should supply information regarding dates, file designations or
other information that may help to describe the records sought.
§ 142-9. Time limit for response to request.
The City, through its designated agent, shall respond to any request
reasonably describing the record or records sought within five business
days of receipt of the request.
§ 142-3 RECORDS § 142-10
142:145
§ 142-10. Acknowledgment of receipt; further time for grant or
denial.
If the City does not provide or deny access to the records sought within
five business days of the receipt of a request, the City shall furnish a
written acknowledgment of receipt of the request and a statement of the
approximate date when the request will be granted or denied. If access
to records is neither granted nor denied within 10 business days after the
date of acknowledgment of the receipt of a request, the request may be
construed as a denial of access that may be appealed.
§ 142-11. Fees.
Except in cases where a different fee is otherwise prescribed by law, such as
a request for a birth certificate or a death certificate, the City shall charge
a fee for copies of records according to the following schedule:
§ 142-12. Fee exceptions.
No fee shall be charged for the following:
§ 142-13. Responsibilities of records access officer.
The City Clerk-Treasurer, as the designated records access officer, shall be
responsible for assuring that City personnel:
A. The fee for copying records shall be as provided in Chapter 280, Fees.89
B. In instances where copies cannot be made by photocopying equipment,
a transcript of the requested records shall be made upon request. Such
transcript may be either typed or handwritten. In such cases, the
person requesting records shall be charged for the clerical time
involved in making the transcript.
C. The fee for copies of records not covered by Subsections A and B above
shall be equal to the actual reproduction cost, which is the average unit
cost for copying a record, excluding fixed costs of the agency such as
operators' salaries.
D. The actual fees involved in requests pursuant to Subsections B and C
above shall be determined by the City Clerk-Treasurer and may
fluctuate from year to year based upon the actual cost of clerical time
and the unit cost for copying.
A. Inspection of records.
B. Search for records. Any certification by the records access officer that
the record is a true copy of the original.
A. Maintain an up-to-date subject matter list.
89.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 142-10 PORT JERVIS CODE § 142-13
142:146
§ 142-14. List of records to be maintained.
The City Clerk-Treasurer shall maintain a reasonably detailed current list
by subject matter of all records in his or her possession, whether or not the
records are available to the public.
§ 142-15. List of records to be detailed.
The aforementioned subject matter list shall be sufficiently detailed to
permit identification of the category of the records sought.
§ 142-16. Updating of list of records.
The aforementioned subject matter list shall be updated not less than twice
per year, and the most recent update shall appear on the first page of the
subject matter list.
§ 142-17. Appellate agency.
The Common Council of the City of Port Jervis, New York, shall hear appeals
or shall designate, in its discretion, an individual or entity to hear appeals
regarding denial of access to records under the Freedom of Information
Law.
§ 142-18. Written denial of access; contents.
A denial of access shall be in writing, stating the reason therefor and
advising the person denied access of his or her right to appeal to the
Common Council of the City of Port Jervis, New York, or to the individual
B. Assist the requester in identifying requested records, if necessary.
C. Upon locating the records, take one of the following actions:
(1) Make records available for inspection; or
(2) Deny access to records in whole or in part and explain in writing
the reasons therefor.
D. Upon request for copies of records:
(1) Make a copy available upon payment of established fees.
(2) Permit the requester to copy these records without removing the
same from the office of the records access officer.
E. Upon request, certify that a record is a true copy.
F. Upon failure to locate records, certify that:
(1) The agency is not the custodian of such records; or
(2) The records of which the agency is a custodian cannot be found
after diligent search.
§ 142-13 RECORDS § 142-18
142:147
or entity established by said Council to hear appeals. The written denial
shall set forth the individual or entity designated to hear appeals and shall
identify said appellate agency by name, title, business address and business
telephone number. The records access officer shall not be the appeals
officer.
§ 142-19. Time limit for appeal.
Any person denied access to records may appeal within 30 days of a denial.
§ 142-20. Commencement of time for deciding appeal; contents of
appeal.
The time for deciding an appeal by the Common Council of the City of Port
Jervis, New York, or the individual or entity designated by said Council to
hear appeals, shall commence upon receipt of written appeal identifying:
§ 142-21. Copies of appeals to be sent to state agency.90
The City Clerk-Treasurer shall transmit to the Committee on Open
Government copies of all appeals upon receipt of an appeal. Such copies
shall be addressed to: Committee on Open Government, Department of
State, 162 Washington Avenue, Albany, New York, 12231.
§ 142-22. Transmission of decision to appellant and state agency.91
The Common Council of the City of Port Jervis, New York, or the individual
or entity designated by said Council to hear appeals, shall inform the
appellant and the Committee on Open Government of its determination
in writing within seven business days of receipt of an appeal. The
determination shall be transmitted to the Committee on Open Government
in the same manner as set forth in the above section.
§ 142-23. Final denial of access subject to court review.
A final denial of access to a requested record, as provided in these rules and
regulations, shall be subject to court review as provided for in Article 78 of
the Civil Practice Law and Rules.
A. The date and location of a request for records.
B. The records that were denied.
C. The name and return address of the appellant.
90.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
91.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 142-18 PORT JERVIS CODE § 142-23
142:148
Chapter 147
RETIREMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
City officers — See Charter, Art. II.
Officers and employees — See Ch. 115.
Police Department — See Ch. 130.
§ 142-23 RECORDS § 142-23
142:149

ARTICLE I
Health Insurance and Other Benefits
[Adopted 9-28-2009 by L.L. No. 9-2009]
§ 147-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to establish health insurance and other
benefits for enumerated City officers upon their retirement from service
with the City of Port Jervis.
§ 147-2. Enumeration of City officers benefiting.
The following City officers shall benefit from this article upon their
retirement, pursuant to the terms hereof, from service with the City of
Port Jervis: City Clerk-Treasurer; Deputy City Clerk-Treasurer; Assessor;
Director of Public Works; Assistant Director of Public Works; Chief of Police;
Police Lieutenants; Building Official; Assistant Building Official; and
Director of Recreation.
§ 147-3. Eligibility for benefits.
In order to be eligible for the benefits set forth herein, the retiree must be
at least 55 years of age; must have been employed by the City of Port Jervis
for 15 consecutive years prior to retirement; and must be in good standing
with the City of Port Jervis upon retirement.
§ 147-4. Health insurance benefit.
Upon retirement, the City officer shall continue to be covered by the City
of Port Jervis' health insurance plan then in effect on his or her retirement
date and to the type of plan then covering the retiring officer (family plan
or individual plan). This health insurance coverage shall continue for the
lifetime of the retiring officer, and all premiums shall be paid by the City
of Port Jervis. In the event that the City of Port Jervis should change
health insurance carriers or health insurance plans, the retiring officer shall
continue to be covered under a policy written by the new carrier with
coverage at least equal to the former plan. In the event of the death of the
retiring officer, his surviving spouse shall be entitled to continue to receive
coverage and benefits under the City of Port Jervis' health insurance plan or
he or she may elect a lesser plan, at his or her option, for his or her lifetime,
at his or her cost and expense. He or she shall be continued under the plan
of his or her choice for his or her lifetime, and the premiums for said plan
shall be his or her obligation. This benefit shall in no way be construed to
limit or replace benefits which a qualifying Police Chief or Police Lieutenant
may receive under the New York State Retirement System.
§ 147-5. Sick days, personal days and holidays.
Upon retirement, the retiring officer shall receive a cash amount equal to
100% of the earned sick days, personal days and holidays that he or she
§ 147-1 RECORDS § 147-5
142:151
accumulated to the date of his or her retirement at the rate of pay equal to
his or her current pay rate at his or her date of retirement. Earned sick days
shall not exceed a maximum of 180 days.
§ 147-6. Vacation days.
Upon retirement, the retiring officer shall be entitled to receive a cash
amount equal to the value of his or her unused accumulated vacation time
to be paid at a rate of pay equal to his or her current pay rate at his or her
date of retirement.
§ 147-7. Required provisions of law.
Each and every provision of law and clause required by law to be inserted
in this article shall be deemed to have been inserted herein.
§ 147-5 PORT JERVIS CODE § 147-7
142:152
Chapter 153
SHADE TREE COMMISSION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Parks and recreation — See Ch. 389.
Streets, sidewalks and public property — See
Ch. 464.
Trees — See Ch. 492.
§ 153-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PARK TREES — Trees, shrubs, bushes and all other woody vegetation in
public parks having individual names and all areas owned by the City or to
which the public has free access as a park.
STREET TREES — Trees, shrubs, bushes and all other woody vegetation on
land lying between property lines on either side of all streets, avenues or
ways and four feet of street frontage property lines within the City.
§ 153-2. Creation; membership.
There is hereby created and established a City Shade Tree Commission for
the City of Port Jervis. The Commission shall consist of seven members.
Of those seven members, one shall be a resident of the First Ward of the
City, one shall be a resident of the Second Ward of the City, one shall be
a resident of the Third Ward of the City and one shall be a resident of
the Fourth Ward of the City. The remaining three members shall be atlarge
members and therefore need only to be City residents to qualify to
serve. All members shall be appointed by the Mayor with the advice and
consent of the majority of the Common Council. A majority shall mean at
least five members of the Common Council and not simply the majority of
a quorum. Members of the Commission shall serve at the pleasure of the
Mayor and Common Council and continue to serve until their replacements
are appointed and qualified.
§ 153-3. Compensation.
Members of the Commission shall serve without compensation.
§ 153-4. Responsibilities.
The responsibilities of the Commission shall include but are not limited to
the following issues: to study, investigate, develop and/or update annually
and administer a written plan for the care, preservation, pruning, planting,
replanting, removal or disposition of trees, shrubs and bushes in parks,
§ 147-7 RECORDS § 153-4
142:153
along streets and in other public areas. This plan shall constitute the Official
Comprehensive City Tree Plan for the City of Port Jervis.
§ 153-5. Administration.
The Commission shall choose its own officers, make its own rules and
regulations and keep a journal of its proceedings. A majority of the members
shall be a quorum for the transaction of business.
§ 153-6. Tree species to be planted.
The Commission shall develop and maintain a list of desirable trees for
planting along streets in three size classes based on mature height: small
(under 20 feet), medium (20 feet to 40 feet) and large (over 40 feet). Lists
of trees not suitable for planting will also be created by the Commission.
§ 153-7. Spacing.
The spacing of street trees shall be in accordance with the three size classes
listed in § 153-6, and no trees may be planted closer together than the
following: small trees, 30 feet; medium trees, 40 feet; and large trees,
50 feet, except in special plantings designed or approved by a landscape
architect.
§ 153-8. Distance from sidewalk on private property.
The distance trees may be planted from sidewalks will be no closer than
four feet of street frontage property.
§ 153-9. Interference with Commission.
It shall be unlawful for any person to prevent, delay or interfere with the
Commission or any of its agents while engaging in and about the planting,
cultivating, mulching, pruning, spraying or removing of any street trees or
park trees as authorized in this chapter.
§ 153-10. Review by Common Council.
The Common Council shall have the right to review the conduct, acts and
decisions of the Commission. Any person may appeal from any ruling or
order of the Commission to the Common Council, which may hear the
matter and make final decisions.
§ 153-11. Restrictions on trees planted near utility wires.
No street trees other than those species listed as small trees in § 153-7 of
this chapter may be planted under or within 10 feet of any overhead utility
wire.
§ 153-4 PORT JERVIS CODE § 153-12
142:154
§ 153-12. Severability.
If any clause, sentence, paragraph, section, or part of this chapter shall
be adjudged by any court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such
judgment shall be confined in its operation to the clause, sentence,
paragraph, section or part thereof directly involved in the controversy in
which judgment shall have been rendered.
§ 153-13. Repealer.
This chapter supersedes Chapter 153, which is hereby repealed in its
entirety.
Chapter 170
TRAFFIC VIOLATIONS BUREAU
GENERAL REFERENCES
Appearance tickets — See Ch. 5. Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 505.
§ 170-1. Establishment authorized.
For the purpose of assisting the Judge of the City Court of the City of
Port Jervis in the disposition of offenses in relation to traffic violations,
pursuant to the provisions of Article 14-B, §§ 370, 371 and 372 of the
General Municipal Law, the Judge of the City Court of the City of Port Jervis
is hereby authorized to establish a Traffic Violations Bureau.
§ 170-2. Supervision; hours.
The Traffic Violations Bureau shall be under the charge of the Judge of the
City Court of the City of Port Jervis or such person or persons as he may
designate and shall be open at such hours as the City Judge of said City may
designate.
§ 170-3. Scope of authority; powers.
The Traffic Violations Bureau shall be authorized to dispose of all violations
of the Traffic Ordinance92 of the City of Port Jervis and the Vehicle and
Traffic Law of the State of New York, including parking violations, other
than those which constitute speeding or which may be classified as
misdemeanors or felonies under those statutes, by permitting a person
charged with an offense within the limitations herein stated to answer
within a specified time at such Traffic Violations Bureau, either in person or
by written power of attorney, in such form as may be prescribed herein, by
paying a fine to be designated by the City Judge of the City Court of the City
92.Editor's Note: See Ch. 505, Vehicles and Traffic.
§ 153-12 TRAFFIC VIOLATIONS BUREAU § 170-3
170:155
of Port Jervis for such offense, and in writing to waive a hearing before the
Court, pleading guilty to the charge and authorizing the person in charge of
the Bureau to make such plea on behalf of such offender and pay such fine
in Court.
§ 170-4. Authority to designate fines.
The City Judge of the City Court of the City of Port Jervis shall have
authority to designate the amount of all fines to be paid for offenses
cognizable by the Traffic Violations Bureau, except that such fines shall not
exceed the limits imposed by either the ordinances of the City of Port Jervis
or the statutes of the State of New York.
§ 170-5. Satisfaction of violation.
Acceptance of a fine and power of attorney by the Bureau shall be deemed
complete satisfaction for the violation, and the violator shall be given a
receipt therefor which so states.
§ 170-6. Failure of violator to respond; complaint; warrant.
If a person charged with a traffic or parking violation, as aforesaid, does not
answer as herein prescribed within a time designated therefor, the Bureau
shall cause a complaint to be entered against him forthwith and a warrant
to be issued for his arrest and appearance before the Court.
§ 170-7. Right of violator to counsel and Court appearance.
The Traffic Violations Bureau shall not be authorized to deprive a person of
his right to counsel or to prevent him from exercising his right to appear in
Court to answer, to explain or defend any charge of a violation of any traffic
law, ordinance, rule or regulation.
§ 170-8. Payment of fines.
The designated fines to be paid for offenses may be satisfied at the Bureau
as hereinbefore stated, provided that such fines are within the limits
established as penalties for such offenses.
§ 170-9. Records; additional duties.
The Traffic Violations Bureau shall keep a record of all violations, whether
guilt was established in Court or in the Bureau, and also a record of all
fines collected and the disposition thereof. It shall also perform such other
or additional duties and keep such other or additional records as shall be
prescribed by the Judge of the City Court of the City of Port Jervis.
§ 170-10. Power of attorney.
The power of attorney shall be in the following form:
§ 170-3 PORT JERVIS CODE § 170-10
170:156
"Whereas, I have been served with summons for a violation of the traffic
law Sec. _______ (City or Vehicle and Traffic Law), and
"Whereas, it is my desire to plead guilty to such violation, I do hereby
authorize _______________________________, giving him full power and
authority to appear for me and to plead guilty on my behalf and to pay the
fine assessed for such violation.
Part II, General Legislation
Chapter 203
ADVERTISING MATERIALS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Peace and good order — See Ch. 398.
§ 203-1. Restrictions on placement and distribution.
It shall be unlawful for any person to throw, cast or distribute, or permit to
be thrown, cast or distributed, any handbill, circular, card, booklet, placard,
phone book, phone directory, yellow pages directory or other advertising
matter whatsoever in or upon any street, front yard, courtyard or lawn of
any building or in private letter boxes or in automobiles or other vehicles
in the City of Port Jervis, provided that nothing herein contained shall
be deemed to prohibit or otherwise regulate the distribution of such
advertising matter from home to home by affixing the same to an inner or
outer door of a private home or by placing the same in a slot or recess of the
door or by placing the same underneath the door of such dwelling, nor shall
anything herein be deemed to prohibit or otherwise regulate the delivery of
such matter by the United States Postal Service, or prohibit the distribution
of sample copies of newspapers sold by the copy or by annual subscription.
(This section is not intended to limit the lawful distribution of anything other
than commercial and business advertising matter.)
§ 203-2. Penalties for offenses.
A breach of this chapter shall be a violation punishable by a fine of not less
than $100 nor more than $750 or imprisonment for a period not exceeding
15 days, or both fine and imprisonment, for the first such violation and, for
any subsequent violations, by a fine of not less than $250 nor more than
$1,000 or imprisonment for a period not exceeding 15 days, or by both fine
and imprisonment. Each day such violation is permitted to continue shall
constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such hereunder.
The City may also bring an action or proceeding to enjoin the violation
and to recover the costs incurred by the City for cleaning up or otherwise
remedying conditions brought about by the violation of this chapter.
§ 170-10 TRAFFIC VIOLATIONS BUREAU § 203-2
170:157
Chapter 206
ALARM SYSTEMS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire Department — See Ch. 55. Police Department — See Ch. 130.
§ 203-2 PORT JERVIS CODE § 203-2
206:158
ARTICLE I
Police Alarm Systems
§ 206-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to establish standards and controls of the
various types of intrusion, holdup and other emergency signals from alarm
devices that require police response, investigation and safeguarding of
property at the location of an event reported by and/or signal-transmitted,
telephoned, radioed and otherwise relayed to the police by an alarm device
or by any person acting in response to a signal actuated by an alarm device.
§ 206-2. Legislative intent.
The Council hereby declares that the legislative intent of this article is to
apply its provisions to any business, firm, corporation or other commercial
entity that is in the business of owning, operating, maintaining or installing
an alarm device or devices or a dial alarm device or devices designed
to summon the police to any location in response to a signal or other
transmission generated or produced by such devices.
§ 206-3. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ALARM DEVICE, POLICE AND MEDICAL EMERGENCY — Any device
which, when activated by a criminal act or other emergency, transmits a
prerecorded message or other signal by telephone, radio, central alarm
station or audible or visible signal designed to cause any person within
audible or visual range to notify the Police Department requiring their
emergency response.
ALARM INSTALLATION — Any police alarm device or aggregation of police
alarm devices installed on or within a single building or within more than
one building or area adjacently located on a common site, at a specific
location.
ALARM LICENSE — The written authorization of the City of Port Jervis
granted to any person to engage in the business of installing and/or
servicing police or medical emergency alarm devices in the City of Port
Jervis pursuant to the provisions of the Code of the City of Port Jervis.
ALARM LICENSEE — Any person, business, firm, corporation or other
commercial entity which is in the business of owning, operating,
maintaining, installing, leasing or selling a police or medical emergency
alarm device or devices, which person, business, firm, corporation or other
commercial entity is, as owner, operator, provider or maintenance service,
installer, lessor or seller of said device, devices or system of devices,
licensed pursuant to the requirement of the Code of the City of Port Jervis.
CENTRAL ALARM SYSTEM — Any facility operated by a private firm that
owns or leases a system of police alarm devices, which facility is manned
§ 206-1 ALARM SYSTEMS § 206-3
206:159
at all times by trained operators employed to receive, record and validate
alarm signals and to relay information about such validated signals to the
police radio dispatch room when appropriate.
DIAL ALARM — Any police alarm device which is a telephone device or
telephone attachment that automatically or electronically selected a
telephone line connected to a central alarm station and reproduces a
prerecorded message to report a criminal act or other emergency requiring
police response.
DIRECT ALARM — Any police alarm device connected directly by leased
telephone wires from a specific location to the police radio dispatch room.
FALSE ALARM —
POLICE COMMUNICATION FACILITIES — The police radio dispatch room
and other enclosures housing privately or publicly owned equipment
serving the police radio dispatch room.
§ 206-4. License required.
A signal emitted by an emergency alarm or alarm device, which signal
results in an actual communication to or with the Police Department,
which communication incorrectly indicates that there is or has been a
burglary, intrusion, holdup or other emergency at a premises in the City
of Port Jervis.
A.
A false alarm does not include signals emitted by an alarm caused by
or as a result of circumstances such as storms or acts of God beyond
the control of the licensee or where the system is shown to be in
correct working order and not activated as a result of abuse, neglect,
inattention, human error or equipment malfunction.
B.
A. It shall be unlawful to operate, maintain, install, lease or sell an alarm
device without a license. It shall be unlawful for any person, business,
firm, corporation or other commercial entity to operate, maintain,
install, lease or sell a police alarm device or devices or system of police
alarm devices, as defined by the terms of this article, without first
obtaining a license as hereinafter provided.
B. Authority to grant license and permits.
(1) The Police Chief is hereby authorized to grant a revocable alarm
license to any business, firm, corporation or other commercial
entity, authorizing said business, firm, corporation or other
commercial entity to do business in the City of Port Jervis by
performing any or all of the following functions: to own, operate,
maintain, install, lease or sell an alarm device or devices or systems
of police alarm devices.
(2) All presently existing alarm devices and systems or police alarm
devices and present owners and lessees of premises having such
§ 206-3 PORT JERVIS CODE § 206-4
206:160
§ 206-5. Procedures to obtain license.
All businesses, firms, corporations or other commercial entities which are
in the business of owning, operating, maintaining, installing, leasing or
selling a police alarm device or devices or system of police alarm devices
which desire to conduct business in the City of Port Jervis shall apply to
the Police Chief for a business license on a form supplied by the Police
Department of Port Jervis. The application may contain specific provisions
relating to the quality, efficiency and effectiveness of the device or system of
devices owned or to be operated, maintained, installed, leased or sold by the
business licensee, testing procedures involved and any other information
that the Police Chief shall determine to be reasonably necessary to
effectuate the purpose of this article. It shall also contain an affirmative
representation by the applicant that he has diligently investigated all
employees, consultants and agents connected with this business and, to
his knowledge, they have no prior criminal convictions for a felony or
misdemeanor. In addition, it shall contain the name, address and policy
number for a fidelity bond of at least $5,000 covering any of his employees
or servants. Such business license shall be issued for a one-year period, on
a calendar-year basis or a part thereof, and no license shall extend beyond
December 31 of each year. Notwithstanding this provision, a person having
a business license may conduct such business through January 31 of the
year following the expiration of his business license. Prior to the issuance
of any permit or license, the applicant will furnish satisfactory proof of a
fidelity bond of at least $5,000 fully paid for the time the license or permit
will be valid and which policy will be to protect homeowners from criminal
or illegal acts of licensee's, employee's or servants.
§ 206-6. Fees.93
License fees for a business license shall be as provided in Chapter 280,
Fees, without pro ration and such other amounts as shall be fixed from time
to time by resolution of the Common Council of the City of Port Jervis.
§ 206-7. Denial, suspension or revocation of license.
A license issued under this article may be suspended or revoked by the
Police Chief after notice and hearing by the Police Chief for the violation
of any of the provisions of this article or of any regulation or regulations
promulgated by the Police Chief pursuant to this article, and any license
or identification card issued hereunder shall be refunded when a license
is suspended or revoked. Any applicant whose application for a license
or permit has been denied or any business license alarm agent, owner
or lessee whose license has been suspended or revoked by the Police
devices or systems must comply with all provisions of this article by
such date as shall be fixed by resolution of the City of Port Jervis.
93.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 206-4 ALARM SYSTEMS § 206-7
206:161
Chief may appeal such denial, suspension or revocation, in writing, to the
Common Council within 30 days after the date of denial or of the notice of
suspension or revocation and may appear before such Common Council at
a time and place to be determined by the Common Council in support of his
or its contention that the license should not have been denied, suspended
or revoked. The decision of the Common Council of the City of Port Jervis
shall be final.
§ 206-8. Records.
Every business, firm, corporation or other commercial entity conducting
the business of owning, operating, installing, leasing or selling police alarm
devices within the City of Port Jervis shall maintain complete and accurate
records of all installations of alarm systems in the City of Port Jervis and
shall produce such records for inspection by the Police Chief or his agent
upon demand.
§ 206-9. General provisions.
§ 206-10. Special provisions.
A. Change of location. If the location of the police communication facilities
should be changed at any time, licensees under this article shall not
attempt to charge the City of Port Jervis with any resulting cost of
moving alarm systems or any parts thereof.
B. Installation and maintenance costs. All costs and recurring charges
incurred in the installation and maintenance of systems permitted by
this article in police communications facilities shall be borne by the
licensee.
C. Rules and regulations. The Chief of Police may promulgate reasonable
rules and regulations that may reasonably be necessary for the
purposes of assuring the quality, efficiency and effectiveness of police
alarm devices, holdup alarms, dial alarms and alarm installations
owned, operated, maintained, installed or sold by a permittee under
this article and of administering and enforcing the provisions of this
article.
A. Direct alarm systems. The Chief of Police is hereby authorized to
prescribe the location and the manner of installation of all connections
and equipment, cabinets and accessories of an approved direct alarm
system within the police communication facilities for the purpose of
providing a direct alarm system, where the visible and audible signals
therefor may be readily seen and heard by police personnel. Any cost
shall be solely borne by the licensee.
B. All holders of alarm devices and medical alarms and any other alarms
may be required to provide written authorization to the Police
Department to forcibly enter the premises for the purpose of verifying
the validity of the emergency condition.
§ 206-7 PORT JERVIS CODE § 206-11
206:162
§ 206-11. Maintenance.
§ 206-12. Automatic cutoff system.
No person shall install or maintain in any building, structure or
establishment in the City of Port Jervis an external audible alarm of any type
which does not also contain an automatic cutoff system to automatically cut
off the source of power to the alarm after it has sounded for a period of 15
minutes. It shall be required that a minimum of three names to contact shall
be provided to the police for the purpose of securing or restoring said alarm
system when necessary.
§ 206-13. False alarms.
§ 206-14. Disclaimer or disability; verification of security by alarm
user.
The City of Port Jervis shall not be liable for any defects in the operation
of emergency alarm systems nor for any failure to respond appropriately
nor for any erroneous response nor for the failure or defect of any licensee
pursuant to the provisions of this article with respect to the installation,
operation or maintenance of equipment, the transmission of alarm signals
or messages or the relaying of such signals or messages.
A. Each and every alarm device, holdup alarm, direct alarm, dial alarm
and emergency alarm in the City of Port Jervis shall be properly
maintained and in proper working condition.
B. The installation and maintenance of police alarm devices shall be at no
cost to the City.
C. Any false alarm to which the Police Department responds shall be
attributable to the owner or lessee of the property activating the alarm.
A. Penalties as set forth below may be imposed against the licensee of any
alarm which emits a false alarm as defined.
B. The penalties for false alarms which may be imposed against the
licensee for the occurrence of false alarms caused by such licensee's
emergency alarm is as follows:
(1) A fine not exceeding $100 for the fourth such false alarm in any
calendar year.
(2) A fine not exceeding $150 for the fifth such false alarm in any
calendar year.
(3) A fine not exceeding $200 for the sixth and subsequent false
alarms.
C. The Chief may suspend or revoke the property owner's alarm system
after a hearing pursuant to § 206-7 upon failure to pay any fine within
30 days of demand for payment or more than six false alarms.
§ 206-11 ALARM SYSTEMS § 206-15
206:163
§ 206-15. Penalties for offenses.
Willful violations of any provisions of this article shall constitute an offense
and shall be punishable by a fine of not more than $50 for each day that the
violation shall continue.
§ 206-16. When effective.
This article shall take effect as provided in the Charter of the City of Port
Jervis.
§ 206-15 PORT JERVIS CODE § 206-16
206:164
ARTICLE II
Fire Alarm Systems
[Amended 5-13-2002 by L.L. No. 2-2002]
§ 206-17. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to establish standards and controls for central
station fire alarm systems, that require Fire Department action from a
signal to the Fire Department; via available technology from ownermaintained
alarm systems.
§ 206-18. Legislative intent.
The Council hereby declares that the legislative intent of this article is to
apply its provisions to any business, firm, corporation, other commercial
entity and/or residential buildings designated to summon the Fire
Department to that location in response to such signal.
§ 206-19. Definitions.
Refer to National Fire Alarm Code (National Fire Protection Association 72)
Chapters 1-4.
§ 206-20. General provisions.
A. All fire alarm system installations, modifications, maintenance and/or
testing shall comply with the New York State Fire Prevention and
Building Code, most current edition.
B. All fire alarms systems shall comply with the National Fire Alarm Code
(N.F.P.A. 72), the most current edition.
C. All fire alarm system work shall be done by a licensed New York State
fire alarm company.
D. All companies proposing to do fire alarm system work shall have a copy
of their current New York State fire alarm license on file with the City
Clerk-Treasurer, Bureau of Fire Prevention and Building Department
prior to conducting any alarm work in the City.
E. All companies shall file a copy of their liability and New York State
workers' compensation insurance with the City Clerk-Treasurer. The
City shall be named as an additional insured on their liability policy.
F. All companies shall submit, in writing, to the City Bureau of Fire
Prevention and Building Department, all proposals, including the scope
of the work to be performed and all equipment to be used for review
and approval before any work is started. Upon completion of said work
the company shall demonstrate and test the system with a
representative of the Bureau of Fire Prevention and Building
Department present for final approval.
§ 206-17 ALARM SYSTEMS § 206-20
206:165
G. All fire controls and peripheral devices shall be of applicable grade and
quality in accordance with UL/864 Central Station requirements. All
initiating devices shall be zoned to a remote annunciator panel for
viewing by the occupants and the Fire Department. The alarm panel
shall be easily accessible to the Fire Department.
H. All fire suppression and/or sprinkler systems shall report to the new fire
controls on separate zones. All smoke, heat-detecting and pull stations
shall report on separate zones.
I. Depending on building size, layout, and/or occupancy, the building
owner/occupant may opt to install a minimum of one interior and one
exterior fire alarm pull station where not required by the Code.
J. Upon final approval, the company shall prepare and submit a written
record of completion as per the National Fire Alarm Code.
K. Every system shall have a minimum of one interior and one exterior
ADA approved horn/strobe alerting device.
L. All fire alarm systems shall report to a twenty-four-hour UL/FM
approved central station. The use of a subcontracted central station
shall be prohibited.
M. All approved central monitoring stations shall file their license with the
City Clerk-Treasurer, Bureau of Fire Prevention and Building
Department before December 31 for the ensuing year.
N. All fire alarm companies shall supply proof of a twenty-four-hour
emergency service department capable of responding to a trouble or
alarm within one hour of the reported condition.
O. All central stations shall maintain a current listing of the building
owner, tenant and point of contact. This list shall include the names and
phone numbers of key holders who are capable of responding on a
seven-day, twenty-four-hour emergency notification. This list shall be
updated at least annually and submitted in triplicate for the Bureau of
Fire Prevention, Building and Police Departments.
P. All fire alarm activations shall be treated as an actual alarm, which shall
require the central station to immediately notify the Fire Department.
Q. The Fire Department personnel may reset the alarm system with no
liability.
R. All fire alarm systems shall be registered with City of Port Jervis Bureau
of Fire Prevention. All building owners having fire alarm systems shall
also install a Knox Box secure key entry system. The Fire Department
shall have the only keys to this system. The owner shall be responsible
for updating the correct keys for storage.
§ 206-20 PORT JERVIS CODE § 206-20
206:166
§ 206-21. Penalties for offenses.
§ 206-22. Fees.
All installation, connection, maintenance and monitoring fees shall be at the
expense of the owner/occupant.
§ 206-23. Administrative officials.
The Fire Inspector and/or the Fire Chief shall administer this article.
S. Each fire alarm system shall have an unannounced fire alarm test as
conducted by the Bureau of Fire Prevention. The Bureau of Fire
Prevention shall hold this test at least annually or as deemed necessary.
T. All alarm panels will be keyed to a "B" key.
A. False alarms and/or nuisance calls.
(1) Any owner of a fire alarm system that emits a false alarm may be
issued a violation and appearance ticket for the Port Jervis City
Court and will be subject to the schedule of fines listed below.
Written warnings may be issued for the first three false calls in any
calendar year.
(2) Any fire alarm company and/or monitoring company may be issued
a violation and appearance ticket for the Port Jervis City Court and
shall be subject to the schedule of fines listed below.
(3) Any fire alarm company and/or monitoring company may lose the
right to provide service in the City of Port Jervis, in the interest of
public safety.
B. Schedule of fines.
(1) First offense: $250.
(2) Second offense: $400.
(3) Third offense: $500.
(4) Subsequent offenses: $750 each.
§ 206-20 ALARM SYSTEMS § 206-23
206:167
Chapter 210
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Peace and good order — See Ch. 398.
§ 206-23 PORT JERVIS CODE § 206-23
210:168
ARTICLE I
Open Containers
[Adopted 4-23-1979 (Ch. 117, Art. II of the 1981 Code)]
§ 210-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meaning indicated:
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE — Includes alcohol, spirits, liquor, wine or beer,
and every liquid or solid, patented or not, containing alcohol, spirits, wine
or beer, capable of being consumed by a human being.
CONTAINER — Any bottle, can, glass or other receptacle suitable for or
used to hold any liquid.
INTENT TO CONSUME — Drinking from the container, with alcohol on the
breath of the possessor and/or any circumstances evidencing an intent to
ultimately consume on any public lands.94
§ 210-2. Possession in public places restricted.95
No person shall have in his or her possession with intent to consume any
open or unsealed bottle or container containing liquor, beer, wine, spirits or
any other alcoholic beverage while such person is on any public highway,
public street, public sidewalk, public parking area, public park or recreation
area, public alley or in any public place or in or on any vehicle in any public
place or area as aforesaid excepting those premises and locations licensed
for the sale of and consumption of alcoholic beverages in the City of Port
Jervis, New York.
§ 210-3. Declaration of nuisance.96
The possession with intent to consume of open and unsealed containers of
alcoholic beverages by persons on any public highway, street, parking lot,
sidewalk or area as aforesaid in the City of Port Jervis is hereby deemed to
constitute a hazard and nuisance to the health, safety and welfare of the
public.
94.Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
95.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
96.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 210-1 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES § 210-4
210:169
§ 210-4. Provisions extended to include school district. [Added
4-14-1980 by L.L. No. 2-198097]
The terms and provisions, including the penalties, set forth in this article
the Code of the City of Port Jervis, New York, commonly known as the
"Open Container Ordinance," are hereby extended to cover the property
and improvements of the Port Jervis City School District located within
the City of Port Jervis. The enactment of this section and the provisions
contained in the same shall in no way obligate the City of Port Jervis,
New York, its employees, representatives, officers or agents to otherwise
maintain, regulate, operate, repair, construct, reconstruct or in any other
manner be responsible for any property and improvements of the Port Jervis
City School District.
§ 210-5. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 9-28-1981 by L.L. No.
4-1981]
Any person committing an offense against any provision of this article shall
be punishable as provided in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article I.
§ 210-6. Waiver of provisions.
In the case of special events and celebrations, the Common Council may
waive the prohibitions and enforcement of this article for a specific date,
time, place and event.
97.Editor's Note: The following is the preamble of the local law which adopted the provisions
of this section: "WHEREAS, it has been determined, by the Common Council of the City of
Port Jervis, New York, that it would be in the best interests and to the benefit of the
health, safety and general welfare of the citizens of the City of Port Jervis, New York, to
extend the terms and provisions of Section 18-28 of the Code of Ordinances of the City of
Port Jervis, commonly known as "Open Container Ordinance" to Port Jervis City School
District property located within the City of Port Jervis, and "WHEREAS, the extension of
said terms and provisions of said ordinance is properly within the general police power of
the City and a proper exercise of said power as it is set forth in the General City Law of the
State of New York, and elsewhere."
§ 210-4 PORT JERVIS CODE § 210-6
210:170
Chapter 215
ANIMALS, DOG CONTROL AND OTHER
GENERAL REFERENCES
Noise — See Ch. 381.
§ 210-6 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES § 210-6
210:171

ARTICLE I
Dogs
§ 215-1. License and tag required; seizure and impoundment;
disposition.
A. This chapter is enacted pursuant to the New York Municipal Home Rule
Law and the Agriculture and Markets Law to provide for the licensing,
identification and control of dogs. Effective January 1, 2011, the State
of New York has relinquished the responsibility of dog licensing
function to local municipalities and will eliminate the Animal Population
Control Fund. Local municipalities will now be required to adopt
legislation relating to this issue, which is the purpose of this article.
B. This chapter is enacted pursuant to the provisions of Article 7 of the
Agriculture and Markets Law as amended by Part T of Chapter 59 of the
Laws of 2010 and the Municipal Home Rule Law of the State of New
York, as the same may be subsequently amended and supplemented.
C. All words, terms or phrases used herein shall have the meanings
indicated below or as defined in the Agriculture and Markets Law. If no
specific definition is set forth, all words shall have their usual and
customary meaning in the English language. Words used in the present
tense include the future, and the plural includes the singular. The word
"shall" is intended to be mandatory.
ANIMAL/DOG CONTROL OFFICER — Any individual appointed by the
Chief of Police of the City, the Common Council of the City and/or the
Mayor of the City to enforce this chapter.
CITY — The City of Port Jervis, Orange County, New York.
CLERK — The City Clerk, or Deputy City Clerk, of the City, or his or her
agent.
DOG — Any member of the species Canis familiaris.
HARBOR — To provide food or shelter to any dog.
IDENTIFICATION TAG — A tag issued by the Clerk that sets forth an
identification number, as required by the provisions of this section.
OWNER — Any person who harbors or keeps any dog.
D. Chapter 215 of the Port Jervis City Code as it currently exists shall
herein and hereby be repealed and, in its place and stead, this chapter
is enacted and shall be designated as the new Chapter 215 of the Port
Jervis City Code and shall be entitled "Dog Control."
E. Dog licensing requirements, procedures and fees.
(1) License application.
(a) The owner of any dog reaching the age of four months shall
immediately make application for a dog license. No license
§ 215-1 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES § 215-1
210:173
shall be required for any dog under the age of four months
that is not at large or that is residing in a pound or shelter
maintained by or under contract or agreement with the state or
any county, city, town or village, any duly incorporated society
for the prevention of cruelty to animals, duly incorporated
humane society or duly incorporated dog protective society.
(b) Application for a dog license shall be made to the Clerk and
shall be accompanied by the appropriate license fee, as
specified below.
(c) The application shall state the sex, actual or approximate year
of birth, breed, color(s), and municipal identification number of
the dog, and other identification marks, if any, and the name,
address, telephone number, county and residence of owner,
and such other information as deemed necessary by the Clerk.
(d) In the case of a spayed or neutered dog, every application shall
be accompanied by a certificate signed by a licensed
veterinarian showing that the dog has been spayed or
neutered, provided that such certificate shall not be required if
the same is already on file with the Clerk.
(e) The application shall be accompanied by a statement certified
by a licensed veterinarian showing that the dog or dogs have
been vaccinated to prevent rabies or, in lieu thereof, a
statement certified by a licensed veterinarian stating that
because of age or other reason, the life of the dog or dogs
would be endangered by the administration of vaccine. The
Clerk shall make or cause to be made from such statement a
record of such information and file such record with a copy of
the license.
(2) License fees. The fee for a dog license shall be set by resolution of
the Common Council, from time to time.
(a) Upon submission of proper documentation, there shall be no
fee charged for the license issued for any detection dog, guide
dog, hearing dog, police work dog, service dog, therapy dog,
war dog or working search dog, as such terms are defined by
the Agriculture and Markets Law or by Article I of this Chapter
215.
(b) In addition to other applicable fees, any person applying for a
dog license for a dog indentified as unlicensed during an
enumeration shall pay an additional fee of $25. Such additional
fee shall be used to pay the expenses incurred by the City in
conducting the enumeration, if the City conducts such an
enumeration. In the event that the additional fees collected
exceed the expenses incurred by the City in conducting an
enumeration in any year, such excess fees may be used by the
City for any other lawful purpose.
§ 215-1 PORT JERVIS CODE § 215-1
210:174
(c) In the event any person applying for a dog license has failed to
pay for or renew a dog license for all or part of any prior year,
such person must pay to the City all licensing fees that would
have been due and payable in such prior years along with the
licensing fees due and payable for the current year for which
such person is applying for a dog license. By way of example, if
the owner of a dog applies for a dog license to cover the year
from May 1, 2015, through April 30, 2016, but should have
obtained or renewed a license for that dog for the prior three
years and failed to do so, such person must pay the licensing
fees for the year May 1, 2015, through April 30, 2016, as well
as the applicable licensing fees for the prior three years.
(3) Upon validation by the Clerk, the application shall become a license
for the dog described therein. Once an application has been
validated, no refund shall be made.
(4) The Clerk shall provide a copy of the license to the owner and
retain a record of the license in either paper or electronic format.
(5) A license shall be renewed after a period of one year beginning
with the first day of the month following the date of issuance.
Renewal shall be for a minimum of one year and shall not exceed
three years, based on the validation term of the rabies vaccination.
(6) No license shall be transferable. Upon the transfer of ownership of
any dog, the new owner shall immediately make application for a
license for such dog. The original issued identification tag shall
remain the same for the life of the dog.
(7) No dog can be adopted out of the City's animal shelter without first
obtaining a license from the Clerk.
F. Identification of dogs.
(1) Each dog licensed shall be assigned, at the time the dog is licensed
for the first time, a permanent municipal identification number.
Such identification number shall be carried by the dog on an
identification tag that shall be affixed to a collar on the dog at all
times.
(2) The identification number shall constitute the official identification
of the dog to which it is assigned, regardless of changes of
ownership, and the number shall not be reassigned to any other
dog during the lifetime of the dog to which it is assigned.
(3) At the time a dog is first licensed, one identification tag shall be
furnished to the owner at no charge. Any replacement tag shall be
obtained by the owner at his expense at a fee of $5.
§ 215-1 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES § 215-1
210:175
(4) No tag carrying an official identification number shall be affixed to
the collar of any dog other than the one to which that number has
been assigned.
(5) The identification tag shall be imprinted with the words "City of
Port Jervis" and "State of New York," a unique identification
number, and the telephone number of the Clerk's office.
G. Change of ownership; lost or stolen dogs. In accordance with the
provisions of § 112 of the Agriculture and Markets Law:
(1) In the event of a change in ownership of any dog that has been
assigned an identification number or in the address of the owner of
record of any such dog, the owner of record shall, within 10 days of
such change, notify the Clerk.
(2) If any dog that has been assigned a municipal identification number
is lost or stolen, the owner of record shall, within 10 days of the
discovery of such loss or theft, notify the Clerk.
(3) In the case of a dog's death, the owner of record shall so notify the
Clerk, either prior to renewal of license or upon the time of such
renewal.
H. Seizure and impoundment. In accordance with § 117 of the Agriculture
and Markets Law:
(1) The Animal/Dog Control Officer shall seize:
(a) Any dog which is not licensed, whether on or off the owner's
premises.
(b) Any licensed dog which is not in the control of its owner or
custodian or not on the premises of the dog's owner or
custodian, if there is probable cause to believe the dog is
dangerous.
(c) Any dog which poses an immediate threat to the public safety.
(d) Any dog in violation of this section of the chapter.
(2) The Animal/Dog Control Officer, when acting pursuant to his or her
special duties, shall make and maintain a complete record of any
seizure and subsequent disposition of any dog. Such record shall
include, but not be limited to, a description of the dog, the date and
hour of seizure, the municipal identification number of the such
dog (if any), the location where seized, the reason for the seizure
and the owner's name and address, if known.
(3) Each dog seized in accordance with the provisions of this section
shall be properly sheltered, fed and watered for the redemption
period as hereinafter provided.
§ 215-1 PORT JERVIS CODE § 215-1
210:176
§ 215-2. Leashing.
All dogs in the City of Port Jervis, New York, whether or not tagged or
licensed, shall be restrained by a leash while off the owner's premises, and
any dog not so restrained and found off the owner's premises shall be seized
by any peace officer, Animal Control Officer, Dog Warden or designated
representative of the Commissioner of Agriculture and Markets and held,
sold, redeemed or destroyed in accordance with the provisions of the New
York State Agriculture and Markets Law or this article. In addition, any dog
that is restrained by a leash or other type of restraint while off the owner's
(4) Each dog which is not identified, whether or not licensed, shall be
held for a period of five days from the day seized, during which
period the dog may be redeemed by its owner, provided that such
owner produces proof that the dog has been licensed and has been
identified pursuant to the provisions of this section and further
provided that the owner pays the following impoundment fees:
(a) Not less than $275 for the first impoundment of a dog owned
by that person.
(b) Not less than $300 for the second impoundment, within one
year of the first impoundment, of any dog owned by that
person.
(c) Not less than $325 for the third and subsequent
impoundments, within one year of the first impoundment, of
any dog owned by that person.
(d) If, upon redemption, any dog received a rabies vaccination, the
charge for such vaccination shall be added to impoundment
fees.
(5) If, at the end of the appropriate redemption period, said dog has
not been redeemed by its owner, the owner shall forfeit all title to
the dog, and it shall be available for adoption or be released to an
authorized humane society or shelter.
(6) Prior to releasing a dog to its owner or adopting out a dog, the
Animal/Dog Control Officer shall deliver to the owner a statement
of number of days the dog has been in the shelter and the costs for
any veterinary care, which statement the owner shall take to the
Clerk to whom all fees due and owing for the shelter and veterinary
care shall be paid, together with the impoundment fees and any
licensing fees, whereupon the Clerk shall give a receipt to the
owner who shall then deliver it to Animal/Dog Control Officer, at
which time such dog may be released to owner.
I. Fees can be changed upon Common Council resolution. Any fees
charged under this section of the Code of the City, or any penalties
imposed under this chapter, may be changed from time to time by
resolution of the Common Council of the City.
§ 215-1 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES § 215-2
210:177
premises and while in a public area, or in a common area of a residential
or commercial property, or in the public right-of-way, must be attended and
supervised at all times by the owner of the dog or an agent of the owner, so
that such dog does not impede or affect the safe passage by or presence of
members of the public through, in or over such public area, common area
of a residential or commercial property or the public right-of-way.
§ 215-3. Running at large.
No person shall permit his dog to run at large.
§ 215-4. Howling or barking.
§ 215-5. Removal of feces required; disposal; exceptions.
§ 215-5.1. Service dogs.
A "service dog" is any dog which has been or is being trained to do work for
the benefit of a person with a disability, provided that the dog is or will be
owned by that person, his or her parent, guardian or legal representative.
"Disability" is now the same definition as used in the Executive Law as
a physical, mental or medical impairment resulting from anatomical,
physiological, genetic or neurological conditions which prevents the
exercise of a normal bodily function or is demonstrable by medically
A. No person shall permit his or her dog to howl or bark at any time of the
day or night for a period in excess of 15 minutes continuously.
B. No person shall permit his or her dog to howl or bark during the hours
between 10:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. for a period in excess of five minutes
continuously. No conviction shall be allowed under this subsection
without the corroborating testimony of at least one witness from a
property other than that owned or occupied by the complainant. It shall
be an affirmative defense to such violation if the owner of the dog
proves that the only reason the dog was barking or howling was that the
dog was being provoked by a person or was acting as a guide dog,
hearing dog, service dog or police work dog.
A. Removal of feces required. Any person owning or in charge of any dog
which soils, defiles, defecates on or commits any feces on any common
thoroughfare, sidewalk, passageway, play area, park or any place where
people congregate or walk or upon any private property, without the
permission of the owner of said property, shall immediately remove all
feces deposited by any such dog, in a sanitary manner.
B. Disposal of feces. The feces removed from the aforementioned
designated areas shall be disposed of by the person owning or in charge
of any such dog in a sealed, nonabsorbent, leakproof container.
C. Exception for guide dogs. The provisions of this section shall not apply
to blind persons who may use dogs as guides.
§ 215-2 PORT JERVIS CODE § 215-5.1
210:178
accepted clinical or laboratory techniques or a record of such an
impairment or a condition regarded by others as such an impairment.
§ 215-5.2. Detection dogs.
Detection dogs are also now exempt from license fees. This includes dogs
trained and used to detect controlled substances, explosives, firearms,
cadavers, or school or correctional facility contraband. Search and rescue
dogs are also still exempt under the working search dog classification.
§ 215-5.3. Therapy dogs.
Effective January 1, 2003, any dog which is trained to aid the emotional and
physical health of patients in hospitals, nursing homes, retirement homes
and other settings and is actually used for such purpose or any dog owned
by a recognized training center located within the state during the period
such dog is being trained or bred for such purpose is exempt from license
fees. New York State recognizes the following two institutes, Therapy Dog
International, Inc., and the Delta Society, as training centers.
§ 215-5.4. Maximum number of dogs.
§ 215-6. Dangerous dogs.
A. No more than four dogs over four months old may be harbored or
permitted to remain in any dwelling unit or lot in the City of Port Jervis.
B. Any person who violates any of the provisions of this section shall be
guilty of an offense within the meaning of the Penal Law of the State of
New York and, upon conviction thereof, shall be subject to a fine of not
less than $50 nor more than $500 for each violation and, in addition,
may be required by the court in its discretion to pay restitution to the
City of Port Jervis for any expenses associated with the seizure,
impoundment, shelter, care or destruction of the violator's dogs. Each
day that a violation is permitted to exist shall constitute a separate
offense.
C. In the event that a law enforcement agent or Animal Control Officer has
probable cause to believe that a dog is being harbored or permitted to
remain in any dwelling unit or lot in violation of this section, the law
enforcement officer or Animal Control Officer may petition the Port
Jervis City Court to order the seizure and impoundment of the dog
pending a hearing. The owner or custodian of any dog seized and
impounded pursuant to this section shall be afforded a hearing upon
appropriate notice within five days of said seizure to determine if in fact
a violation of the section occurred.
A. Legislative intent. The Common Council has determined that there
exists a need to address the situation of dangerous dogs in the City of
Port Jervis by supplementing the provisions of § 123 of the Agriculture
and Markets Law of the State of New York.
§ 215-5.1 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES § 215-6
210:179
B. Applicability. The provisions of this section shall be deemed to
supplement applicable state and local laws, ordinances, codes or
regulations, and nothing in this section shall be deemed to abolish,
impair, supersede or replace existing remedies, rights or requirements
of any other applicable state and local laws, ordinances, codes or
regulations.
C. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meaning indicated:
DANGEROUS DOG —
SERIOUS PHYSICAL INJURY — Death, dismemberment, fracture or
any injury to a dog/cat which in the opinion of a licensed veterinarian
threatens the life of such dog/cat.
Includes:
Any dog with a known propensity, tendency or disposition to
attack unprovoked, to cause injury or to menace or to
otherwise endanger the safety of human beings;
(a)
(b) Any dog which attacks a human being without provocation;
Any dog which attacks another dog/cat on the latter's own
premises without provocation and which inflicts serious
physical injury upon such other dog/cat;
(c)
Any dog owned or harbored primarily or in part for the purpose
of dog fighting or any dog trained for dog fighting; or
(d)
Any dog designated as dangerous by the Animal Control
Officer or Police Chief of the City of Port Jervis.
(e)
(1)
No dog shall be deemed dangerous if it bites, attacks or menaces
a trespasser on the property of its owner or harms or menaces
anyone who has tormented or abused it.
(2)
D. Confinement and care of dangerous dogs.
(1) No person owning or harboring or having the care or custody of a
dangerous dog shall suffer or permit such dog to go unconfined on
the premises of such person. A dangerous dog is "unconfined," as
the term is used in this section, if such dog is not securely confined
indoors or confined in a securely enclosed and locked pen or dog
run area upon the premises of said person. Such pen or dog run
area must also have either sides six feet high or a secure top, must
be at least 10 feet from the property line of any adjoining premises,
and must comply with the Zoning Law regarding fences. If the pen
or structure has no bottom secured to the sides, the sides must be
imbedded into the ground no less than one foot. In addition, any
dangerous dog kept or harbored must have a "chip" implanted by a
licensed veterinarian so that the history and whereabouts of said
dog can be traced by the Animal Control Officer of the City of Port
§ 215-6 PORT JERVIS CODE § 215-6
210:180
Jervis and others. Proof of payment must be provided to the Animal
Control Officer upon his/her request.
(2) No person owning or harboring or having the care or custody of a
dangerous dog shall suffer or permit such dog to go beyond the
premises of such person unless such dog is securely muzzled and
restrained with a chain having a minimum tensile strength of 300
pounds and not exceeding three feet in length.
(3) No person shall possess with intent to sell, offer for sale, breed, or
buy or attempt to buy within the City of Port Jervis any dangerous
dog.
(4) All persons owning or harboring or having the care or custody of a
dangerous dog shall post their premises with a clearly visible
warning sign that there is a dangerous dog on the property. In
addition, the owner or custodian of a dangerous dog shall
conspicuously display a sign to be obtained by the Animal Control
Officer of the City of Port Jervis. Said sign shall contain a warning
symbol that informs children of the presence of a dangerous dog.
(5) All persons owning or harboring or having the care or custody of a
dangerous dog shall procure and maintain a liability policy with
limits not less than $100,000, combined single-limit bodily injury
and property damage, for injury or damage caused by the dog.
(6) The owner or custodian of any dangerous dog shall immediately
notify the Port Jervis Police Department or Port Jervis Animal
Control Officer if said dangerous dog is unconfined or has bitten a
human being, domestic animal, dog or cat.
(7) The owner or custodian of any dangerous dog shall give 72 hours'
notice to the Animal Control Officer of the City of Port Jervis prior
to the giving away or transfer of ownership of any dangerous dog.
Said notice must provide the Animal Control Officer with the name,
address and telephone number of the new or proposed owner or
custodian of the dangerous dog.
E. Illegal training of dogs. No person shall own or harbor any dog for the
purpose of dog fighting or train, torment, badger, bait or use any dog
for the purpose of causing or encouraging said dog to unprovoked
attacks upon human beings, domestic animals, dogs or cats.
F. Enforcement.
(1) In the event that a law enforcement agent or Animal Control Officer
has probable cause to believe that a dog is being harbored or cared
for in violation of this section, the law enforcement agent or Animal
Control Officer may petition the Port Jervis City Court to order the
seizure and impoundment of the dog pending hearing. In the event
that a law enforcement agent or Animal Control Officer has
probable cause to believe that a dangerous dog is being harbored
§ 215-6 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES § 215-6
210:181
in violation of Subsection D(2) or that any dog is being harbored
in violation of Subsection E or that any dog has attacked a human
being, the law enforcement agent or Animal Control Officer may
seize and impound the dog pending hearing.
(2) Any person may make a complaint under oath or affirmation to the
Port Jervis City Court of any violation of this section.
(3) The owner or custodian of any dog seized and impounded pursuant
to this section shall be afforded a hearing upon appropriate notice
within five days of said seizure to determine if in fact a violation of
this section has occurred.
G. Penalties. A violation of any provisions of this section shall constitute an
offense within the meaning of the Penal Law of the State of New York
punishable as provided for herein.
(1) A fine of no less than $150 and no greater than $500 or by
imprisonment for a period not exceeding 15 days, or by both such
fine and imprisonment, for a first offense.
(2) A fine of no less than $350 and no greater than $1,000 or by
imprisonment for a period not exceeding 15 days, or by both such
fine and imprisonment, for a second or subsequent offense.
(3) Any person violating Subsection E, Illegal training of dogs, shall be
subject to penalties as prescribed in § 351 of the Agriculture and
Markets Law.
(4) Any person violating the provisions of this section may be required
in the court's discretion to pay restitution to:
(a) Any person who incurs medical or veterinarian expenses as the
result of an attack by the violator's dangerous dog; or
(b) The City of Port Jervis for any expenses associated with the
seizure, impoundment, shelter, care or destruction of the
violator's dangerous dog.
(5) A Judge of the Port Jervis City Court may, in his or her discretion,
order the destruction of any dangerous dog owned or harbored in
violation of the provisions of this section when the court determines
that such dog represents a continuing threat of serious harm to
human beings.
H. Contesting determination of dangerous dog. The owner or custodian of
any dog determined by the Animal Control Officer or Police Chief of the
City of Port Jervis to be dangerous within the meaning of this section
may contest such designation by commencing an action as provided in
Article 78 of the Civil Practice Law and Rules within 30 days of the
mailing of the written notice provided for in Subsection I below.
§ 215-6 PORT JERVIS CODE § 215-6
210:182
§ 215-7. City parks.
§ 215-8. Penalties for offenses.
I. Records; written notice. The City Clerk of the City of Port Jervis shall
keep records identifying by name and address the owners or custodians
of all dogs determined to be dangerous by the Animal Control Officer or
the Police Chief of the City of Port Jervis. The Animal Control Officer
shall provide all owners and custodians of dangerous dogs with written
notice of the provisions of this section.
J. Reporting of all animal bites. It shall be the duty of every person within
the City of Port Jervis, including every veterinarian and physician
practicing within the City of Port Jervis, to promptly report to the Port
Jervis Police Department or Port Jervis Animal Control Officer any
instance in which a person is bitten by a dog.
K. Inspections. The Animal Control Officer of the City of Port Jervis is
hereby authorized to make appropriate and reasonable inspections and
inquiries to ensure compliance with this section.
A. No dogs shall be permitted in any park owned by the City of Port Jervis,
except in areas specifically designated for such use by the Department
of Recreation and Parks.
B. A violation of this section shall constitute an offense within the meaning
of the Penal Law of the State of New York and shall be punishable as
provided in § 215-8C.
A. Except as otherwise provided in Article 7 of the Agriculture and
Markets Law, any person violating any provision or provisions of
§ 215-1 of Article I of this chapter shall be deemed to have committed
an offense against such § 215-1 and any violation shall be punishable by
a fine not exceeding $250 or by imprisonment for not more than 15
days, or both fine and imprisonment, for each offense. Any violation
which continues beyond one day shall be deemed a separate violation
and bear a separate penalty for each separate day, 12:00 midnight to
12:00 midnight, in which the violation occurs.
B. Any person who violates any of the provisions of § 215-6 of this article
shall be subject to the penalties prescribed in § 215-6G.
C. Any person who violates any of the provisions of § 215-7 of this article
shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a fine of not less than $100
nor more than $500 and/or to imprisonment for not longer than 15 days
in jail for each violation.
D. Any person who violates any of the other provisions of this article shall,
upon conviction thereof, be subject to a fine of not less than $100 nor
more than $500 for each violation. Any person who violates any of the
provisions of § 215-4 of this article shall, in addition, be subject, in the
§ 215-6 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES § 215-8
210:183
§ 215-9. Appearance tickets.
Upon probable cause that any provision of this article has been or is being
violated, any law enforcement officer or the Animal Control Officer of the
City of Port Jervis is hereby authorized to issue an appearance ticket, on a
form prescribed by the Animal Control Officer, directing the alleged violator
to appear to answer such charge in the Port Jervis City Court.
court's discretion, to a conditional discharge requiring one or more of
the following directives:
(1) The subject dog(s) must not be left outside if the owner or his/her
family is not home;
(2) The subject dog(s) must wear a bark collar when outside;
(3) The owner of the subject dog(s) must install an outside ultrasonic
bark control system;
(4) The subject dog(s) must be housed inside the residence between
10:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. At any time the subject dog(s) is(are)
outside during these hours, it(they) must be accompanied by the
owner or suitable age person in charge of the dog(s);
(5) Removal of the subject dog(s) from the premises upon the third or
subsequent conviction under § 215-4.
§ 215-8 PORT JERVIS CODE § 215-9
210:184
ARTICLE II
Cats
§ 215-10. Maximum number of cats.
No more than five cats, over six months old, may be harbored or permitted
to remain in any dwelling unit or lot in the City of Port Jervis.
§ 215-11. Penalties for offenses.
Any person who violates any of the provisions of this article shall be guilty
of an offense within the meaning of the Penal Law of the State of New York
and, upon conviction thereof, shall be subject to a fine of not less than $50
nor more than $250 for each violation and in addition may be required by
the court in its discretion to pay restitution to the City of Port Jervis for
any expenses associated with the seizure, impoundment, shelter, care or
destruction of the violator's cats. Each day that a violation is permitted to
exist shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 215-12. Enforcement.
In the event that a law enforcement agent or Animal Control Officer has
probable cause to believe that a cat is being harbored or permitted to
remain in any dwelling unit or lot in violation of this article, the law
enforcement officer or Animal Control Officer may petition the Port Jervis
City Court to order the seizure and impoundment of the cat pending
hearing. The owner or custodian of any cat seized and impounded pursuant
to this article shall be afforded a hearing upon appropriate notice within
five days of said seizure to determine if in fact a violation of this article has
occurred.
§ 215-10 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES § 215-12
210:185

ARTICLE III
Farm Animals
§ 215-13. Prohibited animals.
It shall be unlawful to permit any of the following farm animals to be
harbored or allowed to remain in any dwelling or lot in the City of Port
Jervis: cattle, chicken, duck, goose, goat, horse or pig.
§ 215-14. Penalties for offenses.
Any person who violates any of the provisions of this article shall be guilty
of an offense within the meaning of the Penal Law of the State of New York
and, upon conviction thereof, shall be subject to a fine of not less than $50
nor more than $250 for each violation and in addition may be required by
the court, in its discretion, to pay restitution to the City of Port Jervis for
any expenses associated with the seizure, impoundment, shelter, care or
destruction of the violator's animals. Each day that a violation is permitted
to exist shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 215-15. Seizure and impoundment; hearing.
In the event that a law enforcement agent or Animal Control Officer has
probable cause to believe that any of the above farm animals is being
harbored or permitted to remain in any dwelling unit or lot in violation
of this article, the law enforcement officer or Animal Control Officer may
petition the Port Jervis City Court to order the seizure and impoundment
of the farm animal pending hearing. The owner or custodian of any farm
animal seized and impounded pursuant to this article shall be afforded
a hearing upon appropriate notice within five days of said seizure to
determine if in fact a violation of this article has occurred.
§ 215-13 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES § 215-15
210:187
Chapter 220
AUCTIONS AND AUCTIONEERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Charter reference — See § C4-13K.
Pawnbrokers — See Ch. 394.
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 403.
§ 215-15 PORT JERVIS CODE § 215-15
210:188
ARTICLE I
Auctions
§ 220-1. License required.
It shall be unlawful for any person, by himself or by any servant or agent, to
sell or offer for sale or cause or permit to be sold or disposed of at auction
within the corporate limits of the City any goods, wares, merchandise, real
estate and personal property without first having obtained and paid for and
having in full force and effect a license therefor as herein provided.
§ 220-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AUCTIONEER — Any person selling or offering for sale for another or for
himself at public auction any goods, wares, merchandise, real estate or
personal property of any description, except as hereinafter provided.
SELLING AT AUCTION; AUCTION — Includes the offering for sale or selling
of goods, wares, merchandise, real estate and personal property to the
highest bidder, or offering for sale or selling of such property by the method
known as "downhill selling," by which is meant the first offering of any
article at a higher price and then offering the same at successive lower
prices.
§ 220-3. Applicability.
§ 220-4. Application procedure.
A. Section 220-1 shall not apply to auction sales of goods, wares and
merchandise in job lots or at wholesale, of real estate, household goods,
cattle and horses.
B. Nothing herein contained shall apply to judicial sales or sales by
executors or administrators, by trustees under deed of assignment, by
lienors or by public officers in the manner prescribed by law, or to sales
by local religious, educational, musical or charitable associations.
A. Required. Every person desiring to procure a license as herein provided
shall file with the Mayor, at least 10 days prior to the opening of an
auction sale, a written application upon a blank form prepared and
furnished by the City.
B. Contents. Such application shall contain the names and residences of
the applicant, if an individual, partnership or firm, or the names and
residences of the principal officers, if the applicant is an association or
corporation; the nature and character of the property proposed to be
sold at such sale; the dates and the hours of each day such sale is to be
held; the length of time such applicant has resided in the City; the
length of time such applicant has been in business in the City and the
§ 220-1 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES § 220-4
210:189
§ 220-5. Bonding required.98
The application described in § 220-4 shall be accompanied by a bond to
the City, approved as to form and manner of execution by the Corporation
Counsel, in the penal sum as set by the Common Council from time to
time, with sufficient surety or sureties or sufficient collateral security to be
approved by the Mayor, conditioned for the faithful observance of the laws
of the State of New York and the ordinances of the City now or hereafter
enacted relative to auctions. Such bond shall be kept in full force and effect
during the entire period for which the license is granted and for six months
thereafter.
§ 220-6. Issuance of license; grounds for refusal; reapplication.
§ 220-7. License fee; use restrictions.
street and number where his business is now located; the address,
street and number of the proposed place of sale; the name or names of
the auctioneers to be employed; the length of time for which the license
is desired; and such further pertinent information as the Mayor may
request.
C. Execution. Such application shall be signed and acknowledged by the
applicant before a notary public or other official authorized to
administer oaths in the City.
A. Upon the filing of the application and bond as provided in §§ 220-4 and
220-5, the Mayor may, upon his approval of such application and subject
to the limitations and restrictions and the payment to the City of the
license fee hereinafter provided, issue to the applicant a license to
conduct an auction. No license shall be refused except for a specific
reason and for the protection of the public safety, good order and
morals. All licenses shall be numbered in the order in which they are
issued and shall state clearly the street and number at which the
auction is to be held or conducted, the fee paid and the name and
address of the licensee.
B. No applicant to whom a license has been refused shall make further
application until a period of at least six months shall have elapsed since
the last previous rejection, unless he can show that the reason for such
rejection no longer exists.
A. Fee. The license fee shall be as provided in Chapter 280, Fees.
[Amended 9-28-1981 by L.L. No. 4-1981; 7-27-1992 by L.L. No.
5-1992; 2-26-2007 by L.L. No. 2-2007]
98.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 220-4 PORT JERVIS CODE § 220-7
210:190
§ 220-8. Revocation of license.
§ 220-9. Hours of auction. [Amended 7-15-1970; 9-23-1996 by L.L.
No. 16-1996]
Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful to sell or expose for sale
at auction any personal property, goods, wares, antiques or merchandise
between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. No auction shall be
conducted between the hours of 10:00 p.m. Saturday and 12:00 midnight
Sunday.
§ 220-10. Department approval required. [Amended 7-15-1970;
9-23-1996 by L.L. No. 16-1996; 1-11-2010 by L.L. No. 1-2010]
The sale of any goods at auction, as defined above in § 220-2, shall be
in premises approved by the various City departments having jurisdiction
thereover, including but not limited to the Building Official, Fire Inspector
and Electrical Inspector, and such sale shall be conducted in such area in
B. Exemption. Nonprofit charitable organizations shall be exempt from the
license fee requirement, but shall comply with all other provisions of
this chapter. [Added 9-28-1981 by L.L. No. 4-1981]
C. Use of license. No license shall be used by any person other than the
original licensee, and any holder of such license who permits it to be
used by another and any person who uses such license granted to
another person shall be guilty of a violation of this article.
D. Duplicate license. Whenever a license shall be lost or destroyed without
fault on the part of the holder, a duplicate license in lieu thereof under
the original application and bond may be issued by the Mayor, in his
discretion, upon the filing with him of an affidavit by the licensee,
setting forth the circumstances of the loss and what, if any, search has
been made for its recovery.
E. Destroying or defacing license. No person shall destroy, deface or injure
a license in any manner or change the name, numbers or dates thereon.
A. Authority, effect. The Mayor may at any time for such reasonable cause
as he, upon investigation, deems sufficient, revoke any license granted
under the provisions of this article. Whenever any license shall be so
revoked, no refund of any unearned portion thereof shall be made, and
no license shall be granted to any person whose license has been
revoked, in the discretion of the Mayor, within a period of two years
from the date of such revocation.
B. Notice. Notice of revocation and the reason or reasons therefor in
writing shall be served by the Mayor upon the person named in the
application by mailing the same to the address given in the application
and upon filing a copy of the same with the City Clerk-Treasurer.
§ 220-7 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES § 220-10
210:191
the City of Port Jervis where retail sales are permitted in accordance with
the Zoning Ordinance99 of the City of Port Jervis.
§ 220-11. Prohibited conduct.
§ 220-12. Jewelry.
A. Generally. No person shall, by auction, dispose of any goods, wares or
merchandise, real estate or personal property at any time:
(1) Except through the medium of an auctioneer licensed to conduct
such business.
(2) In any street or public place.
(3) To any person who, at the time of bidding for or while examining
the same, shall be on the sidewalk or roadway of any street.
B. False representations. It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or offer
or advertise for sale any goods, wares or merchandise at auction,
falsely representing or pretending that such property is in whole or in
part a bankrupt or insolvent stock, damaged goods or goods saved from
fire, or to make any false statement as to the purchase, history or
character of such property.
C. Promise to give jewelry. No person shall sell any goods, wares or
merchandise at public auction with the understanding that the
purchaser thereof shall receive gratis or as a part consideration any
article of jewelry.
A. Contents of statement. It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or offer
for sale at auction any diamonds or other precious or semiprecious
stones or imitations thereof, watches, clocks, jewelry or glassware
unless there be securely attached to each of such articles a tag or label
upon which there shall be plainly written or printed in English a true
and correct statement of the kind and quality of the metal of which such
article is made or composed and the percentage or karat or purety of
such metal. If such articles are plated or overlaid, then such tag or label
shall contain a true statement of the kind of plate and the percentage of
purety of such plating and the kind of material of metal covered. When
precious or semiprecious stones are offered for sale or sold by auction,
such written statement shall set forth the true name, weight, quality
and fineness of such stone, and imitations shall be described as such.
When watches and clocks are sold, the true names of the manufacturers
shall be stated in writing and no parts of the movements or mechanism
thereof shall be substituted or contain false and misleading names or
trademarks, neither shall secondhand or old movements be offered for
sale in new cases, without a true statement to that effect.
99.Editor's Note: See Ch. 535, Zoning.
§ 220-10 PORT JERVIS CODE § 220-12
210:192
§ 220-13. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 9-28-1981 by L.L. No.
4-1981]
Any person who, himself or by his clerk, agent or employee, shall sell
or offer for sale or cause or permit to be sold or disposed of at auction
any goods, wares, merchandise, real estate or personal property without a
license, or who shall commit an offense against any of the provisions of this
article, or who, having had his license revoked, shall continue to conduct
an auction, shall, upon conviction thereof, be punishable as provided in
the general penalty provisions of the City of Port Jervis; see Chapter 1,
General Provisions, Article I. Each day on which such offense continues
shall constitute a separate violation. In addition to the penalty imposed,
the license of the person violating the same shall be canceled or revoked
and the bond upon such license shall be forfeited. Upon such forfeiture, the
amount of the bond shall thereupon become due and payable to the City
and the amount thereof may be recovered in a civil action based upon such
forfeiture.
B. Disposition; effect. Such tag or label shall remain securely attached to
any such article or merchandise, shall be delivered to the purchaser as
a true and correct description and representation of the articles sold
and shall be deemed prima facie evidence of intent to defraud in case
such written statement is not a true and correct description and
representation of such articles sold.
§ 220-12 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES § 220-13
210:193

ARTICLE II
Auctioneers
§ 220-14. License required.
It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct or to represent or circulate or
place before the public any announcement that he conducts the business of
an auctioneer without first having obtained and paid for and having in full
force and effect an auctioneer's license therefor as hereinafter provided.
§ 220-15. Nonapplicability.
Nothing herein contained shall apply to judicial sales or sales by executors
or administrators, by trustees under deed of assignment, by lienors or by
public officers in the manner prescribed by law.
§ 220-16. Application procedure.
§ 220-17. Police investigation.
When an application is filed, the Mayor shall cause an investigation to be
made by the Police Department to ascertain whether the applicant is of
good character and repute. The Chief of Police shall furnish to the Mayor, in
writing, the information derived from such investigation, accompanied by a
recommendation as to whether a license should be granted or refused.
§ 220-18. Bonding required.100
Such application shall be accompanied by a bond to the City, approved as
to form and manner of execution by the Corporation Counsel, in the penal
sum as set by the Common Council from time to time, with at least two
sufficient sureties approved by the Mayor, conditioned that the applicant
will faithfully perform his duties as such auctioneer as required by law and
A. Contents. Every person desiring to procure an auctioneer's license as
herein provided shall file with the Mayor a written application upon a
blank form prepared and furnished by the City. Such application shall
contain the name and business and residence addresses of the
applicant; the length of time such applicant has resided in the City; his
previous employment and where; whether married or single; whether
he has ever been convicted of a misdemeanor or felony, and if so, what
offense, when and in what court; whether he has, either alone or with
someone else, ever engaged in the business of auctioneer, and if so,
when and where; and the length of time for which the license is desired.
B. Execution. Such application shall be signed and acknowledged before a
notary public or other official authorized to administer oaths in the City.
100. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 220-14 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES § 220-18
210:195
ordinances now or hereafter enacted and render such accounts and pay
such duties as may be required of him by law.
§ 220-19. Issuance of license; grounds for refusal; reapplication.
§ 220-20. Ineligible persons.
A license shall not be granted to any person who has been convicted of
violating the laws of the State of New York or ordinances of the City relating
to auctions and auctioneers or of fraud or deceit in the conduct of auctions.
§ 220-21. License personal to licensee.
No person having an auctioneer's license granted under this article shall
delegate his power to any clerk, partner or person; but the privilege given
shall be personal to the person named in the license and shall be exercised
by him alone.
§ 220-22. License fee; duration. [Amended 9-28-1981 by L.L. No.
4-1981]
§ 220-23. Nontransferability; duplication and destruction
prohibited.
A. Upon the filing of the application, bond and information as provided in
the previous sections, the Mayor may, upon his approval of such
application and the payment to the City of the license fee hereinafter
provided, issue to the applicant a license to engage in the business as
provided in § 220-14. No auctioneer's license shall be refused except for
a specific reason and for the protection of the public safety, good order
and morals. All licenses shall be numbered in the order in which they
are issued and shall state clearly the dates of issuance and expiration of
the license, the fee paid and the name and business address of the
licensee.
B. No applicant to whom a license has been refused shall make further
application until a period of at least six months shall have elapsed since
the last previous rejection, unless he can show that the reason for such
rejection no longer exists.
A. The license fee for an auctioneer shall be as provided in Chapter 280,
Fees. [Amended 7-27-1992 by L.L. No. 5-1992101]
B. Each license shall expire on the 31st day of January in each year.
A. Nontransferable. No auctioneer's license shall be used by any person
other than the original licensee, and any holder of such license who
permits it to be used by another and any person who uses such license
granted to another person shall be guilty of a violation of this article.
101. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 220-18 PORT JERVIS CODE § 220-23
210:196
§ 220-24. Prohibited conduct.
No auctioneer shall do the following:
§ 220-25. Revocation of license.
B. Duplicate license. Whenever a license shall be lost or destroyed without
fault on the part of the holder, a duplicate license in lieu thereof under
the original application and bond may be issued by the Mayor, in his
discretion, upon the filing with him of an affidavit by the licensee,
setting forth the circumstances of the loss and what, if any, search has
been made for its recovery.
C. Destroying or defacing license. No person shall destroy, deface or injure
a license in any manner or change the name, numbers or dates thereon.
A. False representations. Make any false representations as to the
character, quality, condition, previous history, value or ownership of any
property offered for sale.
B. Substitutions. Substitute any other article for the article sold to the
bidder.
C. Bidding. Bid in any property offered for sale by himself, and no person
shall act as an accomplice or "capper" for the purpose of making mock
bids at any auction.
D. Noises. Employ a bellman, crier, instrument of music or means of
attracting the attention of passersby other than a sign or flag which
shall bear the license number.
E. Sales for unlicensed merchants. Conduct any auction sale for a
transient merchant or other person who or which has not procured a
license required by law or ordinance or whose license has expired or
been revoked.
F. Exhibit of license. Refuse to exhibit his license to any police officer upon
demand at the place where an auction is being conducted.
G. Sales to or for minors. Receive for sale by auction or sell by auction any
goods, wares or merchandise from or to any minor, knowing him to be
such.
A. Authority; effect. The Mayor may at any time for such cause as he, upon
investigation, deems sufficient, revoke any auctioneer's license granted
under the provisions of this article. Whenever any license shall be so
revoked, no refund of any unearned portion thereof shall be made, and
no license shall be granted to any person whose license has been
revoked, in the discretion of the Mayor, within a period of two years
from the date of such revocation.
B. Notice. Notice of revocation and the reason or reasons therefor in
writing shall be served by the Mayor upon the person named in the
§ 220-23 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES § 220-25
210:197
§ 220-26. Records to be kept.
application by mailing the same to the address given in the application
and upon filing a copy of such with the City Clerk-Treasurer
A. Contents; applicability. Every auctioneer shall, upon the receipt or
acceptance by him of any goods for the purpose of sale at auction and
before offering the same or any part thereof for sale at auction, write or
cause to be written in a book to be kept by him for the purpose the
name and address of the person who employed him to sell such goods at
auction; the name and address of the person for whose benefit, behalf
or account such goods are to be sold at auction; the name and address
of the person from whom such auctioneer received or accepted such
goods; the name and address of the person who was the owner, the
authorized agent of the owner or the consignor of such goods
immediately prior to the receipt or acceptance for the purpose of sale at
auction of the same by such auctioneer; the location, with street and
number, if any, of such goods immediately prior to the receipt or
acceptance of the same by such auctioneer for the purpose of sale at
auction; the date of the receipt or acceptance by such auctioneer of
such goods for the purpose of sale at auction; the place, with street and
number, if any, in which such goods are to be held, kept or stored until
sold or offered for sale at auction; the place, with street and number, if
any, in which such goods are to be sold or offered for sale at auction; a
description of such goods, the quantity thereof and the distinctive
marks thereon, if any; the terms and conditions upon which such
auctioneer receives or accepts such goods for sale at auction. The
expression "goods" as used in this section signifies any goods, wares,
works of art, commodity, compound or thing, chattels, merchandise or
personal property which may be lawfully kept or offered for sale, but
shall not include goods damaged at sea or by fire and sold or to be sold
for the benefit of the owners or insurers or for the account of whom it
may concern or goods sold by virtue of judicial decree. Nothing in this
section shall apply to the sale of real property at auction.
B. Availability for inspection. Such book and the entries therein made as
provided in Subsection A shall, at all reasonable times, be open to the
inspection of the Mayor, the Chief of Police and the District Attorney
and any person who shall be duly authorized in writing for that purpose
by any or either of them and who shall exhibit such written
authorization to such auctioneer.
§ 220-25 PORT JERVIS CODE § 220-26
210:198
Chapter 228
BINGO
GENERAL REFERENCES
Games of chance — See Ch. 300.
§ 228-1. Conduct authorized.
It shall be lawful for any authorized organization, as defined in § 476 of the
General Municipal Law, upon obtaining the required license, to conduct the
game of bingo within the territorial limits of the City of Port Jervis, subject
to the provisions of this chapter, Article 14-H of the General Municipal Law
and Article 19-B of the Executive Law.
§ 228-2. Sunday games.
Any game of bingo conducted within the City pursuant to a license issued in
accordance with this chapter and the applicable statutes may be operated
by authorized organizations on the first day of the week, commonly known
as "Sunday."
Chapter 231
BUILDING CODE ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Dangerous buildings — See Ch. 234.
Numbering of buildings — See Ch. 238.
Electrical standards and requirements — See
Ch. 267.
Housing standards — See Ch. 319.
Zoning — See Ch. 535.
§ 231-1. Purpose.
This chapter provides for the administration and enforcement of the New
York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code (the Uniform Code)
and the State Energy Conservation Construction Code (the Energy Code) in
this City. This chapter is adopted pursuant to § 10 of the Municipal Home
Rule Law. Except as otherwise provided in the Uniform Code, other state
law, or other section of this chapter, all buildings, structures, and premises,
regardless of use or occupancy, are subject to the provisions of this chapter.
§ 220-26 BINGO § 231-2
228:199
§ 231-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BUILDING OFFICIAL/SUPERVISING CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER —
The Building/Safety Department head appointed pursuant to § 231-3B of
this chapter.
BUILDING PERMIT — A permit issued pursuant to § 231-4 of this chapter.
The term "building permit" shall also include a building permit which is
renewed, amended or extended pursuant to any provision of this chapter.
CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY/CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE — A
certificate issued pursuant to § 231-7B of this chapter.
CITY — The City of Port Jervis.
CODE ENFORCEMENT PERSONNEL — Includes all code enforcement
officers and all inspectors.
COMPLIANCE ORDER — An order issued by the Code Enforcement Officer
pursuant to § 231-15A of this chapter.
CONDITIONAL CERTIFICATE — A certificate issued pursuant to § 231-7D.
ENERGY CODE — The State Energy Conservation Construction Code, as
currently in effect and as hereafter amended from time to time.
INSPECTOR — An inspector appointed pursuant to § 231-3D of this chapter.
OPERATING PERMIT — A permit issued pursuant to § 231-10 of this
chapter. The term "operating permit" shall also include an operating permit
which is renewed, amended or extended pursuant to any provision of this
chapter.
PERMIT HOLDER — The person to whom a building permit has been issued.
PERSON — An individual, corporation, limited-liability company,
partnership, limited partnership, business trust, estate, trust, association,
or any other legal or commercial entity of any kind or description.
STOP-WORK ORDER — An order issued pursuant to § 231-6 of this chapter.
UNIFORM CODE — The New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and
Building Code, as currently in effect and as hereafter amended from time to
time.
§ 231-3. Code Enforcement Officer; inspectors.
A. The office of Code Enforcement Officer is hereby created. The Code
Enforcement Officer shall administer and enforce all the provisions of
the Uniform Code, the Energy Code and this chapter. The Code
Enforcement Officer shall have the following powers and duties:
(1) To receive, review, and approve or disapprove applications for
building permits, certificates of occupancy/certificates of
compliance, temporary certificates and operating permits, and the
§ 231-2 PORT JERVIS CODE § 231-3
228:200
plans, specifications and construction documents submitted with
such applications;
(2) Upon approval of such applications, to issue building permits,
certificates of occupancy/certificates of compliance, temporary
certificates and operating permits, and to include in building
permits, certificates of occupancy/certificates of compliance,
conditional certificates and operating permits such terms and
conditions as the Code Enforcement Officer may determine to be
appropriate;
(3) To conduct construction inspections, inspections to be made prior
to the issuance of certificates of occupancy/certificates of
compliance, conditional certificates and operating permits,
firesafety and property maintenance inspections, inspections
incidental to the investigation of complaints, and all other
inspections required or permitted under any provision of this
chapter;
(4) To issue stop-work orders;
(5) To review and investigate complaints;
(6) To issue orders pursuant to § 231-15A, Compliance orders, of this
chapter;
(7) To maintain records;
(8) To collect fees as set by the Mayor and Common Council of this
City;
(9) To pursue administrative enforcement actions and proceedings;
(10) In consultation with this City's attorney, to pursue such legal
actions and proceedings as may be necessary to enforce the
Uniform Code, the Energy Code and this chapter, or to abate or
correct conditions not in compliance with the Uniform Code, the
Energy Code or this chapter; and
(11) To exercise all other powers and fulfill all other duties conferred
upon the Code Enforcement Officer by this chapter.
B. The Building Official/Supervising Code Enforcement Officer shall be
appointed by the Mayor and Common Council. The Building Official/
Supervising Code Enforcement Officer shall possess background
experience related to building construction or fire prevention and shall,
within the time prescribed by law, obtain such basic training, in-service
training, advanced in-service training and other training as the State of
New York shall require for code enforcement personnel, and the
Building Official/Supervising Code Enforcement Officer shall obtain
certification from the State Fire Administrator pursuant to the
Executive Law and the regulations promulgated thereunder.
§ 231-3 BINGO § 231-3
228:201
§ 231-4. Building permits.
C. In the event that the Building Official/Supervising Code Enforcement
Officer is unable to serve as such for any reason, an individual shall be
appointed by the Mayor and Common Council to serve as Acting
Building Official/Supervising Code Enforcement Officer. The Acting
Building Official/Supervising Code Enforcement Officer shall, during
the term of his or her appointment, exercise all powers and fulfill all
duties conferred upon the Building Official/Supervising Code
Enforcement Officer by this chapter.
D. One or more inspectors may be appointed by the Mayor and Common
Council to act under the supervision and direction of the Building
Official/Supervising Code Enforcement Officer and to assist the
Building Official/Supervising Code Enforcement Officer in the exercise
of the powers and fulfillment of the duties conferred upon the Building
Official/Supervising Code Enforcement Officer by this chapter. Each
inspector shall, within the time prescribed by law, obtain such basic
training, in-service training, advanced in-service training and other
training as the State of New York shall require for code enforcement
personnel, and each inspector shall obtain certification from the State
Fire Administrator pursuant to the Executive Law and the regulations
promulgated thereunder.
E. The compensation for the Building Official/Supervising Code
Enforcement Officer and inspectors shall be fixed from time to time by
the Mayor and Common Council of this City.
A. Building permits required. Except as otherwise provided in Subsection
B of this section, a building permit shall be required for any work which
must conform to the Uniform Code and/or the Energy Code, including,
but not limited to, the construction, enlargement, alteration,
improvement, removal, relocation or demolition of any building or
structure or any portion thereof, and the installation of a solid-fuelburning
heating appliance, chimney or flue in any dwelling unit. No
person shall commence any work for which a building permit is
required without first having obtained a building permit from the Code
Enforcement Officer.
B. Exemptions. No building permit shall be required for work in any of the
following categories:
(1) Construction or installation of one-story detached structures
associated with one- or two-family dwellings or multiple singlefamily
dwellings (townhouses) which are used for tool and storage
sheds, playhouses or similar uses, provided the gross floor area is
less than 144 square feet (13.38 square meters);
(2) Installation of swings and other playground equipment associated
with a one- or two-family dwelling or multiple single-family
dwellings (townhouses);
§ 231-3 PORT JERVIS CODE § 231-4
228:202
(3) Installation of swimming pools associated with a one- or two-family
dwelling or multiple single-family dwellings (townhouses) where
such pools are designed for a water depth of less than 24 inches
and are installed entirely above ground;
(4) Installation of fences which are not part of an enclosure
surrounding a swimming pool;
(5) Construction of retaining walls, unless such walls are six feet or
more in height and support a surcharge or impound Class I, II or
IIIA liquids;
(6) Construction of temporary motion-picture, television and theater
stage sets and scenery;
(7) Installation of window awnings supported by an exterior wall of a
one- or two-family dwelling or multiple single-family dwellings
(townhouses);
(8) Installation of partitions or movable cases less than five feet nine
inches in height;
(9) Painting, wallpapering, tiling, carpeting, or other similar finish
work;
(10) Installation of listed portable electrical, plumbing, heating,
ventilation or cooling equipment or appliances;
(11) Replacement of any equipment, provided the replacement does not
alter the equipment's listing or render it inconsistent with the
equipment's original specifications; or
(12) Repairs, provided that such repairs do not involve:
(a) The removal or cutting away of a load-bearing wall, partition,
or portion thereof, or of any structural beam or load-bearing
component;
(b) The removal or change of any required means of egress; or the
rearrangement of parts of a structure in a manner which
affects egress;
(c) The enlargement, alteration, replacement or relocation of any
building system; or
(d) The removal from service of all or part of a fire protection
system for any period of time.
C. Exemption not deemed authorization to perform noncompliant work.
The exemption from the requirement to obtain a building permit for
work in any category set forth in Subsection B of this section shall not
be deemed an authorization for work to be performed in violation of the
Uniform Code or the Energy Code.
§ 231-4 BINGO § 231-4
228:203
D. Applications for building permits. Applications for a building permit
shall be made in writing on a form provided by or otherwise acceptable
to the Code Enforcement Officer. The application shall be signed by the
owner of the property where the work is to be performed or by an
authorized agent of the owner. The application shall include such
information as the Code Enforcement Officer deems sufficient to permit
a determination by the Code Enforcement Officer that the intended
work complies with all applicable requirements of the Uniform Code
and the Energy Code. The application shall include or be accompanied
by the following information and documentation:
(1) A description of the proposed work;
(2) The Tax Map number and the street address of the premises where
the work is to be performed;
(3) The occupancy classification of any affected building or structure;
(4) Where applicable, a statement of special inspections prepared in
accordance with the provisions of the Uniform Code; and
(5) At least two sets of construction documents (drawings and/or
specifications) which:
(a) Define the scope of the proposed work;
(b) Are prepared by a New York State registered architect or
licensed professional engineer where so required by the
Education Law;
(c) Indicate with sufficient clarity and detail the nature and extent
of the work proposed;
(d) Substantiate that the proposed work will comply with the
Uniform Code and the Energy Code; and
(e) Where applicable, include a site plan that shows any existing
and proposed buildings and structures on the site, the location
of any existing or proposed well or septic system, the location
of the intended work, and the distances between the buildings
and structures and the lot lines.
E. Construction documents. Construction documents will not be accepted
as part of an application for a building permit unless they satisfy the
requirements set forth in Subsection D(5) of this section. Construction
documents which are accepted as part of the application for a building
permit shall be marked as accepted by the Code Enforcement Officer in
writing or by stamp. One set of the accepted construction documents
shall be retained by the Code Enforcement Officer, and one set of the
accepted construction documents shall be returned to the applicant to
be kept at the work site so as to be available for use by the code
enforcement personnel. However, the return of a set of accepted
construction documents to the applicant shall not be construed as
§ 231-4 PORT JERVIS CODE § 231-4
228:204
authorization to commence work, nor as an indication that a building
permit will be issued. Work shall not be commenced until and unless a
building permit is issued.
F. Issuance of building permits. An application for a building permit shall
be examined to ascertain whether the proposed work is in compliance
with the applicable requirements of the Uniform Code and Energy
Code. The Code Enforcement Officer shall issue a building permit if the
proposed work is in compliance with the applicable requirements of the
Uniform Code and Energy Code.
G. Building permits to be displayed. Building permits shall be visibly
displayed at the work site and shall remain visible until the authorized
work has been completed.
H. Work to be performed in accordance with construction documents. All
work shall be performed in accordance with the construction
documents which were submitted with and accepted as part of the
application for the building permit. The building permit shall contain
such a directive. The permit holder shall immediately notify the Code
Enforcement Officer of any change occurring during the course of the
work. The building permit shall contain such a directive. If the Code
Enforcement Officer determines that such change warrants a new or
amended building permit, such change shall not be made until and
unless a new or amended building permit reflecting such change is
issued.
I. Time limits. Building permits shall become invalid unless the authorized
work is commenced within three months following the date of issuance.
Building permits shall expire 12 months after the date of issuance. A
building permit which has become invalid or which has expired
pursuant to this subsection may be renewed upon application by the
permit holder and approval of the application by the Code Enforcement
Officer for an additional six months, following which no further work is
to be undertaken without a new building permit.
J. Revocation or suspension of building permits. If the Code Enforcement
Officer determines that a building permit was issued in error because of
incorrect, inaccurate or incomplete information, or that the work for
which a building permit was issued violates the Uniform Code or the
Energy Code, the Code Enforcement Officer shall revoke the building
permit or suspend the building permit until such time as the permit
holder demonstrates that all work then completed is in compliance with
all applicable provisions of the Uniform Code and the Energy Code and
all work then proposed to be performed shall be in compliance with all
applicable provisions of the Uniform Code and the Energy Code.
K. Fee. The fee specified in or determined in accordance with the
provisions set forth in § 231-16, Fees, of this chapter must be paid at the
time of submission of an application for a building permit, for an
amended building permit, or for renewal of a building permit.
§ 231-4 BINGO § 231-5
228:205
§ 231-5. Construction inspections.
§ 231-6. Stop-work orders.
A. Work to remain accessible and exposed. Work shall remain accessible
and exposed until inspected and accepted by the Code Enforcement
Officer or by an inspector authorized by the Code Enforcement Officer.
The permit holder shall notify the Code Enforcement Officer when any
element of work described in Subsection B of this section is ready for
inspection.
B. Elements of work to be inspected. The following elements of the
construction process shall be inspected, where applicable:
(1) Work site prior to the issuance of a building permit;
(2) Footing and foundation before pour and foundation before backfill;
(3) Preparation for concrete slab before pour;
(4) Framing and sheathing before cover;
(5) Building systems, including underground and rough-in;
(6) Fire-resistant construction;
(7) Fire-resistant penetrations;
(8) Solid-fuel-burning heating appliances, chimneys, flues or gas vents;
(9) Energy Code compliance; and
(10) A final inspection after all work authorized by the building permit
has been completed.
C. Inspection results. After inspection, the work or a portion thereof shall
be noted as satisfactory as completed, or the permit holder shall be
notified as to where the work fails to comply with the Uniform Code or
Energy Code. Work not in compliance with any applicable provision of
the Uniform Code or Energy Code shall remain exposed until such work
shall have been brought into compliance with all applicable provisions
of the Uniform Code and the Energy Code, reinspected, and found
satisfactory as completed.
D. Fee. The fee specified in or determined in accordance with the
provisions set forth in § 231-16, Fees, of this chapter must be paid prior
to or at the time of each inspection performed pursuant to this section.
A. Authority to issue. The Code Enforcement Officer is authorized to issue
stop-work orders pursuant to this section. The Code Enforcement
Officer shall issue a stop-work order to halt:
(1) Any work that is determined by the Code Enforcement Officer to be
contrary to any applicable provision of the Uniform Code or Energy
§ 231-5 PORT JERVIS CODE § 231-6
228:206
§ 231-7. Certificates of occupancy/certificates of compliance.
Code, without regard to whether such work is or is not work for
which a building permit is required, and without regard to whether
a building permit has or has not been issued for such work; or
(2) Any work that is being conducted in a dangerous or unsafe manner
in the opinion of the Code Enforcement Officer, without regard to
whether such work is or is not work for which a building permit is
required, and without regard to whether a building permit has or
has not been issued for such work; or
(3) Any work for which a building permit is required which is being
performed without the required building permit, or under a
building permit that has become invalid, has expired, or has been
suspended or revoked.
B. Content of stop-work orders. Stop-work orders shall be in writing, be
dated and signed by the Code Enforcement Officer, state the reason or
reasons for issuance, and, if applicable, state the conditions which must
be satisfied before work will be permitted to resume.
C. Service of stop-work orders. The Code Enforcement Officer shall cause
the stop-work order, or a copy thereof, to be served on the owner of the
affected property (and, if the owner is not the permit holder, on the
permit holder) personally or by registered mail or by certified mail. The
Code Enforcement Officer shall be permitted, but not required, to cause
the stop-work order, or a copy thereof, to be served on any builder,
architect, tenant, contractor, subcontractor, construction
superintendent, or their agents, or any other person taking part or
assisting in work affected by the stop-work order, personally or by
registered mail or by certified mail; provided, however, that failure to
serve any person mentioned in this sentence shall not affect the efficacy
of the stop-work order.
D. Effect of stop-work order. Upon the issuance of a stop-work order, the
owner of the affected property, the permit holder and any other person
performing, taking part in or assisting in the work shall immediately
cease all work which is the subject of the stop-work order.
E. Remedy not exclusive. The issuance of a stop-work order shall not be
the exclusive remedy available to address any event described in
Subsection A of this section, and the authority to issue a stop-work
order shall be in addition to, and not in substitution for or limitation of,
the right and authority to pursue any other remedy or impose any other
penalty under § 231-15, Enforcement; penalties for offenses, of this
chapter or under any other applicable local law or state law. Any such
other remedy or penalty may be pursued at any time, whether prior to,
at the time of, or after the issuance of a stop-work order.
§ 231-6 BINGO § 231-7
228:207
A. Certificates of occupancy/certificates of compliance required. A
certificate of occupancy/certificate of compliance shall be required for
any work which is the subject of a building permit and for all structures,
buildings, or portions thereof which are converted from one use or
occupancy classification or subclassification to another. Permission to
use or occupy a building or structure, or portion thereof, for which a
building permit was previously issued shall be granted only by issuance
of a certificate of occupancy/certificate of compliance.
B. Issuance of certificates of occupancy/certificates of compliance. The
Code Enforcement Officer shall issue a certificate of occupancy/
certificate of compliance if the work which was the subject of the
building permit was completed in accordance with all applicable
provisions of the Uniform Code and Energy Code and, if applicable, the
structure, building or portion thereof that was converted from one use
or occupancy classification or subclassification to another complies
with all applicable provisions of the Uniform Code and Energy Code.
The Code Enforcement Officer or an inspector authorized by the Code
Enforcement Officer shall inspect the building, structure or work prior
to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy/certificate of compliance.
In addition, where applicable, the following documents, prepared in
accordance with the provisions of the Uniform Code by such person or
persons as may be designated by or otherwise acceptable to the Code
Enforcement Officer, at the expense of the applicant for the certificate
of occupancy/certificate of compliance, shall be provided to the Code
Enforcement Officer prior to the issuance of the certificate of
occupancy/certificate of compliance:
(1) A written statement of structural observations and/or a final report
of special inspections; and
(2) Flood hazard certifications.
C. Contents of certificates of occupancy/certificates of compliance. A
certificate of occupancy/certificate of compliance shall contain the
following information:
(1) The building permit number, if any;
(2) The date of issuance of the building permit, if any;
(3) The name, address and Tax Map number of the property;
(4) If the certificate of occupancy/certificate of compliance is not
applicable to an entire structure, a description of that portion of the
structure for which the certificate of occupancy/certificate of
compliance is issued;
(5) The use and occupancy classification of the structure;
(6) The type of construction of the structure;
(7) The assembly occupant load of the structure, if any;
§ 231-7 PORT JERVIS CODE § 231-7
228:208
§ 231-8. Notification regarding fire or explosion.
The chief of any fire department providing fire-fighting services for a
property within this City shall promptly notify the Code Enforcement Officer
of any fire or explosion involving any structural damage, fuel-burning
appliance, chimney or gas vent.
(8) If an automatic sprinkler system is provided, a notation as to
whether the sprinkler system is required;
(9) Any special conditions imposed in connection with the issuance of
the building permit; and
(10) The signature of the Code Enforcement Officer issuing the
certificate of occupancy/certificate of compliance and the date of
issuance.
D. Conditional certificate. The Code Enforcement Officer shall be
permitted to issue a conditional certificate allowing the conditional
occupancy of a building or structure, or a portion thereof, prior to
completion of the work which is the subject of a building permit.
However, in no event shall the Code Enforcement Officer issue a
conditional certificate unless the Code Enforcement Officer determines
that the building or structure, or the portion thereof covered by the
conditional certificate, may be occupied safely, that any fire- and smokedetecting
or fire protection equipment which has been installed is
operational, and that all required means of egress from the building or
structure have been provided. The Code Enforcement Officer may
include in a conditional certificate such terms and conditions as he or
she deems necessary or appropriate to ensure safety or to further the
purposes and intent of the Uniform Code. A conditional certificate shall
be effective for a period of time, not to exceed six months, which shall
be determined by the Code Enforcement Officer and specified in the
conditional certificate. During the specified period of effectiveness of
the conditional certificate, the permit holder shall undertake to bring
the building or structure into full compliance with all applicable
provisions of the Uniform Code and the Energy Code.
E. Revocation or suspension of certificates. If the Code Enforcement
Officer determines that a certificate of occupancy/certificate of
compliance or a temporary certificate was issued in error because of
incorrect, inaccurate or incomplete information, and if the relevant
deficiencies are not corrected to the satisfaction of the Code
Enforcement Officer within such period of time as shall be specified by
the Code Enforcement Officer, the Code Enforcement Officer shall
revoke or suspend such certificate.
F. Fee. The fee specified in or determined in accordance with the
provisions set forth in § 231-16, Fees, of this chapter must be paid at the
time of submission of an application for a certificate of occupancy/
certificate of compliance or for a temporary certificate.
§ 231-7 BINGO § 231-9
228:209
§ 231-9. Unsafe buildings and structures.
Unsafe structures and equipment in this City shall be identified and
addressed in accordance with the procedures established by Chapter 234 of
the City Code, as now in effect or as hereafter amended from time to time.
§ 231-10. Operating permits.
A. Operating permits required.
(1) Operating permits shall be required for conducting the activities or
using the categories of buildings listed below:
(a) Manufacturing, storing or handling hazardous materials in
quantities exceeding those listed in Tables 2703.1.1(1),
2703.1.1(2), 2703.1.1(3) or 2703.1.1(4) in the publication
entitled "Fire Code of New York State" and incorporated by
reference in 19 NYCRR 1225.1;
(b) Hazardous processes and activities, including but not limited
to commercial and industrial operations which produce
combustible dust as a byproduct, fruit and crop ripening, and
waste handling;
(c) Use of pyrotechnic devices in assembly occupancies;
(d) Buildings containing one or more areas of public assembly with
an occupant load of 100 persons or more; and
(e) Buildings whose use or occupancy classification may pose a
substantial potential hazard to public safety, as determined by
resolution adopted by the Mayor and Common Council of this
City.
(2) Any person who proposes to undertake any activity or to operate
any type of building listed in this Subsection A shall be required to
obtain an operating permit prior to commencing such activity or
operation.
B. Applications for operating permits. An application for an operating
permit shall be in writing on a form provided by or otherwise
acceptable to the Code Enforcement Officer. Such application shall
include such information as the Code Enforcement Officer deems
sufficient to permit a determination by the Code Enforcement Officer
that quantities, materials, and activities conform to the requirements of
the Uniform Code. If the Code Enforcement Officer determines that
tests or reports are necessary to verify conformance, such tests or
reports shall be performed or provided by such person or persons as
may be designated by or otherwise acceptable to the Code Enforcement
Officer, at the expense of the applicant.
§ 231-9 PORT JERVIS CODE § 231-10
228:210
§ 231-11. Firesafety and property maintenance inspections.
C. Inspections. The Code Enforcement Officer or an inspector authorized
by the Code Enforcement Officer shall inspect the subject premises
prior to the issuance of an operating permit.
D. Multiple activities. In any circumstance in which more than one activity
listed in Subsection A of this section is to be conducted at a location, the
Code Enforcement Officer may require a separate operating permit for
each such activity, or the Code Enforcement Officer may, in his or her
discretion, issue a single operating permit to apply to all such activities.
E. Duration of operating permits. Operating permits shall remain in effect
until reissued, renewed, revoked, or suspended.
F. Revocation or suspension of operating permits. If the Code
Enforcement Officer determines that any activity or building for which
an operating permit was issued does not comply with any applicable
provision of the Uniform Code, such operating permit shall be revoked
or suspended.
G. Fee. The fee specified in or determined in accordance with the
provisions set forth in § 231-16, Fees, of this chapter must be paid at the
time of submission of an application for an operating permit, for an
amended operating permit, or for reissue or renewal of an operating
permit.
A. Inspections required. Firesafety and property maintenance inspections
of buildings and structures shall be performed by the Code
Enforcement Officer or an inspector designated by the Code
Enforcement Officer at the following intervals:
(1) Firesafety and property maintenance inspections of buildings or
structures which contain an area of public assembly shall be
performed at least once every 12 months.
(2) Firesafety and property maintenance inspections of buildings or
structures being occupied as dormitories shall be performed at
least once every 12 months.
(3) Firesafety and property maintenance inspections of all multiple
dwellings not included in Subsection A(1) and (2), and all
nonresidential buildings, structures, uses and occupancies not
included in Subsection A(1) or (2), shall be performed at least once
every 36 months.
B. Inspections permitted. In addition to the inspections required by
Subsection A of this section, a firesafety and property maintenance
inspection of any building, structure, use, or occupancy, or of any
dwelling unit, may also be performed by the Code Enforcement Officer
or an inspector designated by the Code Enforcement Officer at any time
upon: the request of the owner of the property to be inspected or an
§ 231-10 BINGO § 231-11
228:211
authorized agent of such owner; receipt by the Code Enforcement
Officer of a written statement alleging that conditions or activities
failing to comply with the Uniform Code or Energy Code exist; or
receipt by the Code Enforcement Officer of any other information,
reasonably believed by the Code Enforcement Officer to be reliable,
giving rise to reasonable cause to believe that conditions or activities
failing to comply with the Uniform Code or Energy Code exist;
provided, however, that nothing in this subsection shall be construed as
permitting an inspection under any circumstances under which a court
order or warrant permitting such inspection is required, unless such
court order or warrant shall have been obtained.
C. OFPC inspections. Nothing in this section or in any other provision of
this chapter shall supersede, limit or impair the powers, duties and
responsibilities of the New York State Office of Fire Prevention and
Control ("OFPC") and the New York State Fire Administrator under
Executive Law § 156-e and Education Law § 807-b. Notwithstanding
any other provision of this section to the contrary:
(1) The Code Enforcement Officer shall not perform firesafety and
property maintenance inspections of a building or structure which
contains an area of public assembly if OFPC performs firesafety
and property maintenance inspections of such building or structure
at least once every 12 months;
(2) The Code Enforcement Officer shall not perform firesafety and
property maintenance inspections of a building or structure
occupied as a dormitory if OFPC performs firesafety and property
maintenance inspections of such building or structure at least once
every 12 months;
(3) The Code Enforcement Officer shall not perform firesafety and
property maintenance inspections of a multiple dwelling not
included in Subsection A(1) or (2) of this section if OFPC performs
firesafety and property maintenance inspections of such multiple
dwelling at intervals not exceeding the interval specified in
Subsection A(3) of this section; and
(4) The Code Enforcement Officer shall not perform firesafety and
property maintenance inspections of a nonresidential building,
structure, use or occupancy not included in Subsection A(1) or (2)
of this section if OFPC performs firesafety and property
maintenance inspections of such nonresidential building, structure,
use or occupancy at intervals not exceeding the interval specified
in Subsection A(3) of this section.
D. Fee. The fee specified in or determined in accordance with the
provisions set forth in § 231-16, Fees, of this chapter must be paid prior
to or at the time of each inspection performed pursuant to this section.
This subsection shall not apply to inspections performed by OFPC.
§ 231-11 PORT JERVIS CODE § 231-12
228:212
§ 231-12. Complaints.
The Code Enforcement Officer shall review and investigate complaints
which allege or assert the existence of conditions or activities that fail
to comply with the Uniform Code, the Energy Code, this chapter, or any
other local law or regulation adopted for administration and enforcement
of the Uniform Code or the Energy Code. The process for responding to a
complaint shall include such of the following steps as the Code Enforcement
Officer may deem to be appropriate:
§ 231-13. Recordkeeping.
A. Performing an inspection of the conditions and/or activities alleged to
be in violation, and documenting the results of such inspection;
B. If a violation is found to exist, providing the owner of the affected
property and any other person who may be responsible for the violation
with notice of the violation and opportunity to abate, correct or cure the
violation, or otherwise proceeding in the manner described in § 231-15,
Enforcement; penalties for offenses, of this chapter;
C. If appropriate, issuing a stop-work order;
D. If a violation which was found to exist is abated or corrected,
performing an inspection to ensure that the violation has been abated
or corrected, preparing a final written report reflecting such abatement
or correction, and filing such report with the complaint.
A. The Code Enforcement Officer shall keep permanent official records of
all transactions and activities conducted by all code enforcement
personnel, including records of:
(1) All applications received, reviewed and approved or denied;
(2) All plans, specifications and construction documents approved;
(3) All building permits, certificates of occupancy/certificates of
compliance, conditional certificates, stop-work orders, and
operating permits issued;
(4) All inspections and tests performed;
(5) All statements and reports issued;
(6) All complaints received;
(7) All investigations conducted;
(8) All other features and activities specified in or contemplated by
§§ 231-4 through 231-12, inclusive, of this chapter; and
(9) All fees charged and collected.
§ 231-12 BINGO § 231-13
228:213
§ 231-14. Program review and reporting.
§ 231-15. Enforcement; penalties for offenses.
B. All such records shall be public records open for public inspection
during normal business hours. All plans and records pertaining to
buildings or structures, or appurtenances thereto, shall be retained for
at least the minimum time period so required by state law and
regulation.
A. The Code Enforcement Officer shall annually submit to the Mayor and
Common Council of this City a written report and summary of all
business conducted by the Code Enforcement Officer and the
inspectors, including a report and summary of all transactions and
activities described in § 231-13, Recordkeeping, of this chapter and a
report and summary of all appeals or litigation pending or concluded.
B. The Code Enforcement Officer shall annually submit to the Secretary of
State, on behalf of this City, on a form prescribed by the Secretary of
State, a report of the activities of this City relative to administration and
enforcement of the Uniform Code.
C. The Code Enforcement Officer shall, upon request of the New York
State Department of State, provide to the New York State Department
of State, from the records and related materials this City is required to
maintain, excerpts, summaries, tabulations, statistics and other
information and accounts of the activities of this City in connection with
administration and enforcement of the Uniform Code.
A. Compliance orders. The Code Enforcement Officer is authorized to
order, in writing, the remedying of any condition or activity found to
exist in, on or about any building, structure, or premises in violation of
the Uniform Code, the Energy Code, or this chapter. Upon finding that
any such condition or activity exists, the Code Enforcement Officer shall
issue a compliance order. The compliance order shall be in writing; be
dated and signed by the Code Enforcement Officer; specify the
condition or activity that violates the Uniform Code, the Energy Code,
or this chapter; specify the provision or provisions of the Uniform Code,
the Energy Code, or this chapter which is/are violated by the specified
condition or activity; specify the period of time which the Code
Enforcement Officer deems to be reasonably necessary for achieving
compliance; direct that compliance be achieved within the specified
period of time; and state that an action or proceeding to compel
compliance may be instituted if compliance is not achieved within the
specified period of time. The Code Enforcement Officer shall cause the
compliance order, or a copy thereof, to be served on the owner of the
affected property personally or by registered mail or certified mail. The
Code Enforcement Officer shall be permitted, but not required, to cause
the compliance order, or a copy thereof, to be served on any builder,
architect, tenant, contractor, subcontractor, construction
§ 231-13 PORT JERVIS CODE § 231-15
228:214
superintendent, or their agents, or any other person taking part or
assisting in work being performed at the affected property personally
or by registered mail or certified mail; provided, however, that failure to
serve any person mentioned in this sentence shall not affect the efficacy
of the compliance order.
B. Appearance tickets. The Code Enforcement Officer and each inspector
are authorized to issue appearance tickets for any violation of the
Uniform Code.
C. Civil penalties. In addition to those penalties prescribed by state law,
any person who violates any provision of the Uniform Code, the Energy
Code or this chapter, or any term or condition of any building permit,
certificate of occupancy/certificate of compliance, temporary
certificate, stop-work order, operating permit or other notice or order
issued by the Code Enforcement Officer pursuant to any provision of
this chapter, shall be liable to a civil penalty of not more than $200 for
each day or part thereof during which such violation continues. The
civil penalties provided by this subsection shall be recoverable in an
action instituted in the name of this City.
D. Injunctive relief. An action or proceeding may be instituted in the name
of this City, in a court of competent jurisdiction, to prevent, restrain,
enjoin, correct, or abate any violation of, or to enforce, any provision of
the Uniform Code, the Energy Code, this chapter, or any term or
condition of any building permit, certificate of occupancy/certificate of
compliance, temporary certificate, stop-work order, operating permit,
compliance order, or other notice or order issued by the Code
Enforcement Officer pursuant to any provision of this chapter. In
particular, but not by way of limitation, where the construction or use of
a building or structure is in violation of any provision of the Uniform
Code, the Energy Code, this chapter, or any stop-work order,
compliance order or other order obtained under the Uniform Code, the
Energy Code or this chapter, an action or proceeding may be
commenced in the name of this City, in the Supreme Court or in any
other court having the requisite jurisdiction, to obtain an order
directing the removal of the building or structure or an abatement of
the condition in violation of such provisions. No action or proceeding
described in this subsection shall be commenced without the
appropriate authorization from the Mayor and Common Council of this
City.
E. Remedies not exclusive. No remedy or penalty specified in this section
shall be the exclusive remedy or penalty available to address any
violation described in this section, and each remedy or penalty specified
in this section shall be in addition to, and not in substitution for or
limitation of, the other remedies or penalties specified in this section, in
§ 231-6, Stop-work orders, of this chapter, in any other section of this
chapter, or in any other applicable law. Any remedy or penalty specified
in this section may be pursued at any time, whether prior to,
simultaneously with, or after the pursuit of any other remedy or penalty
§ 231-15 BINGO § 231-15
228:215
§ 231-16. Fees.
specified in this section, in § 231-6, Stop-work orders, of this chapter,
in any other section of this chapter, or in any other applicable law.
In particular, but not by way of limitation, each remedy and penalty
specified in this section shall be in addition to, and not in substitution
for or limitation of, the penalties specified in Subdivision (2) of § 382 of
the Executive Law, and any remedy or penalty specified in this section
may be pursued at any time, whether prior to, simultaneously with, or
after the pursuit of any penalty specified in Subdivision (2) of § 382 of
the Executive Law.
A. A fee schedule shall be established by resolution of the Mayor and
Common Council of this City. Such fee schedule may thereafter be
amended from time to time by like resolution. The fees set forth in, or
determined in accordance with, such fee schedule or amended fee
schedule shall be charged and collected for the submission of
applications, the issuance of building permits, amended building
permits, renewed building permits, certificates of occupancy/
certificates of compliance, conditional certificates, operating permits,
firesafety and property maintenance inspections, and other actions of
the Code Enforcement Officer described in or contemplated by this
chapter. Refer to § 535-72J for established fees.
B. When the Building Official or Deputy Building Official or other
inspectors or officials of the City of Port Jervis find it necessary to
consult with and obtain the assistance of an engineer, architect or other
certified building construction experts in order to perform firesafety
and property maintenance inspections in order to determine the safety
of any building, structure, use or occupancy within the City of Port
Jervis, the cost of said inspection and report from said engineer,
architect or expert shall be paid by the property owner, and in the event
that said cost or fee is not paid by said owner, same shall be included in
the next real property tax bill for the affected property issued by the
City of Port Jervis as said procedure is permitted under the appropriate
section or sections of this Code. [Added 2-8-2016 by L.L. No.
2-2016]
C. In instances where the Building Official, Code Enforcement Officer or
the designated inspector of the Building Official or Code Enforcement
Officer has set up an inspection of real property at the request of a
property owner or contractor or agent of a property owner or an
inspection has been set up by the Building Official or Code Enforcement
Officer of the City of Port Jervis as mandated by the Building Official or
Code Enforcement Officer of the City of Port Jervis pursuant to the Port
Jervis City Code and the property owner or contractor or agent of the
property owner fails to appear at said appointment at the time and date
specified prior to same, the City shall be entitled to a fee of $150 for
said failure to appear as requested or ordered.102 [Added 2-27-2017
by L.L. No. 5-2017]
§ 231-15 PORT JERVIS CODE § 231-17
228:216
§ 231-17. Intermunicipal agreements.
The Mayor and Common Council of this City may, by resolution, authorize
the Building Official/Supervising Code Enforcement Officer of this City to
enter into an agreement, in the name of this City, with other governments
to carry out the terms of this chapter, provided that such agreement does
not violate any provision of the Uniform Code, the Energy Code, Part 1203
of Title 19 of the NYCRR, or any other applicable law.
Chapter 234
BUILDINGS, DANGEROUS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Housing standards — See Ch. 319. Property maintenance — See Ch. 417.
§ 234-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
DANGEROUS BUILDINGS — All buildings or structures which have any or
all of the following defects:
Those whose interior walls or other vertical structural members list,
lean or buckle to such an extent that a plumb line passing through the
center of gravity falls outside of the middle third of its base.
A.
Those which, exclusive of the foundation, show thirty-three-percent-ormore
damage or deterioration of the supporting member or members,
or fifty-percent damage or deterioration of the nonsupporting enclosing
or outside walls or covering.
B.
Those which have improperly distributed loads upon the floors or roofs
or in which the same are overloaded, or which have insufficient
strength to be reasonably safe for the purpose used.
C.
Those which have been damaged by fire, wind or other causes so as
to have become dangerous to life, morals or the general welfare of the
occupants or the people of the City.
D.
Those which have been abandoned or which have become or are so
dilapidated, decayed, unsafe, unsanitary or which so utterly fail to
provide the amenities essential to decent living that they are unfit for
human habitation or are likely to cause sickness or disease so as to
work injury to the health, morals, safety or general welfare of those
E.
102. Editor's Note: So in original.
§ 231-17 BINGO § 234-1
228:217
§ 234-2. Declaration as public nuisances.
All dangerous buildings within the terms of § 234-1 are hereby declared
to be public nuisances and shall be repaired, vacated or demolished as
hereinbefore and hereinafter provided.
§ 234-3. Duties of Building Official.104
The Building Official shall:
living therein. [Amended 2-26-1996 by L.L. No. 2-1996; 5-13-1996
by L.L. No. 6-1996]
Those having light, air and sanitation facilities which are inadequate to
protect the health, morals, safety or general welfare of human beings
who live or may live therein.103
F.
Those having inadequate facilities for egress in case of fire or panic
or those having insufficient stairways, elevators, fire escapes or other
means of communication.
G.
Those which have parts thereof which are so attached that they may fall
and injure members of the public or property.
H.
Those which because of their condition are unsafe, unsanitary or
dangerous to the health, morals, safety or general welfare of the people
of this City.
I.
Those buildings existing in violation of any provision of the Building
Code of this City or any provision of the Fire Prevention Code or other
ordinances of this City.
J.
A. Inspect or cause to be inspected semiannually all public buildings,
schools, halls, churches, theaters, hotels, tenements and commercial,
manufacturing or loft buildings for the purpose of determining whether
any conditions exist which render such places a "dangerous building"
within the terms of § 234-1.
B. Inspect any building, wall or structure about which complaints are filed
by any person to the effect that a building, wall or structure is or may be
existing in violation of this chapter.
C. Inspect any building, wall or structure reported, as hereinafter
provided for, by the Fire or Police Departments of this City as probably
existing in violation of the terms of this chapter.
D. Inspect annually buildings in designated sections of this City to
determine whether there are dangerous buildings within the terms of
§ 234-1.
103. Editor's Note: For related standards, see Ch. 319, Housing Standards.
104. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 115, Officers and Employees, Art. V.
§ 234-1 PORT JERVIS CODE § 234-3
228:218
§ 234-4. Duties of Fire Department.
The employees of the Fire Department shall make a report in writing to
the Building Official of all buildings or structures which are, may be or are
suspected to be dangerous buildings within the terms of this chapter. Such
reports must be delivered to the Building Official within 24 hours of the
discovery of such buildings by any officer of the Fire Department.
§ 234-5. Duties of Police Department.
All employees of the Police Department shall make a report in writing to
the Building Official of any buildings or structures which are, may be or are
suspected to be dangerous buildings within the terms of this chapter. Such
reports must be delivered to the Building Official within 24 hours of the
discovery of such buildings by any officer of the Police Department.
E. Duties regarding noncomplying buildings. [Amended 2-26-1996 by
L.L. No. 2-1996; 5-13-1996 by L.L. No. 6-1996; 7-10-2000 by L.L.
No. 6-2000]
(1) With respect to buildings he deems in noncompliance with the
conditions set forth in § 234-1 herein, the Building Official shall
serve notice on the owner, occupant and/or lessee, by certified
mail, that the building must be immediately restored to habitable
condition, advising such individual(s) that any required permits for
repair must be obtained within 60 days of the notice and repairs
fully completed (returning the building to habitable condition)
within 180 days of the notice.
(2) For good cause shown, in writing, the Building Official may extend
the time to correct or remove for an additional 60 days.
(3) Upon failure of the owner, occupant or lessee to comply with the
notice(s) of the Building Official or failure to apply for any required
permits for repair or failure to complete the required repairs or the
inability of the Building Official to locate a responsible party, the
Building Official shall report in writing to the Common Council his
findings and recommendations with regard to their being repaired
or secured for safety purposes or their demolition and removal.
(4) The Building Official shall have a six-inch-round, vinyl, self-sticking
sign adhered to the front or main entrance of the dangerous
building so as to notify emergency responders as well as the public
and others not to enter the designated dangerous building. The
sticker must have a red "X" in the center, and the crossed bars of
the "X" must be 1 1 /2 inches in width. [Added 12-14-2105 by L.L.
No. 8-2015]
§ 234-3 BINGO § 234-6
228:219
§ 234-6. Common Council order. [Added 2-26-1996 by L.L. No.
2-1996; amended 5-13-1996 by L.L. No. 6-1996]
The Common Council shall thereafter consider such report (pursuant to
§ 234-3E herein) and by resolution determine, if in its opinion the report so
warrants, that such building is unsafe and dangerous and order its repair,
if the same can be safely repaired, its securing for safety purposes or its
demolition and removal, and further order that a notice be served upon the
persons designated in § 234-9 of this chapter and in the manner provided
therein.
§ 234-7. Contents of notice. [Added 2-26-1996 by L.L. No. 2-1996;
amended 5-13-1996 by L.L. No. 6-1996]
This notice shall contain the following:
§ 234-8. Standards for repair, vacation and demolition.
The following standards shall be followed in substance by the Building
Official and Common Council in ordering repair, vacation or demolition:
A. A description of the premises.
B. A statement of the particulars in which the building or property is
unsafe or dangerous.
C. A statement outlining the manner in which the building or property is to
be made safe and secure or demolished or removed.
D. An order that the securing or removal of such building or condition
(nuisance) shall commence within 30 days of the service of the notice
and shall be completed within 60 days thereafter, unless for good cause
shown such time shall be extended.
E. A date, time and place for a hearing before the Common Council in
relation to such dangerous or unsafe building, which hearing shall be
scheduled not less than five business days from the date of service of
the notice.
F. A statement that in the event of neglect or refusal to comply with the
order to secure or demolish and remove or correct such condition
(nuisance), the Common Council is authorized to provide for its repair,
securing or its demolition and removal as the case may be, to assess all
expenses thereof against the land on which it is located and to institute
a special proceeding to collect the cost of repair or demolition and
removal, including legal and engineering expenses.105
A. Repair. If the dangerous building can reasonably be repaired so that it
will no longer exist in violation of the terms of this chapter, it shall be
ordered to be repaired.
105. Editor's Note: Original § 69-8, Notification procedure, as amended, which immediately
followed this section, was repealed 5-13-1996 by L.L. No. 6-1996.
§ 234-6 PORT JERVIS CODE § 234-8
228:220
§ 234-9. Service of notice. [Added 2-26-1996 by L.L. No. 2-1996;
amended 5-13-1996 by L.L. No. 6-1996]
The notice required under this chapter shall be served by personal service
of a copy thereof upon the owner, executor, administrator, agent, lessee or
any person having a vested or contingent interest in such unsafe building
or property as shown on the records of the Assessor of the City or of the
County Clerk; if no such person can be reasonably found, service shall be
made by mailing to such owner by certified mail, return receipt requested,
a copy of such notice directed to his last known address as shown on the
assessment rolls of the City of Port Jervis and by personal service of a copy
of such notice upon any person residing in or occupying said premises if
such person can be reasonably found and by securely affixing a copy of
such notice upon the unsafe building or property. Affidavits of service of the
notice shall be filed with the City Clerk-Treasurer at the hearing provided
for in § 234-7E herein.
§ 234-10. Copy of notice to be filed with the County Clerk and the
City Clerk-Treasurer. [Added 2-26-1996 by L.L. No. 2-1996;
amended 5-13-1996 by L.L. No. 6-1996]
A copy of the notice served as provided herein shall be filed in the office of
the Clerk of the County of Orange and with the City Clerk-Treasurer of the
City of Port Jervis.
§ 234-11. Failure to comply. [Added 2-26-1996 by L.L. No. 2-1996;
amended 5-13-1996 by L.L. No. 6-1996]
In the event of the refusal or neglect of the person so notified to comply
with said order of the Common Council and after the hearing, the Common
Council shall provide for the repair, securing or demolition and removal, as
the case may be, of such building or property either by City employees or by
contract. Except in emergency cases, as provided for herein, any contract
for repair, securing or demolition and removal, as the case may be, shall be
awarded in accordance with the provisions of the General Municipal Law of
the State of New York.
B. Vacation. If the dangerous building is in such condition as to make it
dangerous to the health, morals, safety or general welfare of its
occupants, it shall be ordered to be vacated.
C. Demolition. In any case where a dangerous building is fifty-percent
damaged or decayed or deteriorated from its original value or
structure, it shall be demolished, and in all cases where a building
cannot be repaired so that it will no longer exist in violation of the terms
of this chapter, it shall be demolished. In all cases where a dangerous
building is a fire hazard existing or erected in violation of the terms of
this chapter or any ordinance of the City or statute of the State of New
York, it shall be demolished.
§ 234-8 BINGO § 234-12
228:221
§ 234-12. Assessment of expenses. [Added 2-26-1996 by L.L. No.
2-1996; amended 5-13-1996 by L.L. No. 6-1996]
All expenses incurred by the City in connection with the proceedings to
repair and secure or demolish and remove the unsafe building or property
including the cost of actually removing such building or correcting such
condition or nuisance or repairing the same shall be assessed against the
land on which such building or condition or nuisance is located and shall be
levied and collected in the same manner as provided for in the City Code for
the levy and collection of a special ad valorem levy.
§ 234-13. Emergency cases. [Amended 5-13-1996 by L.L. No.
6-1996]
In cases where it reasonably appears that there is immediate danger to the
life or safety of any person unless a dangerous building as defined herein
is immediately repaired, vacated or demolished, the Building Official shall
report such facts to the Common Council and it shall cause the immediate
repair, vacation or demolition of such dangerous building. The cost of such
emergency repair, vacation or demolition of such dangerous building shall
be collected in the same manner as provided in § 234-12.
§ 234-14. Duties of Corporation Counsel.
The Corporation Counsel shall:
§ 234-15. Administrative liability; defense by Corporation Counsel.
No officer, agent or employee of the City shall render himself personally
liable for any damage that may accrue to persons or property as a result
of any act required or permitted in the discharge of his duties under this
chapter. Any suit brought against any officer, agent or employee of the City
as a result of any act required or permitted in the discharge of his duties
under this chapter shall be defended by the Corporation Counsel until the
final determination of the proceedings therein.
§ 234-16. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 9-28-1981 by L.L. No.
4-1981]
A. Prosecute all persons failing to comply with the terms of the notices
provided for herein. [Amended 5-13-1996 by L.L. No. 6-1996]
B. Appear at all hearings before the Common Council in regard to
dangerous buildings.
C. Bring suit to collect all municipal liens, assessments or costs incurred
by the Common Council repairing or causing a dangerous building to be
vacated or demolished.
D. Take such other legal action as is necessary to carry out the terms and
provisions of this chapter.
§ 234-12 PORT JERVIS CODE § 234-16
228:222
Chapter 238
BUILDINGS, NUMBERING OF
§ 238-1. Findings.
Orange County, New York, has implemented an enhanced 911 telephone
system whereby an individual will be able to dial a 911 telephone number
in the event of an emergency. A City-wide uniform numbering system of
all buildings will assist emergency personnel in responding efficiently and
quickly to an emergency. It is, therefore, in the best interest of the public
health, safety and welfare of the City of Port Jervis to enact this chapter.
§ 238-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meaning
indicated:
BUILDING — The principal building or buildings on each lot and shall not
include any accessory building.
STREET — The street designated in the property address.
§ 238-3. Determination of buildings to be numbered.
The 911 Coordinator and, in the absence of the 911 Coordinator, the
Building Official106 shall be authorized to decide which building or buildings
on any particular lot shall be numbered.
A. By owner. The owner of any dangerous building who shall fail to comply
with any notice or order to repair, vacate or demolish said building
given by any person authorized by this chapter to give such notice or
order shall, upon conviction, be punishable as provided in the general
penalty provisions of the City of Port Jervis; see Chapter 1, General
Provisions, Article I.
B. By occupant. The occupant or lessee in possession who fails to comply
with any notice given as provided for in this chapter shall, upon
conviction, be punishable as provided in the general penalty provisions
of the City of Port Jervis; see Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article I.
C. Removal of notice. Any person removing the notice posted by the City of
Port Jervis shall, upon conviction, be punishable as provided in the
general penalty provisions of the Code of the City of Port Jervis; see
Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article I. [Amended 5-13-1996 by L.L.
No. 6-1996]
106. Editor's Note: Throughout this chapter, references to "Building Inspector" were amended
to "Building Official" at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
§ 234-16 BUILDINGS, NUMBERING OF § 238-4
238:223
§ 238-4. Duty of building owners.
It shall be the duty of every owner and/or every occupant/tenant of a
building in the City of Port Jervis to cause to be displayed thereon the
street number of said building on the building At all times, the owner and/
or occupant/tenant of a building shall maintain such number in compliance
with the provisions of this chapter.
§ 238-5. Size and display of address numbers.
New and existing buildings shall have approved address numbers, building
numbers, or approved building identification placed in a position to be
plainly legible and visible from the street or road fronting the property.
These numbers shall contrast with their background. Address numbers shall
be Arabic numerals or alphabet letters. Numbers shall be a minimum of four
inches (102 millimeters) high with a minimum stroke width of 0.5 inch (12.7
millimeters).
§ 238-6. Display of other numbers prohibited.
The display of any house number other than the number authorized or
assigned by the 911 Coordinator or Building Official is expressly prohibited.
§ 238-7. Noncompliance; notice; remedy; costs.
A. Noncompliance deemed a violation. Any person, corporation,
partnership, or other entity owning a building within the City of Port
Jervis failing or neglecting for 60 days after the initial notice from his or
its respective post office of his or its new number to place the proper
designated number on said building shall be deemed in violation of this
chapter.
B. Nonmaintenance deemed a violation. Any person, corporation,
partnership, or other entity owning a building within the City of Port
Jervis failing to maintain house numbers as provided herein shall be
deemed in violation of this chapter.
C. Service of notice. The notice provided for herein may be given by
personal service or by certified mailing to the last known address of the
owner as shown on the last assessment roll on file in the Assessor's
office of the City of Port Jervis.
D. Numbering of building by City. In the event of the failure, neglect or
refusal of any owner and/or occupant/tenant, after notice, to cause said
building to be properly numbered, the Building Official of the City of
Port Jervis shall cause said building to be properly numbered.
E. Report; assessment of costs. The Building Official shall report the cost
of numbering said building to the Common Council, and such Council
shall order said cost assessed as a lien against the property of the
owner and collected in the same manner as other City taxes.
§ 238-4 PORT JERVIS CODE § 238-8
238:224
§ 238-8. Penalties for offenses.
Any person, corporation, partnership or other entity violating any of the
provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be punishable by a fine not
to exceed $250. Each calendar week or portion thereof that said violation
continues shall be deemed a separate violation.
Chapter 243
BURIALS
§ 243-1. Use of cemeteries required.
No person shall bury any dead human body within the City except in one of
the cemeteries therein.
§ 243-2. Permission for use of cemetery required.
No person shall, without authority, dig any grave, erect any fence, railing,
gravestone or other construction or dig any sod in any of the cemeteries of
the City.
§ 243-3. Depth of grave prescribed.
Each and every grave within the limits of the City in which the body of any
deceased person shall be buried shall be at least five feet deep.
§ 243-4. Penalties for offenses.107
Any person committing an offense against any provision of this chapter
shall be punishable as provided in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article I,
General Penalty.
Chapter 267
ELECTRICAL STANDARDS AND REQUIREMENTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Housing standards — See Ch. 319.
107. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
§ 238-8 BURIALS § 243-4
243:225

ARTICLE I
Adoption of Standards
§ 267-1. Designation of standards.
All installations of electrical work, all extensions thereto and alterations
thereof shall be made in conformity with the requirements of the National
Electrical Code except where the provisions of this chapter or any other
local law or ordinance of the City shall prescribe differently, in which event
compliance with the provisions of such local law or ordinance shall be
recognized as proper compliance with this article. The requirements of the
National Electrical Code hereby adopted and incorporated by reference
shall be those contained in the latest edition of that code adopted by
the National Fire Protection Association and by the American National
Standard Institute and designated as NFPA No. 70 (ANSI).
§ 267-2. Effect of adoption.
In every case where no specific type or class of material or no specific
standards are prescribed by law, conformity with the regulations and
requirements contained in the National Electrical Code adopted in § 267-1
shall be prima facie evidence of conformity with approved standards for
safety to life and property.
§ 267-3. Purpose; scope of provisions.
Because there is danger to life and property inherent in the use of electrical
energy, this article is enacted to regulate the installation, alteration or
repair of wiring for electric light, heat or power and signal systems
operating on 50 volts or more in or on all real property within the City.
§ 267-4. Nonapplicability of provisions.
§ 267-5. Electrical Inspectors.108
A. The provisions of this article shall not apply to electrical installations in
mines, ships, railway cars or automotive equipment nor the installation
of equipment employed by a railway, electrical or communication utility
in the exercise of its function as a utility and located outdoors or in
buildings used exclusively for that purpose. This article shall not apply
to any work involved in the manufacture, assembly, test or repair of
electrical machinery, apparatus, materials or equipment by a person
engaged in electrical manufacturing as his principal business, nor shall
it apply to any building which is owned or leased in its entirety by the
government of either the United States or the State of New York.
B. The provisions of this article and the National Electrical Code adopted
hereby shall not apply to the replacement of light bulbs, fuses or
household fixtures or other minor repair work, nor to the connection of
any household or portable electrical appliance to any permanently
installed electrical receptacle.
§ 267-1 BURIALS § 267-5
243:227
A. Each Inspector performing electrical inspections shall possess in his or
her name certifications from a nationally recognized electrical
certification program in all of the following disciplines [documentation
to be filed (hard copy) with Building Department]:
(1) Electrical Inspector, one- and two-family dwelling.
(2) Electrical Inspector, general.
(3) Electrical Inspector, plan review.
B. Each agency shall submit a certificate of liability insurance with a
minimum limit of $1,000,000. The City of Port Jervis shall be endorsed
as an additional insured and noted as a certificate holder as follows:
City of Port Jervis Building Department
20 Hammond Street
PO Box 1002
Port Jervis, NY 12771
C. Proof of inspections performed at each site shall be affixed as described
below:
(1) Service inspection: sticker affixed to meter pan.
(2) Rough wiring inspection: sticker affixed to kitchen window glass or
to window glass nearest to kitchen.
(3) Final inspection: sticker is to be affixed to the service distribution
panel and an additional sticker partially affixed to be collected by
the Port Jervis Building Department upon final inspection of a
completed project.
(4) Pool inspection: same as final inspection procedure above.
D. Faxed and hard copies of all inspection certificates are to be sent to the
City of Port Jervis Building Department as soon as possible, but in no
case longer than 30 days after an inspection has been performed.
E. Documentation of any failure of inspections of electrical work
performed shall be legible and submitted to the City of Port Jervis
Building Department as soon as reasonably possible to assist in the
proper generation of an "Order To Remedy Violation" to be conveyed to
the owner of the property of the failed inspection.
F. The Inspector that performed the inspection and/or certification of final
certificate for issuance to the property owner shall sign all documents
108. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 267-5 PORT JERVIS CODE § 267-5
243:228
§ 267-6. General duties of Inspectors.
§ 267-7. Right of access.
The Inspector shall have the right during reasonable hours to enter any
building in the discharge of his official duties or for the purpose of making
any inspection, reinspection or test of the installation of electric wiring,
devices, appliances and equipment contained therein, and shall have the
authority to cut or disconnect any wire in cases of emergency where
submitted to the City of Port Jervis Building Department with regard to
inspections performed.
G. Inspection agencies engaged by an electrical contractor or property
owner in which an electrical project is underway and has had an initial
inspection performed by said engaged agency shall perform and follow
up all inspections of said electrical project until a completed final
electrical inspection certificate has been issued and filed with the City
of Port Jervis Building Department.
A. Report to Building Official. It shall be the duty of the Inspector to report
in writing to the Building Official, whose duty it shall be to enforce all
the provisions of this article. All violations of or deviations from or
omissions of the electrical provisions of the National Electrical Code
and all local laws and ordinances referred to in this article insofar as
any of the same apply to electrical wiring.
B. Inspections and reinspections upon written request. The Inspector shall
make inspections and reinspections of electrical, installations in and on
properties in the City upon the written request of an authorized official
of the City or as herein provided.
C. Discretionary inspections and reinspections. The Inspector is
authorized to make inspections and reinspections of electrical wiring
installations, devices, appliances and equipment in and on properties
within the City where he deems it necessary for the protection of life
and property.
D. Emergency inspections. In the event of an emergency, it shall be the
duty of the Inspector to make electrical inspections upon the oral
request of an official or officer of the City.
E. Reports to City and to owners. It shall be the duty of the Inspector to
furnish written reports to the proper officials of the City and to the
owners of property where defective electrical installations and
equipment are found upon inspection.
F. Certificate of compliance. The Inspector shall authorize the issuing of a
certificate of compliance when electrical installations and equipment
are in conformity with this article. He shall direct that a copy of the
certificate of compliance be sent to the City to the attention of the
Building Official.
§ 267-5 BURIALS § 267-7
243:229
necessary for the safety of life or property or where such wire may interfere
with the work of the Fire Department. He is also authorized to disconnect
or order the discontinuance of electrical service to any electrical wiring,
devices, appliances or equipment found to be dangerous to life or property
because they are defective or defectively installed until they have been
made safe and approved by him.
§ 267-8. Inspection of damaged premises.109
It shall be the duty of the Inspector to make an inspection of any premises
wherein a fire or explosion has occurred, and for such purpose it shall
be the duty of the Chief of the Fire Department or the head of the fire
protection agency of the City, within 24 hours after such occurrence, to
report or cause to be reported to the office of the New York Board of Fire
Underwriters or other agency approved by the Common Council from which
such Inspector operates the address or location of such premises and to
furnish such other information and assistance with respect thereto as such
Inspector may require.
§ 267-9. Required applications and certificates.
A. Application for inspection required prior to installation. It shall be an
offense against this article for any person to install or cause to be
installed or to alter or repair electrical wiring for light, heat or power in
or on properties in the City until an application for inspection has been
filed with the New York Board of Fire Underwriters or other agency
approved by the Common Council.110
B. Issuance of certificate required prior to connection to energy supply. It
shall be an offense against this article for a person to connect or cause
to be connected electrical service in or on properties for light, heat or
power to any source of electrical energy supply prior to the issuance of
a temporary certificate or a certificate of compliance by the New York
Board of Fire Underwriters or other agency approved by the Common
Council . [Amended 10-13-1987 by L.L. No. 7-1987111]
C. Issuance of certificate required prior to reconnections. It shall be
unlawful for any person to make connection from a source of electrical
energy to any electric wiring, devices, appliances or equipment which
has been disconnected or ordered to be disconnected by the Inspector
or the use of which has been ordered by the Inspector to be
discontinued until a certificate of approval has been issued authorizing
the reconnection and use of such wiring, devices, appliances or
equipment.
109. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
110. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
111. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 267-7 PORT JERVIS CODE § 267-10
243:230
§ 267-10. Public utility to furnish monthly reports to Inspector.
Any public utility company furnishing electric service within the City shall,
once each month, furnish to the Inspector a written list containing the name
and address of each person or corporation supplied by said public utility
company with mercantile, commercial or industrial electrical service during
the previous month. This provision shall only apply in the case of a new
supply or a resumption of supply of electric service.
§ 267-11. No waiver of responsibility or assumption of liability.112
This article shall not be construed to relieve from or lessen the
responsibility of any person owning, operating, controlling or installing any
electric wiring, devices, appliances or equipment for loss of life or damage
to person or property caused by any defect therein, nor shall the City or
the New York Board of Fire Underwriters or other agency approved by the
Common Council be deemed to have assumed any such liability by reason
of any inspection made or license issued pursuant to this chapter.
112. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 267-10 BURIALS § 267-11
243:231

ARTICLE II
Licensing of Electricians
§ 267-12. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated unless the context requires otherwise:
BOARD — The Board of Electrical Examiners of the City of Port Jervis as
established by this article.
INSPECTOR — The person or persons authorized and required by this
chapter to make electrical inspections within the City, as more fully
provided for in § 267-5 hereof.
MASTER ELECTRICIAN — Any person who engages in or carries on the
business of installing, erecting, altering or repairing electrical wiring,
apparatus, fixtures, devices, appliances and equipment utilized or designed
for the utilization of electricity for light, heat or power purposes or for
signaling systems operating on 50 volts or more, and any person who
performs or supervises the performance of work done in connection with
the installation, erection, alteration, extension or repair of electrical wiring,
apparatus, fixtures, devices, appliances and equipment for light, heat or
power purposes or for signaling systems operating on 50 volts or more,
and any person who contracts to do any of the foregoing, except where the
above would be in conflict with the National Electrical Code.
SPECIAL ELECTRICIAN — Any person who is in the exclusive employ
of the owner, lessee or manager of a building, plant or structure and
whose employment consists wholly or partly of the work of maintaining
and repairing electrical wiring, apparatus, fixtures, devices, appliances and
equipment utilized or designed for the utilization of electricity for light, heat
or power purposes or for signaling systems operating on 50 volts or more,
except where the above would be in conflict with the National Electrical
Code.
§ 267-13. Board of Electrical Examiners established; membership.
A. There is hereby established in and for the City of Port Jervis a board to
be known as the "Board of Electrical Examiners of the City of Port
Jervis." This Board shall consist of nine persons who shall be residents
of the City of Port Jervis, with the exception of the Inspector
representing the New York Board of Fire Underwriters, Bureau of
Electricity, the representative of the utility company supplying
electricity to the City of Port Jervis and the City Electrician. Such
persons shall include or represent the following: [Amended
10-13-1987 by L.L. No. 7-1987]
(1) One Electrical Inspector representing the New York Board of Fire
Underwriters, Bureau of Electricity.
(2) Two electricians appointed by the Mayor, at least one of whom shall
be a licensed master electrician, Class A.
§ 267-12 BURIALS § 267-13
243:233
§ 267-14. Powers and duties of Board.
The Board shall have the following powers and duties, in addition to those
elsewhere prescribed in this article:
(3) One authorized representative of the utility company supplying
electrical energy to the City of Port Jervis.
(4) One professional engineer or registered architect, appointed by the
Mayor. [Amended 5-23-1988 by L.L. No. 2-1988]
(5) Two lay citizens of the City of Port Jervis, appointed by the Mayor.
(6) One member of the Common Council. [Amended 5-23-1988 by
L.L. No. 2-1988]
(7) A representative of the Building Department. [Amended
5-23-1988 by L.L. No. 2-1988]
B. Term of office. Subject to confirmation by the Common Council,
members of the Board shall hold office for three years. Meetings shall
be held at least once each month. [Amended 10-13-1987 by L.L. No.
7-1987; 5-23-1988 by L.L. No. 2-1988; 6-27-2011 by L.L. No.
2-2011]
C. A vacancy occurring in the membership of the Board from any cause
shall be filled by the Mayor for the unexpired term of the member
whose office has become vacant, such appointment being subject to
confirmation by the Common Council.
D. A member of the Board may be removed by the Mayor for misfeasance
or malfeasance in office, incompetency, incapacity, neglect of duty or
other good and sufficient cause, after giving to such member a copy of
the charges against him and an opportunity to be heard in his defense
in person and/or by counsel.
E. The Board shall elect a Chairman and a Secretary from its membership.
F. A majority of the Board shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of
business.
G. Compensation. Board members who are not otherwise employed by the
City of Port Jervis shall be paid $15 each regular, monthly meeting
attended. [Added 6-27-2011 by L.L. No. 2-2011]
A. Meetings. To hold at least one meeting in each month and as many
other meetings at such other times as, in the opinion of the Chairman or
a majority of the Board, are necessary or desirable for the efficient
discharge of the business of the Board. [Amended 10-13-1987 by L.L.
No. 7-1987]
§ 267-13 PORT JERVIS CODE § 267-14
243:234
§ 267-15. Electrician's license required.
B. Examinations. To examine into the qualifications and fitness of
applicants for licenses under this article or of the representatives of
such applicants designated for such purpose.
C. Issue licenses. To grant and issue licenses as master electricians to
applicants possessing or whose representatives possess the requisite
qualifications, and to grant and issue licenses as special electricians to
applicants possessing the requisite qualifications. Licenses shall be
signed by the Chairman and Secretary.
D. Suspend or revoke licenses. To suspend or revoke licenses for cause as
prescribed in § 267-21.
E. Impose and collect fines. To impose and collect fines for violations as
prescribed in § 267-21.
F. Keep records. To keep records of all its meetings and proceedings and
of all licenses issued, suspended or revoked by it and to make such
records available for public inspection.
G. Prepare manual. To prepare a manual of its rules and regulations for
the conduct of examinations and to furnish copies thereof to persons
desiring the same.
H. Promulgate rules. To adopt such rules and regulations as may be
necessary, not inconsistent with the provisions of this article, with
respect to the form and content of applications for licenses, the
reception thereof, the investigation and examination of applicants and
their qualifications, the conduct of the meetings and the business of the
Board and the other matters incidental or appropriate to the powers
and duties of the Board as prescribed by this article and for the proper
administration and enforcement of the provisions of this article, and to
amend or repeal any of such rules and regulations, by a majority vote,
at any special or regular meeting, upon notice of at least 30 days to
each member thereof.
I. File copy of rules. To file a copy of all of its rules and regulations and of
all changes therein, duly certified by the Secretary, with the City Clerk-
Treasurer immediately upon the adoption thereof, which copy shall be
available for public inspection during the regular business hours of the
day.
A. Master electrician. No person shall hereafter engage in, carry on or
conduct the business of master electrician or do or perform, or offer or
undertake or contract to do or perform, the work of a master electrician
within the City or hold himself out to the public, directly or indirectly, as
being able so to do unless licensed therefor pursuant to this article or
unless employed by and working under the direction and supervision of
a person so licensed, who shall be responsible for ensuring that all work
§ 267-14 BURIALS § 267-15
243:235
performed by such employees is done in compliance with the National
Electrical Code.
B. Special electrician. No person shall hereafter engage in, undertake or
perform the work of a special electrician or agree to do or perform such
work within the City or hold himself out to the public, directly or
indirectly, as being able so to do unless licensed therefor pursuant to
this article, and no person shall, directly or indirectly, hire, employ,
engage or suffer or permit any person to do the work of a special
electrician unless such person is licensed as a special electrician
pursuant to this article.
C. Exceptions.
(1) Unless otherwise provided in this chapter, all electrical work
performed in the City shall be done by an electrician licensed under
this article; provided, however, that in those situations where an
individual owner of a residential property desires to do work in the
residence in which he dwells, the requirement as to work being
performed by a licensed electrician may be suspended, provided
that all other requirements of this chapter and the National
Electrical Code are fully complied with by said individual. In the
case of an individual owning a two-family or multifamily residence,
such exception shall apply only to the dwelling unit in which the
individual resides.
(2) This article shall not apply to a plant operated by a municipality
authorized to generate or sell electricity nor to electric
corporations, as defined in the Transportation Corporations Law,
nor to any person or corporation engaged in their behalf, nor to the
employees of any of them in performing such work in the conduct of
the business of such corporations in installing, maintaining or
repairing wires, apparatus or fixtures, or other appliances used by
such companies and necessary for or to their business, whether or
not such wires, conduits, apparatus, fixtures or other appliances
are on their own premises, unless the work in connection therewith
is done within a building not owned by such corporation. This
article shall not apply to the installation, maintenance or repair of
elevators, dumbwaiters and escalators, nor to the electrical work of
a telephone, telegraph, central station, of a protective, railroad or
radio broadcasting company, nor to persons performing electrical
work for such a company where said electrical work is an integral
part of the plant or service used by such company in rendering its
duly authorized service to the public. This article shall not apply to
the maintenance, repairing or operation of electrical equipment
within a theater or other place of public assemblage where
entertainment or exhibition is provided, motion-picture studio,
theatrical studio, or motion-picture film laboratory, nor to the
installation of temporary electrical cables, assembling or erecting
of such theatrical, sound-recording, sound-reproducing or motionpicture
equipment where such equipment is an integral part of the
§ 267-15 PORT JERVIS CODE § 267-15
243:236
§ 267-16. Effect of license; term; fees; renewal. [Amended
12-8-1986 by L.L. No. 8-1986; 10-13-1987 by L.L. No. 7-1987;
5-23-1988 by L.L. No. 2-1988; 7-27-1992 by L.L. No. 5-1992;
3-23-1998 by L.L. No. 1-1998114]
The Board may issue licenses under this article as follows:
theater, traveling production, motion-picture studio or laboratory
used in the production or exhibition of stage or motion picture
attractions. Either of said licenses shall be issued upon proof that
the applicant has been continuously engaged in work of the
character herein defined for a period of five years prior to the
enactment of this article, without further examination, provided
that such application is made within one year after the enactment
of this article.113
A. Master electrician's license, Class A. A master electrician's license,
Class A, shall authorize the licensee to engage in the business of master
electrician within the City for a period ending December 31 of the year
in which it is issued. The initial fee for such license shall be as provided
in Chapter 280, Fees. Such license may be renewed annually on or
before the expiration thereof for periods of one year upon payment of
an annual renewal fee as provided in Chapter 280, Fees. Any such
renewal for a period beginning January 1, 2001, or later shall be
granted only if the applicant meets and demonstrates satisfactory
compliance with the provisions of Subsection D below.
B. Master electrician's license, Class B. A master electrician's license,
Class B, shall authorize the licensee to engage in the business of master
electrician in the City but only for the purpose of undertaking,
performing and completing a single continuous job or installation at one
location or property. The initial fee for such license shall be as provided
in Chapter 280, Fees, for a period ending December 31 of the year in
which it is issued. Such license may be renewed on or before the
expiration thereof for a period of time necessary to complete the job for
which it is issued, at a renewal fee as provided in Chapter 280, Fees,
per calendar year. Any such renewal for a period beginning January 1,
2001, or later shall be granted only if the applicant meets and
demonstrates satisfactory compliance with the provisions of Subsection
D below.
C. Electrician's license, Class C. An electrician's license, Class C, shall
authorize the licensee to engage in the business of an electrician in the
City only for the purpose of installing, maintaining and repairing
electrically operated and/or controlled devices, such as oil burners,
stokers and gas burners, or to do other specialized work to be noted
and provided for on the license issued. The initial fee for such license
113. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
114. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 267-15 BURIALS § 267-16
243:237
§ 267-17. Application for license.
shall be as provided in Chapter 280, Fees, for a period ending
December 31 of the year in which it is issued. Such a license may be
renewed annually on or before the expiration thereof for periods of one
year upon payment of an annual renewal fee as provided in Chapter
280, Fees. Any such renewal for a period beginning January 1, 2001,
or later shall be granted only if the applicant meets and demonstrates
satisfactory compliance with the provisions of Subsection D below.
D. Any such renewal as set forth in Subsection A, B or C above for a period
beginning January 1, 2001, or later shall be granted only if the applicant
can show documentation satisfactory to the Electrical Board that said
applicant has completed the I.A.E.I. Electrical Seminar or such other
electrical seminar as may from time to time be approved by the City of
Port Jervis Electrical Board.
E. Special electrician's license. A special electrician's license shall
authorize the licensee to perform only the work of a special electrician
for an employer and at a location designated and specified in the license
for a period ending December 31 of the year in which it is issued. Such
a license shall not authorize the holder thereof to engage in, perform or
supervise the work of installing, erecting, altering or extending
electrical wiring, apparatus, fixtures, devices, appliances and
equipment for light, heat or power purposes or for signaling systems
operating on 50 volts or more or otherwise to do or perform the work of
a master electrician, and all persons licensed as special electricians
under this article are prohibited from performing or supervising such
work. The initial fee for such license shall be as provided in Chapter
280, Fees. Such license may be renewed annually on or before the
expiration thereof for periods of one year upon payment of an annual
renewal fee as provided in Chapter 280, Fees. Upon receipt of a proper
application therefor, the Board shall grant the holder of such a license
permission to do the work of a special electrician for an employer or at
a location not designated in the license in lieu of the one designated
therein without any additional fee, and a new license specifying the new
employer and/or the new location, as the case may be, shall be issued
upon the surrender of the old license.
A. General procedure; application contents. Every person desiring a
license as a master electrician under this article shall make application
therefor to the Board in such form and detail as the Board may
prescribe. Such application shall state, among other things, the name
and place of business of the applicant, the class of license applied for
and the name of the representative of the applicant who will take the
examination for the license and who will act as the supervisor of the
work to be done under the license, if granted. If the applicant is a
corporation, any one of the officers of the corporation who owns and
holds at least 25% of the issued and outstanding capital stock may be
designated as the representative of the applicant for such purposes.
§ 267-16 PORT JERVIS CODE § 267-17
243:238
B. Eligibility qualifications.
(1) In order to be eligible to take an examination, the candidate for a
master electrician's license must supply satisfactory proof to the
Board of one of the following:
(a) Five years' apprenticeship under a duly qualified electrician.
(b) Two years in an accredited electrical trade school or the
equivalent and two years as an apprentice under a duly
qualified electrician. [Amended 10-13-1987 by L.L. No.
7-1987]
(c) A certificate issued by a service-connected trade school for
electricians, plus a minimum of two years or more as an
apprentice under a duly qualified electrician or such length of
time as an apprentice as may be determined by the Board.
(d) Any equivalent combination of experience and training
sufficient to indicate ability to do the work. [Added
10-13-1987 by L.L. No. 7-1987]
(2) For the purposes of this subsection, "duly qualified electrician"
shall mean an electrician holding a master electrician's license
from the City of Port Jervis or an electrician holding a license of a
substantially similar character to that of a master electrician's
license from the City of Port Jervis, as determined at the discretion
of the Board. [Amended 6-27-2011 by L.L. No. 2-2011]
C. Commercial buildings and industrial plants. A person who owns, leases,
manages, maintains or operates one or more buildings or structures
constituting a plant occupied or used for commercial or industrial
purposes and who desires a license as a master electrician so that the
work of a master electrician may be regularly performed in such plant
may make application therefor to the Board in such form and detail as
the Board may prescribe, or may regularly employ a licensed master
electrician for such purposes. Such application shall state, among other
things, the name and nature of the business of the applicant, the
location and description of the buildings or structures constituting the
plant of the applicant where the work of a master electrician will be
performed under the license, if granted, and the name of the
representative of the applicant who will take the examination for the
license and who will act as the supervisor of the work to be done under
the license, if granted.
D. Special electrician, Class C. Every person desiring a license as a special
electrician under this article shall make application therefor to the
Board in such form and detail as the Board may prescribe. Such
application shall state, among other things, the name and residence
address of the person employing the applicant and establish that the
applicant has a minimum of one year of experience in the work of a
special electrician. [Amended 5-23-1988 by L.L. No. 2-1988]
§ 267-17 BURIALS § 267-17
243:239
§ 267-18. Examinations.
E. Payment of license fee. Each application shall be accompanied by
payment, in full, of the license fee for the license being applied for. Said
fee is nonrefundable. [Amended 10-13-1987 by L.L. No. 7-1987]
F. City employees. Licenses shall be issued without fee to any employee of
the Electrical Department of the City and to any other employee of the
City whose work is directly concerned with electric power, provided
that such employee held a Class A license before becoming employed by
the City. Said licenses shall be renewable without fee, provided that
said employees are in the employ of the City at the time of renewal.
G. All applications will expire and be canceled after a period of three
months if the applicant does not appear for examination within that
period. The three-month period commences on the date of notification.
The fee application is nonrefundable. [Added 5-23-1988 by L.L. No.
2-1988]
H. Eligibility qualifications for Class C license. In order to be eligible to
take an examination, the candidate for a Class C license must supply
satisfactory proof to the Board of one of the following: [Added
12-12-1988 by L.L. No. 8-1988]
(1) Five years apprenticeship under a duly qualified plumber, heating
contractor or air-conditioning contractor.
(2) Two years in an accredited plumbing, heating or air-conditioning
trade school or the equivalent and two years as an apprentice
under a duly qualified plumber, heating contractor or airconditioning
contractor.
(3) A certificate issued by a service-connected trade school for
plumbers, heating or air conditioning, plus a minimum of two years
or more as an apprentice under a duly qualified plumber, heating
contractor or air-conditioning contractor or such length of time as
an apprentice as may be determined by the Board.
(4) Any equivalent combination of experience and training sufficient to
indicate ability to do the work.
A. Generally. Examinations shall be in writing. A complete record of every
examination given shall be kept on file until three years after the date of
the examination. Examinations shall be held at such times and places as
the Board may fix. [Amended 10-13-1987 by L.L. No. 7-1987]
B. Appearance for examination. The applicant or, in the case of those
applying for licenses as master electricians, the designated
representatives of the applicant shall present himself for examination at
the time and place specified in a notice to be given by the Board. Upon
the failure of the candidate to appear for examination without due
notice or good cause, as determined by the Board, the examination fee
§ 267-17 PORT JERVIS CODE § 267-18
243:240
shall be forfeited. An examination may be rescheduled for the candidate
in such instances upon payment of an additional examination fee as
provided in Chapter 280, Fees. [Amended 7-27-1992 by L.L. No.
5-1992115]
C. Reexamination. An applicant or the representative of an applicant who
has failed the first examination shall not be eligible for reexamination
until one month from the date of such failure; one who fails twice or
more shall not be eligible for further reexamination until at least six
months have elapsed from the date of such second or subsequent
failure.
D. Standards and criteria for master electricians. No license as a master
electrician shall be granted to any person unless such person or his
designated representative shall prove satisfactorily to the Board that:116
(1) He is a competent electrician and qualified to do electrical
contracting, construction and installation work and electrical
wiring.
(2) He has a working knowledge of electricity and the natural laws,
properties and functions of electricity and of appliances, apparatus,
materials and devices for electric light, heat, power and signaling
purposes used and required in such work, combined with a
practical working knowledge of the requirements and provisions of
the National Electrical Code and a knowledge of the provisions of
this chapter and the rules and regulations of the Board and the
laws of the state and City, if any, for installation of electrical wiring,
devices, appliances and equipment, and of the provisions thereof
requiring permits therefor.
E. Standards and criteria for special electricians. No license as a special
electrician shall be granted to any person unless he shall prove to the
satisfaction of the Board that:
(1) He is a competent electrician and qualified to do electrical
repairing and maintenance work.
(2) He has a working knowledge of electricity and the natural laws,
properties and functions of electricity and of appliances, apparatus,
materials and devices for electric light, heat, power and signaling
purposes used or likely to be used in the building, plant or
structure where he is or will be employed, combined with a
practical working knowledge of the requirements and provisions of
the National Electrical Code and a knowledge of the provisions of
this chapter and the rules and regulations of the Board and the
115. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
116. Editor's Note: Former Subsection D(1), regarding the requirement of establishment of
business within the City, was repealed 6-23-1986 by L.L. No. 4-1986.
§ 267-18 BURIALS § 267-18
243:241
§ 267-19. License conditions and regulations.
laws of the state and City, if any, for the repair and maintenance of
electrical wiring, devices, appliances and equipment.
F. Minimum age; requirements of Compensation Law. No license shall be
granted to any person under the age of 21 years or who does not comply
with the New York Workers' Compensation Law. [Amended
10-13-1987 by L.L. No. 7-1987]
A. Nonassignable. No license issued hereunder shall be assignable or
transferable.
B. Contents of master electrician's license. Each license as a master
electrician issued hereunder shall specify the name of the person
licensed, who shall be known as the "holder" of the license, and shall
also specify the name of the person who has passed the examination,
and such person shall be designated in the license as the supervisor of
all work to be done under the license.
C. Supervisor designated. The person designated as the supervisor may be
a person in the employ of the holder of the license or, if the holder be an
individual, may be the holder himself or, if the holder be a firm or
partnership, may be a member thereof or, if the holder be a corporation,
may be an officer of the corporation, provided that he has the requisite
qualification of stock ownership herein prescribed therefor.
D. Same supervisor prohibited in more than one license. The same person
shall not be designated as the supervisor in two or more licenses issued
to different holders.
E. Termination of supervisor's employment. In the event that the business
association of the supervisor with, or the employment of the supervisor
by, the holder of the license shall terminate, the holder shall notify the
Board of such fact forthwith and shall promptly designate another
person as the representative of the holder, who shall submit himself for
examination to the Board when notified so to do. If no such new
designation is made within 30 days after the termination of the
association or employment of the former supervisor, the license of the
holder will become null and void on the 30th day following such
termination.
F. Licenses to be numbered. All licenses shall be numbered in the order in
which they are issued and shall be in such form and of such color and
shall contain such information as may be prescribed by the Board.
G. License to be displayed. Each license shall at all times be kept
conspicuously displayed in the place of business or employment, as the
case may be, of the licensee.
§ 267-18 PORT JERVIS CODE § 267-20
243:242
§ 267-20. Renewal of Class A master electrician's license. [Amended
10-13-1987 by L.L. No. 7-1987]
Any such license not renewed within the time prescribed by this article
shall lapse at the expiration of its term and the holder of such license must
thereafter qualify for an original license hereunder and comply with all the
requirements and provisions hereof relative thereto.117
§ 267-21. Suspension and revocation of licenses; fines.
§ 267-22. Review of Board action.
Any action of the Board of Electrical Examiners may be reviewed by any
person aggrieved thereby in any court of competent jurisdiction by a
proceeding instituted under the provisions of Article 78 of the Civil Practice
Law and Rules.
§ 267-23. Employment of unlicensed electricians restricted.
It shall be unlawful for any person other than a licensed master electrician
to employ an unlicensed electrician to do any electrical work in the City,
except as stated in § 267-4.
§ 267-24. Disposition of fees, fines and penalties.
All fees, fines and penalties derived by the Board from the operation of this
article shall be turned over by the Board to the City Clerk-Treasurer within
10 days after they are received, and such moneys shall be paid by such
Clerk-Treasurer into the general fund of the City and shall be available for
use for any lawful City purpose.
A. Any license issued hereunder may be suspended or revoked, in the
discretion of the Board, after hearing, upon due notice, held upon
charges given to the licensee and an opportunity to be heard in his
defense in person and/or by attorney, if the Board is satisfied that the
holder of such license or any of his or its officers or employees willfully
or by reason of incompetence has violated any provision of this article
or of any other law, ordinance, resolution or building code governing
electrical work or requiring permits therefor or any requirement
contained in the rules and regulations of the National Board of Fire
Underwriters, known as the "National Electrical Code."
B. The Board may, in lieu of suspending or revoking a license hereunder,
impose a fine not to exceed $100 for the first offense and not more than
$200 for a subsequent offense and may suspend the license until such
fine is paid. [Amended 10-13-1987 by L.L. No. 7-1987; 5-23-1988
by L.L. No. 2-1988]
117. Editor's Note: Original § 80-21, Display of sign by master electrician, Class A, which
immediately followed this section, was repealed 10-13-1987 by L.L. No. 7-1987.
§ 267-20 BURIALS § 267-25
243:243
§ 267-25. Reciprocal and one-time licenses.
Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, reciprocal and onetime
licenses may be issued as follows:
A. Reciprocal licenses. Any person, firm or corporation duly licensed by
another municipality in New York State which has licensing standards
and requirements, including examinations, substantially the same as
those provided by this chapter, and which has reciprocity provisions
applicable to licensees of the City of Port Jervis, may be issued, without
examination, a license equivalent to that held in the other municipality,
subject to all other conditions and provisions of this chapter. As a
prerequisite to the issuance of such a reciprocal license, the candidate
shall:
(1) Submit substantiating documents and evidence supporting the
claim that he is the holder of a valid license from the other
municipality.
(2) Complete the appropriate application forms for the City of Port
Jervis.
(3) Pay an annual renewal fee equal to the annual fee charged by the
municipality in which he is licensed. [Amended 6-23-1986 by
L.L. No. 4-1986]
B. One-time licenses. Any person, firm or corporation duly licensed by
another municipality which has licensing standards and requirements,
including examinations, substantially the same as those provided by
this chapter, may be issued, without examination, a one-time license,
equivalent to that held in the other municipality, for the performance of
a specific contract or job, upon application to and approval by the
Board. [Amended 5-23-1988 by L.L. No. 2-1988]
(1) Such application shall be accompanied by substantiating
documents and evidence supporting the claim that he is the holder
of a valid license from the other municipality and by a fee as
provided in Chapter 280, Fees. [Amended 6-2-1986 by L.L. No.
4-1986; 7-27-1992 by L.L. No. 5-1992; 4-8-1996 by L.L. No.
5-1996118]
(2) Such one-time license shall be valid only for a specific contract or
job, at a specific location, and shall expire upon issuance of a
certificate of compliance for the work covered by the contract or
job.
(3) Notwithstanding any other provision of this Subsection B, where a
candidate for a one-time license is a resident of a municipality not
licensing electricians, the Board may consider other evidence of
118. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 267-25 PORT JERVIS CODE § 267-25
243:244
qualifications, such as a statement from the local building or
electrical inspector, and may make such investigation and inquiry
into the candidate's qualifications as it may deem necessary, and
may thereupon, in its discretion, issue a one-time license, with such
conditions as it may deem proper to secure the purposes of this
chapter.
(4) Any one-time license shall be subject to all conditions and
provisions of this chapter not otherwise inconsistent with this
section.
§ 267-25 BURIALS § 267-25
243:245

ARTICLE III
Electric Wires and Poles
§ 267-26. Minimum requirements for installation, operation and
maintenance.
No person shall erect, maintain or operate, or cause to be erected,
maintained or operated, either inside or outside of any building in this City,
any wire or apparatus for the transmission of electrical currents except in
accordance with the rules and requirements of the National Board of Fire
Underwriters for the installation of wiring and apparatus, except as the
same are modified or changed by the provisions of this article.
§ 267-27. Map of electrical system.
§ 267-28. Emergency cutoff of current; reconnection.
A. Every person, company or corporation which operates in this City any
system for the transmission of electrical current shall have on file in its
office maps of the various sections of the City on which shall be plainly
shown all poles, wires and cables erected, maintained or operated by
such person, company or corporation, designating on said map which
wires are used for alternating and which for direct currents. Such
person, company or corporation, when any new pole is erected or new
wire or cable is installed or any pole, wire or cable is changed or
abandoned by it, shall immediately designate the same upon the maps
of the system thereby affected. All dead wires shall be immediately
removed by the owner thereof.
B. Upon written request by the Common Council or any duly appointed
official designated by the Common Council, any such person, company
or corporation operating a system for the transmission of electrical
current shall immediately supply a copy of any map required. There
shall be no charge made to the City for copies of such requested maps.
A. Every person, company or corporation operating any system of electric
light, heat or power in this City shall, when requested to do so by the
Chief of the Port Jervis Fire Department, cut off the current from all or
such part of said system as the said Fire Chief may designate, but said
Fire Chief shall not order such cutoff except in case of fire, danger to
life or accident.
B. Upon the severing of wires as a result of fire or other emergency,
electrical service shall not be reconnected until an inspection has been
made by the duly appointed Electrical Inspector for the City of Port
Jervis and a certificate of compliance or cut-in order has been issued by
said Inspector.
§ 267-26 BURIALS § 267-29
243:247
§ 267-29. Height of wires or cables.
No person shall erect, maintain or operate, or cause to be erected,
maintained or operated, any electrical wire or cable across any public
street, square or roadway in this City within 18 feet from the ground nor,
without the permission of the owner, across the entrance to any alley,
driveway or lane opening upon any public street, square or place within said
distance from the ground.
§ 267-30. Felling of trees which may injure wires.
No person shall fell any tree by the fall of which any wire erected or
maintained in any public street, square or place shall be liable to injury
without first obtaining authorization from the Director of Public Works.
§ 267-31. Use of poles by City.
Space shall be reserved, for use by the City, on any pole erected in any
public street, square or place in the City and used to support electric wires.
The location on poles of City-owned wires and equipment shall be as agreed
upon between the owner(s) of the respective pole(s) and the authorized City
official.
§ 267-32. Regulations as to certain service lines.
All electric wires of a higher potentiality than 600 volts for furnishing light,
heat or power in this City, when conducted into any building, shall be fitted
with suitable appliances to cut off the current on the outside of the building;
and no wire of such system shall run approximately parallel to the outside
wall of any building for more than five feet when within six feet of such wall.
§ 267-33. Fastening of signs or banners to poles prohibited.
It shall be illegal for any person or persons to fasten, in any manner, any
sign, directional sign or banner on any pole erected in any public street,
square or place in this City.
§ 267-29 PORT JERVIS CODE § 267-33
243:248
ARTICLE IV
Penalties
§ 267-34. Penalties for offenses.
Any person, firm or corporation committing an offense against any provision
of this chapter shall be punishable as provided in Chapter 1, General
Provisions, Article I.
§ 267-35. Fine for working as electrician without license. [Added
7-22-1996 by L.L. No. 12-1996]
Any person found to have been doing electrical work within the City of
Port Jervis without first having obtained a license from the appropriate City
authorities, as required by this chapter, shall be automatically subject to a
mandatory fine of not less than $300 and not more than $3,000.
§ 267-34 BURIALS § 267-35
243:249

ARTICLE V
Undergrounding of Utility Services and Replacement of Service
Lines
[Added 2-23-2015 by L.L. No. 2-2015]
§ 267-36. Undergrounding of utility services. [Amended 2-27-2017
by L.L. No. 4-2017]
All new utility services or replacement services and service lines for
commercial or residential properties must be installed and maintained
underground on new construction only.
§ 267-36 BURIALS § 267-36
243:251
Chapter 272
ESCROW DEPOSITS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fees — See Ch. 280.
§ 272-1. Purpose.
§ 272-2. Statutory authority.
This chapter is enacted under the authority of Subdivisions a(1) and (2) and
d(3) of Municipal Home Rule Law § 10(1)(ii) and Municipal Home Rule Law
§ 22. More particularly, it is the expressed intent of the Common Council to
empower to the City to require such payments as a condition of approvals.
§ 272-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
APPLICANT — Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation or
entity, of any type, kind or nature, who requests the City, the Common
Council, the Planning Board, the Zoning Board of Appeals or any other
board, agency, employee or official of the City for approval of a project.
CONSULTANT — Any person or entity of any type who is retained by the
City to provide consulting or professional services for any project, including,
but not necessarily limited to, engineering, planning, legal and stenographic
expenses.
A. The Common Council enacts this chapter to put in place a system for
the reimbursement of fees and expenses which would otherwise be
raised by assessments of the taxpayers of the City to defray the costs of
the City consultants, including, but not limited to, engineering,
planning, legal and stenographic expenses, with respect to the review
of projects as defined in § 272-3 of this chapter. It is the intention of this
chapter that the cost of such consultants ultimately be paid by those
who seek approvals from the City rather than from general City funds.
B. The City also wishes to establish a procedure to be followed requiring
the deposit of those funds in the City's Special Trust and Agency
Account or similar account established by the Common Council and
requiring that payments from that account be made only upon receipt
and approval by the Common Council of itemized vouchers from its
consultants following the determination by the Common Council as set
forth in § 272-5 of this chapter.
§ 267-36 PORT JERVIS CODE § 272-3
243:252
PROJECT — Includes a subdivision, site plan, special use permit, variance,
interpretation, improvement district formation or extension or such other
similar action where the Common Council, Planning Board and/or Zoning
Board of Appeals determines to refer the action to a consultant.
§ 272-4. Reimbursement of fees and expenses.
All applicants for approval of any project in the City shall reimburse the
City for all reasonable, necessary and appropriate consulting expenses
incurred by the Town in connection with the review and consideration of
such project.
§ 272-5. Deposit of funds; payment of fees.
A. Following a pre-submission appearance by any applicant filing an
application for approval of a project with the appropriate official or
board of the City, the applicant shall deposit with the City a sum of
money as determined in accordance with the provisions of this chapter,
which sum shall be used to pay the costs described in § 272-4 of this
chapter.
B. In the event that the deposit amount does not appear on the schedule of
deposits referred to in § 272-6 of this chapter, upon the applicable
board of the City computing the deposit amount pursuant to the
provisions of this chapter and advising the applicant in writing of the
appropriate amount, the applicant shall deposit that sum with the Town
in accordance with the above provision.
C. Upon receipt of such monies, the City shall cause such monies to be
placed in the City's Special Trust and Agency Account or similar
account established by the Common Council, without interest accruing
to the applicant, and shall keep a separate record of all such monies so
deposited and the name of the applicant and project for which sums
were deposited.
D. Upon receipt and approval by the Common Council of an itemized
voucher from a consultant for services rendered on behalf of the City
pertaining to the project, the City Clerk-Treasurer shall cause such
voucher to be paid out of the monies so deposited and shall debit the
separate record of the account accordingly.
E. The consultant shall furnish copies of such voucher to the applicant at
the same time such voucher is submitted to the City.
F. The Common Council shall review and audit all such vouchers and shall
approve payment of only such consulting fees and disbursements as are
consistent with the schedule established by the Common Council.
G. If at any time during or after the review of any project there shall be
insufficient monies on hand to the credit of such applicant to pay the
approved vouchers in full, or if it shall reasonably appear to the City
that such monies will be insufficient to meet vouchers yet to be
§ 272-3 BURIALS § 272-5
243:253
§ 272-6. Deposit amounts.
§ 272-7. Deposits in addition to application fees.
The deposits required by this chapter shall be in addition to any application
fees that may be required by any other rule, regulation or enactment of the
City.
Chapter 280
FEES
§ 280-1. Service fee for documents and reports. [Amended
11-23-2009]
submitted, the City shall advise the applicant, who shall deposit
additional sums as the City deems necessary or advisable in order to
meet such expenses or anticipated expenses.
H. In the event that the applicant fails to deposit such monies, the City
shall notify, as applicable, the board, agency, employee or officer of the
City of such failure, and any review, approval, building permit or
certificates of occupancy may be withheld by the appropriate board,
agency, employee or officer of the City until such monies are deposited.
I. After conclusion of the review of the project and after payment of all
approved vouchers submitted, any sums remaining on account to the
credit of said applicant shall be paid over towards the cost of the
building permit or other permits which the applicant needs to obtain
from the Building Official or other appropriate City agent or agency. If
there are no additional permits to be obtained from the City, the
remaining sums in the account shall be returned to the applicant.
A. The amount of the initial deposit for various projects covered by this
chapter shall be set forth in a schedule of deposits as adopted from time
to time by resolution of the Common Council. Said schedule shall
remain in effect and shall apply to all applicants until amended or
revised by subsequent resolution. In the event the City receives an
application for a project for which the amount of the initial deposit has
not been established on the schedule of deposits, the City shall
forthwith establish an amount of the initial deposit for such project, and
the City shall notify the applicant.
B. No monies deposited pursuant to this chapter shall be used by the City
to offset the City's general expenses of consultants' services nor for its
general administration expenses, except that any interest accrued shall
be paid to the City's general fund.
A. The City of Port Jervis shall charge a service fee of $25 when requested
to produce any of the following documents or reports from the indicated
departments:
§ 272-5 PORT JERVIS CODE § 280-1
243:254
§ 280-2. Fee for dishonored or returned check. [Amended 2-26-2007
by L.L. No. 2-2007]
The fee for any check presented to the City of Port Jervis for payment of any
tax, water rent, fee or service that is dishonored or returned by a bank for
insufficient funds or otherwise shall be $20. The payment of this charge and
the original amount of the payment must be made by cash, certified check
or bank check.
§ 280-3. Payment; receipt required.
§ 280-4. Recreation fees. [Added 3-14-2005 by L.L. No. 1-2005]
(1) A street report from the Director of Public Works.
(2) A certificate of occupancy letter, floodplain certification and/or
violation search from the Building Official.
(3) Any fingerprinting service for any application, other than a permit
to be issued by the City, for each set requested. This fee will be
waived for residents of the City of Port Jervis upon proof of
residency.
(4) Requests for Fire Department violation search.
B. Tax searches.
(1) Fee charges for tax searches on parcels of property within the City
of Port Jervis: $100 (effective January 15, 2016). [Amended
12-14-2015]
(2) A set of delinquent tax lists for county, City and School taxes will be
printed and supplied to any party requesting such at the fee of $75.
Said lists will not be updateable and are not certified for use in real
estate or title transactions as a substitute for a full tax search.
[Added 9-2-2015]
C. Notary service. [Added 12-10-2012]
(1) The City of Port Jervis elects to establish a fee for notarization of
documents by City staff for nonresidents of the City of Port Jervis of
$5 per notarization. This fee is to be effective January 1, 2013.
(2) Proof of residency within the City limits will be required for City
residents to receive free notary service.
A. All fees imposed by this chapter shall be paid to the City Clerk-
Treasurer's office.
B. No document for which a fee is imposed by this chapter shall be
provided unless and until a receipt for the fees is attached to the
application.
§ 280-1 BURIALS § 280-4
243:255
A. Legislative findings. The Common Council of the City of Port Jervis
hereby finds that there is a present need for park and recreational
facilities in the City and the maintenance and expansion of existing
facilities, based on projected population growth to which all residential
construction will contribute. The Common Council has determined that
a system of parks and recreational facilities to meet the needs of the
residents of the City is preferable. Therefore, the Common Council
determines that it is a proper case that each new residential dwelling
contribute recreation fees. The Common Council determines that the
provisions of this section are consistent with the purposes of General
City Law § 33 and that to the extent, if any, that this section may
hereinafter be determined to be inconsistent, this section shall, as
provided in Article IX of the New York State Constitution and the
Municipal Home Rule Law, supersede such provisions in reference to
the City of Port Jervis.
B. There is hereby imposed a fee in lieu of parkland contribution to be
assessed upon real property in the City of Port Jervis on which new
residential building construction takes place. Such fees shall be levied
and collected in accordance with this section. Such fees shall be called
"recreation fees." The obligation to pay such fees shall be a lien against
the property which shall attach to the new construction as of the time of
approval and shall be satisfied as hereinafter provided. All moneys
collected pursuant to this section shall be used by the City exclusively
for park, playground, and recreational purposes, including the
compensation of employees and the acquisition of property within the
City of Port Jervis.
C. The City of Port Jervis from time to time shall establish the amount of
such fees by resolution of the Common Council. At least once a year, at
the time of the reorganizational meeting, the Common Council shall
consider the adequacy, sufficiency and fairness of the fees to be
charged.
D. Collection of fees.
(1) Each subdivision plat or site plan hereinafter approved shall
contain a note indicating that any property on which new buildings
may be constructed shall be subject to the lien of recreational fees
to be calculated on the number of new dwelling units created.
(2) At the time of issuance of building permits, the applicant shall pay,
in addition to such other fees that may be due, the recreation fees
in the amount of $500 per new residential dwelling unit.
(3) In the event that such fee is not paid at the time of issuance of the
building permit, the amount of such fee shall remain a lien against
the property and shall accrue interest from such time at the rate of
not less than 9% or the judgment rate then current, whichever shall
be greater. No City official shall issue a certificate of occupancy or
other report, certificate, consent or approval concerning such
§ 280-4 PORT JERVIS CODE § 280-4
243:256
§ 280-5. Building permit fee. [Added 2-26-2007 by L.L. No. 2-2007]
Value of Work Fee
$1.00 to $499.00 $20.00
$500.00 to $1,999.99 $20.00 plus $2.50 per each
$100.00 or fraction thereof over
$500.00
$2,000.00 to $24,999.99 $65.00 plus $7.00 per each
$1,000.00 or fraction thereof
over $2,000.00
$25,000.00 to $49,999.99 $230.00 plus $5.00 per each
$1,000.00 or fraction thereof
over $25,000.00
$50,000.00 to $99,999.99 $400.00 plus $4.00 per each
$1,000.00 or fraction thereof
over $50,000.00
$100,000.00 to unlimited $650.00 plus $3.00 per each
$1,000.00 or fraction thereof
over $100,000.00
property unless such official has determined that the fees required
hereby have been paid, that the parcel existed prior to the date of
this section, that the parcel is shown on a plat or site plan approved
prior to the date of this section or that the property is otherwise
exempt from this section.
E. Exemptions. The Common Council may, by resolution, exempt any
property from payment of the recreation fees required by this section
upon a determination that the property owner has dedicated or donated
to the City property of equal or greater value than the estimated
recreation fees which would otherwise be payable or where a residence
has been destroyed by fire or other catastrophe and a new residence
will be constructed. The Common Council's determination shall be final.
F. The neglect or failure of the City to collect such recreational fees at the
time when such fees are due shall not waive the City's right to collect
such fees, together with interest thereon.
G. In the event that the Common Council determines such fees are due and
owing but have not been paid, the Common Council shall, after notice to
the property owner and the provision of an opportunity to be heard,
assess such recreational fees, together with interest and costs related
to such assessment, against such real property. Notice by certified mail
to the address shown on the City's latest assessment roll at least 10
days prior to the date of the hearing shall be deemed good and
sufficient notice. Such assessment shall be levied on the annual state,
county and town real property tax bill.
§ 280-4 BURIALS § 280-6
243:257
§ 280-6. Demolition permit fee. [Added 2-26-2007 by L.L. No.
2-2007]
The fee for all demolition permits will be computed as set forth in § 280-5
above (i.e., fee calculated based on value of work just as for building
permits).
§ 280-7. Fee for certificate of occupancy or certificate of
compliance. [Added 2-26-2007 by L.L. No. 2-2007]
Value of New Construction or
Alteration Fee
Up to $10,000.00 or an apartment $10.00
Up to $20,000.00 $20.00
Up to $50,000.00 $30.00
Up to $100,000.00 $40.00
Up to $150,000.00 $50.00
Over $150,000.00 $75.00
§ 280-8. Other building, zoning and planning fees. [Added
2-26-2007 by L.L. No. 2-2007; amended 8-23-2010; 10-25-2010;
5-22-2017 by L.L. No. 8-2017]
Service Fees
Sign permit $50
Reclamation fee for sign removed by City $25 per sign
Mailing lists of property owners for
planning and zoning applications
$25
Record search for lot coverage
information
$50
Combined mailing list and record search
where the lot coverage information is the
same as the mailing list
$50
Combined mailing list and record search
where the lot coverage information is
different from the mailing list
$40 for lot coverage information
and $25 for mailing list
Application for Senior Citizen Affordable
Housing District
$500
Inspections by Building Official,
Department of Social Services or other
agency
$100 for initial inspection and
$75 for each additional
inspection; $20 will be retained
by the City in the case of
canceled inspections
Copy of Zoning Map $5
§ 280-6 PORT JERVIS CODE § 280-8
243:258
Service Fees
Zoning Board of Appeals $150 minimum
Planning Board $150 minimum
Planning Board application withdrawal
fee
10% of application fee or $150,
whichever is greater
Zoning Board application withdrawal fee 10% of application fee or $150,
whichever is greater
Planning Board notice publication fees
and Zoning Board of Appeals notice
publication fees
All costs to be paid by the
applicant or applicants
Planning Board and Zoning Board of
Appeals notice mailing fees
To be paid by the applicant or
applicants
§ 280-9. City Code Fee Schedule. [Added 2-26-2007 by L.L. No.
2-2007; amended 5-26-2009 by L.L. No. 5-2009; 10-25-2010;
6-27-2011; 10-15-2013; 12-9-2013 by L.L. No. 9-2013; 1-1-2019]
Section Fee For Amount
Marriage ceremony fee At least one party is
City resident: no fee
At least one party is
NYS resident: $50
Both parties are not
NYS residents: $100
Marriage license $40 fee set by NYS
Certified copy birth/death/
marriage
$10 a copy fee set by
NYS
Fee for notary noncity
resident
$5 per notarization
Delinquent tax list $75, effective 9-2-2015
Tax search fee $150, effective
4-1-2018
Parking permit December 1 to
April 1
$40 before December 1
$100 after December 1
Daily use pass for restaurant/
bars/hotel
$1 daily
Municipal violation search
(Building Department)
$150
§ 142-11A Copying records (FOIL
requests)
$0.25 per page for
photocopies not
exceeding nine inches
by 14 inches
§ 280-8 BURIALS § 280-9
243:259
Section Fee For Amount
Alarm business license $75 per year
215-9A Domestic animal license
Each spayed or neutered dog
or cat
$10
Each unspayed or unneutered
dog or cat
$20
Purebred license for more
than 25 dogs or cats
$100
215-9H Impounded dog release, first
offense
$275
Impounded dog release,
subsequent offenses for the
same dog
$275 plus an additional
$25 for each
subsequent impound
215-30B Application for dangerous dog
license
$50
1 dangerous dog $100 per year
2 dangerous dogs $250 per year
3 dangerous dogs $500 per year
220-7A Auction license $100
220-22A Auctioneer license $100
231-16 Operating permit inspection $100
Fire safety inspection -
commercial
$125
Fire alarm inspection $100
Fire sprinkler inspection $100
Kitchen hood system $100
267-16 Electricians licenses
Master Electrician Class A
Initital fee $100
Renewal fees $100
If continually licensed
prior to June 27, 2011
$100
Port Jervis residents $200
Orange County, New
York, residents
$300
New York State
residents
$400
Out-of-state residents $500
§ 280-9 PORT JERVIS CODE § 280-9
243:260
Section Fee For Amount
Master Electrician Class B
Initital fee $100
Renewal fees $100
If continually licensed
prior to June 27, 2011
$100
Port Jervis residents $200
Orange County, New
York, residents
$300
New York State
residents
$400
Out-of-state residents $500
Master Electrician Class C
Initital fee $100
Renewal fees $100
If continually licensed
prior to June 27, 2011
$100
Port Jervis residents $200
Orange County, New
York, residents
$300
New York State
residents
$400
Out-of-state residents $500
Special Electrician
Initital fee $100
Renewal fees $100
If continually licensed
prior to June 27, 2011
$100
Port Jervis residents $200
Orange County, New
York, residents
$300
New York State
residents
$400
Out-of-state residents $500
267-18B Subsequent electrical
examinations
$50
267-25B(1) One-time electrician's license 1% of the estimated
cost of work or $500,
whichever is greater
§ 280-9 BURIALS § 280-9
243:261
Section Fee For Amount
280-4 Recreation fee new
construction
$500
288-12B Floodplain development
permit application
$100; plus costs
necessary for review,
inspection and approval
(deposit of no more
than $500 for
additional costs)
300-4 Games of chance license $50
403-8 Peddler's permit
Annual peddler's permit $1,500
City fire parade permit $100
410-23 Plumber's examination $100
Subsequent examinations $50 each
410-29A Renewal of plumber's
certificate of competency
If continually licensed
prior to June 27, 2011
$100
Port Jervis residents $200
Orange County, New
York, residents
$300
New York State
residents
$400
Out-of-state residents $500
410-31 Replacement of lost plumber's
license
$5
410-32A(1) One-time plumber's license 1% of the estimated
cost of work or $500,
whichever is greater
445-7B Sewer permit and inspection $50
451-4B Shopping cart recovery $10 per cart
457-15B Garbage collection permit for
nonmunicipal collectors
$1,000 per year
479-10 Taxi driver's license or
renewal
$50, plus processing
fees
479-17 Taxi license or renewal $100 per vehicle, plus
processing fees
479-24C Duplicate taxi/driver's license
or permit
$20
486-4 Restricted towing license $50
§ 280-9 PORT JERVIS CODE § 280-9
243:262
Section Fee For Amount
486-5A Unrestricted towing license $150 per year
520-19 Wireless telecommunications
application
$5,000; extension/
renewal: $2,500
535-34C(3) Application for Senior Citizen
Affordable Housing District
See § 280-8
535-43K(4)(c) Reclamation fee for sign
removed by City
See § 280-8
535-72J Various functions and services See §§ 280-5 to 280-8
535-72M Inspections See § 280-8
A615-10B Use of fire hydrant $100 minimum
§ 280-10. Fees authorized to be set by resolution. [Added 2-26-2007
by L.L. No. 2-2007]
Fees charged by the City of Port Jervis may be established or amended by
the Common Council by resolution from time to time.
§ 280-11. Building Department review fees. [Added 9-22-2008]
An escrow account is to be established to cover review fees at the time of
application.
New Construction and/or Additions
(addition space only)
Size
(square feet) Fee
Less than 5,000 $2,000
5,000 to 10,000 $2,500
10,000 to 20,000 $3,500
20,000 to 50,000 $10,000
Above 50,000 $15,000
Alterations/Renovations (altered space)
with Change of Occupancy
Size
(square feet) Fee
Less than 5,000 $2,000
5,000 to 10,000 $3,000
10,000 to 20,000 $5,000
20,000 to 50,000 $7,500
§ 280-9 BURIALS § 280-11
243:263
Alterations/Renovations (altered space)
with Change of Occupancy
Size
(square feet) Fee
Above 50,000 $10,000
Alterations/Renovations (altered space)
with No Change of Occupancy
Size
(square feet) Fee
Less than 5,000 $1,000
5,000 to 10,000 $1,500
10,000 to 20,000 $2,000
20,000 to 50,000 $3,000
Above 50,000 $5,000
§ 280-12. Park use fees. [Added 10-18-2009]
Fees for use of Riverside Park are:
§ 280-13. Parking fees. [Added 5-28-2013]
Fees for parking shall be as follows:
A. Fifty people or less: $50.
B. Fifty-one to 75 people: $75.
C. More than 75 people: $100.
A. West End Beach.
(1) Parking of a vehicle at West End Beach by City staff for
nonresidents of the City of Port Jervis: $5 per car. This fee is to be
effective June 1, 2013.
(2) Proof of residency within the City limits will be required for City
residents to receive free parking.
B. Overnight parking. [Added 12-14-2015]
(1) The City shall immediately have the right to permit hotels, motels,
restaurants, bars, microbreweries, microdistilleries, brew pubs,
breweries, wineries and tasting rooms, as well as other
establishments selling beers, wines and liquors to secure from the
City of Port Jervis and distribute to customers of these
establishments one-night parking passes to permit customers/
§ 280-11 PORT JERVIS CODE § 280-13
243:264
§ 280-14. Fees for marriages performed by Mayor. [Added
10-15-2013]
§ 280-15. Fees for vacant and abandoned buildings. [Added
8-11-2014]
The fees set forth in § 415-10 shall be changed according to the following
schedule:
patrons to park overnight in City-owned parking lots under the
previous rules/regulations/legislation whereby the City established
annual overnight parking permits for a portion of each calendar
year. The administration of these one-night/overnight parking
passes shall be under the jurisdiction of the City Clerk-Treasurer's
office in conjunction with the office of the Mayor and the Port Jervis
Police Department.
(2) The fee to be charged for a daily overnight parking pass shall be $1.
[Added 12-28-2015]
A. Fees for marriages performed by the Mayor of the City of Port Jervis
shall be as follows:
(1) Ceremony fee if at least one party is a City resident: $0.
(2) Ceremony fee if at least one party is a New York State resident:
$50.
(3) Ceremony fee if both parties are residents of another state/country:
$100.
B. The fee is to be collected upon verification of scheduling and/or before
the ceremony by the City Clerk/Treasurer.
A. The initial fee shall be increased from $250 to $1,200.
B. The fee in § 415-10A(1) shall be increased to $2,200; A(2) to $3,200;
A(3) to $4,200; A(4) to $5,200; A(5) to $6,200; A(6) to $7,200; A(7) to
$8,200; A(8) to $9,200; and A(9) to $10,200.
C. In addition, the City may add interest to any unpaid fees, monthly, at the
maximum legal rate permitted by law, in the event fees are not received
within 30 days after they are due.
§ 280-13 BURIALS § 280-16
243:265
§ 280-16. Parking permit and Metro North parking rates. [Added
7-14-2014 by L.L. No. 9-2014]
Proposed fee schedule for parking permits and Metro North
parking:
Suggested Fee 2 Vehicles at 1 address
12-month $240 $350
6-month N/A
3-month N/A
1-month N/A
Metro North Parking Rates:
Permits Base Fee
12-month $235
6-month $137
3-month $74
1-month N/A
§ 280-17. Waivers. [Added 11-28-2016 by L.L. No. 16-2016]
From time to time, for good cause or reason, the Common Council has been
asked to waive fees set, established or amended by the Council set forth
in Chapter 280 of the Port Jervis Code or elsewhere within the Code. The
Common Council may waive any such fees previously set, established or
amended by a majority vote of the Council upon proper request for waiver
based upon an appropriate or equitable reason or reasons as determined by
the Common Council in its sole discretion from time to time.
Chapter 282
FILM AND VIDEO PRODUCTIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fees — See Ch. 280.
Noise — See Ch. 381.
Parks and recreation — See Ch. 389.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 398.
Streets, sidewalks and public property — See
Ch. 464.
Zoning — See Ch. 535.
§ 282-1. Legislative intent.
The City has experienced an increase in requests from production
companies to utilize City properties and facilities for filming purposes. This
§ 280-16 PORT JERVIS CODE § 282-1
243:266
chapter is intended to establish guidelines for filming within the City and to
create a consistent approach to applications for filming.
§ 282-2. Use of City facilities and/or property.
A. No commercial, movie, television program, documentary or similar
audiovisual production or any portion thereof shall be filmed,
videotaped or recorded in any media format or otherwise made on any
public property in the City of Port Jervis, including but not limited to
streets, sidewalks, parks and buildings, or the waters of City of Port
Jervis without first obtaining a permit from the City Council. A permit
shall be required for the running of cable, the placing or storing of
equipment of any kind, the parking of vehicles or any other film-related
activity on any public property or any other use of public property for
the purpose of making audiovisual productions.
B. Filming shall be permitted subject to the following conditions:
(1) Filming shall not be conducted at the same location for more than
30 calendar days within any twelve-month period.
(2) Filming shall not be conducted at the same location within 14 days
of another filming.
(3) No applicant shall allow any filming for which a permit has been
issued to be conducted prior to 7:00 a.m. or after 10:00 p.m. unless
expressly approved by the City Council.
(4) No applicant shall allow equipment used in connection with
permitted filming, including but not limited to lights, generators
and related equipment, to be set up or operated at the location
contained in the permit application prior to 7:00 a.m. or after 10:00
p.m. unless otherwise expressly approved by the City Council.
(5) The City Council may, in its discretion, waive any of the restrictions
in this subsection and shall be permitted to impose reasonable
conditions in doing so.
C. Application for a permit shall be submitted to the City Council on a form
to be provided by the City Clerk.
D. Permit applications must be submitted at least 30 days prior to the date
of any on-site activity in connection with filming is commenced.
E. The City Council shall have the authority to approve or disapprove an
application for a permit and to establish such conditions for filming as
deemed necessary to protect the health, safety and welfare of the
residents of the City of Port Jervis. The City Council may also extend the
hours of filming on public property, subject to any conditions and
additional fees deemed necessary and appropriate.
F. A certificate of insurance must be submitted with the application,
naming the City of Port Jervis as an additional insured and in
§ 282-1 BURIALS § 282-2
243:267
§ 282-3. Filming on private property.
§ 282-4. Fees.
compliance with other conditions established by the City Council in the
following minimum amounts:
(1) Property damage: $2,000,000 per individual; $2,000,000 per
occurrence.
(2) Personal injury: $2,000,000 per individual; $2,000,000 per
occurrence.
G. Security of the site shall be the responsibility of the person or entity
that will be conducting the filming.
A. Filming shall not be conducted at the same location for more than 30
calendar days within any twelve-month period.
B. Filming shall not be conducted at the same location within 14 days of
another filming.
C. No applicant shall allow any filming to be conducted prior to 7:00 a.m.
or after 10:00 p.m.
D. No applicant shall allow equipment used in connection with permitted
filming, including but not limited to lights, generators and related
equipment, to be set up or operated at the location contained in the
permit application prior to 7:00 a.m. or after 10:00 p.m. unless
otherwise expressly approved by the City Council.
E. Travel on local streets to the site is restricted to 7:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m.
F. The property must be of adequate size.
G. All vehicles associated with the filming must be contained on the site or
arrangements made to lawfully park vehicles off site.
H. Security of the filming location shall be the responsibility of the person
or entity conducting the filming and the owner of the property on which
the filming will occur.
A. Fees shall be adopted by resolution of the City Council for:
(1) Filming by or for a nonprofit organization or the filming of a
documentary, for each day, on public property.
(2) Filming by a production company for a commercial for a profitmaking
entity, for each day, on either private or public property.
B. The schedule of fees, once adopted by the City Council, will be available
for inspection in the office of the City Clerk. The City Council shall be
permitted to raise the level of any fee due under this chapter when the
circumstances warrant.
§ 282-2 PORT JERVIS CODE § 282-5
243:268
§ 282-5. Penalties for offenses.
Chapter 283
FINES
§ 283-1. Modification by Common Council resolution.
Wherever a fine or charge is established by the Common Council of the City
of Port Jervis under any law, resolution, statute, regulation or provision in
the City of Port Jervis Code and Charter, it is hereby determined that said
fine or charge may be changed or modified from time to time by a resolution
or resolutions of the Port Jervis Common Council.
Chapter 285
FIREWORKS
§ 285-1. Purpose.
§ 285-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
A. Any person who violates the provisions set forth in this chapter shall be
subject to a fine of not more than $1,000 per day for each day that the
violation continues and/or imprisonment not to exceed 15 days.
B. The imposition of such penalty shall not be the City's exclusive remedy
in the event of a violation of this chapter. The City may pursue any and
all other legal remedies available in connection with any violation of
this chapter.
C. Notwithstanding any section of this chapter, no applicant who has been
previously convicted of a violation of this chapter shall be granted a
permit hereunder for a period of 18 months from the date of such
conviction.
A. This chapter is designed to promote the health, safety and general
welfare of the people of the City of Port Jervis by imposing regulations
to help ensure the safe conduct of outdoor fireworks displays within the
City.
B. This chapter is enacted pursuant to the authority granted by Article 405
of the Penal Law of the State of New York, the Fire Code of the State of
New York and NFPA 1123, Code for Outdoor Fireworks Display, and is
subject to all of the conditions and provisions contained in said laws and
codes, as may be amended from time to time.
§ 282-5 FINES § 285-2
283:269
ASSISTANT — A person who works under the direction of the operator to
put on a public fireworks display.
BODY — A municipality, school district, private club, association or
organization of individuals.
FIREWORKS — Firecrackers or other combustible or explosive of like
construction, or any preparation containing explosive or inflammable
compounds or any tablets or other device commonly used and sold as
fireworks containing nitrates, chlorates, oxalates, sulphides of lead, barium,
antimony, arsenic, mercury, nitroglycerine, phosphorus or any compound
containing any of the same or other explosives, or any substance or
substances or article prepared for the purpose of producing a visible or an
audible effect by combustion, explosion, deflagration or detonation, or other
device containing any explosive.
HIGHWAY — Any public street, road, highway or alley, or any private road
or street.
OPERATOR — The person with overall responsibility for safety and the
setting up and discharging of a public fireworks display.
PERMIT — The written authorization of the permit authority granted to any
body to conduct a public fireworks display.
PUBLIC FIREWORKS DISPLAY — Any outdoor display of fireworks
performed in a manner to be viewed by the general public.
SPONSOR — The person who exercises general control over the
arrangements for the public fireworks display. The sponsor and the operator
may sometimes be the same person.
§ 285-3. Public displays.
A. Administration and enforcement authority. The City of Port Jervis is
authorized to grant and issue a permit for the public display of
fireworks and to take all such actions as are necessary for the proper
execution of its authority. The enforcement of the provisions provided
herein shall be by the City of Port Jervis Police Department, Port Jervis
Building Inspector, the New York State Police, and any other agents of
the City and State of New York as may be from time to time authorized
by any provision of law.
B. Permit.
(1) No public fireworks display shall be conducted in the City of Port
Jervis unless a valid permit for such a display has been issued by
the City.
(2) There shall be a fee for permits issued under this chapter. The fee
shall be set by the City Council of the City of Port Jervis from time
to time by resolution. The City Council of the City of Port Jervis
reserves the right to waive the fee upon a showing that it is in the
best interest of the public.
§ 285-2 PORT JERVIS CODE § 285-3
283:270
(3) Any permit issued under this chapter shall require a deposit for the
purpose of maintenance of the City property. The deposit shall be
set by the City Council of the City of Port Jervis from time to time by
resolution.
(4) Permits shall be obtained after completion of the application as set
forth by the City of Port Jervis. The application for a permit must be
submitted at least 60 days prior to the date the display is to take
place.
(5) The City of Port Jervis may reject the application if it finds the
proposed display to be contrary to the public health, safety or
welfare.
(6) Application for such a permit shall be made to the Building
Department of the City of Port Jervis on the form provided by it. The
application shall set forth the following information:
(a) The name of the person or entity promoting the fireworks
display and the name of the person actually to be in charge of
the display.
(b) The date and time of day at which the fireworks display is to be
held, including two additional dates in case of inclement
weather.
(c) The exact location planned for the display.
(d) The age, experience and physical characteristics of operators.
(e) The inventory pull sheet listing all types and quantities of
pyrotechnic devices being used in the display. The inventory
pull sheet shall also provide information regarding the blast
radius and fallout zone for the devices that will be used.
(f) The manner and place of storage of such fireworks prior to the
display.
(g) A diagram, with distances shown in feet, of the grounds on
which the fireworks display is to be held showing the point at
which the fireworks are to be discharged, the location of all
buildings, highways and other lines of communication, the
lines behind which the audience will be restrained and the
location of all nearby trees, telegraph or telephone lines or
other overhead obstructions. The diagram shall also show all
necessary emergency access points to the proposed site.
(h) A copy of the appropriate licenses required by New York State
and the federal government or appropriate federal agencies to
operate the display including, but not limited to:
§ 285-3 FINES § 285-3
283:271
[1] A copy of the operator's United States Department of
Transportation hazardous material certificate of
registration;
[2] A copy of the operator's United States Treasury
Department, Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms
explosives permit;
[3] A copy of the operator's New York State Department of
Labor, Division of Safety and Health certificate of
competence;
[4] Copies of the licenses of the individual assistants who will
assist the operator in execution of the fireworks display;
and
[5] Copies of necessary licenses, approvals and notification
verification from the Federal Aviation Agency.
(i) All operators shall supply a photocopy of their licenses to deal
in explosives, issued by the New York State Department of
Labor.
(j) A copy of the promoter's or sponsor's insurance with the City of
Port Jervis named as an additional insured.
(k) A fully explained plan for the setup of the display, cleanup of
the display, and an emergency plan in the event of an
emergency related to the display.
(l) Such other information as the City of Port Jervis may deem
necessary to protect persons or property.
(7) Upon receipt of an application for a permit, the City Council may
make an investigation of the site of the proposed display for the
purpose of determining whether the regulations provided for
herein have been complied with.
(8) No permit granted hereunder shall be transferable, and any such
permit shall apply only to the fireworks display for which it is
granted.
(9) Denial of an application for a permit shall be in writing, addressed
to the sponsor of the permit, setting forth the reasons for such
denial. Such denial must be provided within 10 days of the
determination by the City Council.
C. Regulations.
(1) Any person or entity issued a permit hereunder shall comply with
these regulations, New York State Penal Law Article 405 and shall
comply with the standards and guidelines contained in National
§ 285-3 PORT JERVIS CODE § 285-3
283:272
Fire Protection Association (NFPA) Standard 1123 regarding
outdoor display of fireworks.
(2) Any applicant for a permit to conduct a fireworks display shall send
a copy of the application to the City of Port Jervis Building
Department, Building Inspector, the Chief of the Fire Department
and the City Council. All parties shall be notified of the display
location, date and time if a permit is issued, and the Fire
Department and other officers and employees of the City of Port
Jervis shall be permitted on the property for inspection prior to and
following the event.
(3) Each sponsor and operator to whom a permit has been issued shall
be responsible for reimbursing the City of Port Jervis for personnel
and equipment costs for inspections. The City Council of the City of
Port Jervis reserves the right to waive the fee if it determines such a
waiver is in the best interest of the public.
(4) The operator shall have all permits issued available for examination
by the City of Port Jervis, its employees and officers, or the City of
Port Jervis Police Department and Building Inspector at the time of
the display.
D. Prohibitions.
(1) No person or other legal entity shall conduct an indoor fireworks
display in the City of Port Jervis.
(2) No public fireworks display shall be conducted in the City of Port
Jervis on a lot containing a one- or two-family home as the principal
use.
(3) No public fireworks display shall be conducted prior to 8:00 p.m. or
after 10:00 p.m.
(4) No public fireworks display may last for longer than 45 minutes.
E. Notice. Any applicant for a permit to conduct a fireworks display shall
give proper public notice by placing an advertisement in the City's
official newspaper (not a legal notice) and by posting notification in at
least five public places in the City, one of which shall be the Official City
Bulletin Board located at the City Hall, no more than 20 days and no
less than five days prior to the display.
F. Insurance. No permit shall be issued until an indemnity insurance
policy with liability coverage and indemnity protection naming the City
of Port Jervis as an insured and indemnified party in a sum to be fixed by
the City of Port Jervis, but in no case less than $3,000,000 is provided
by the applicant.
G. Exceptions. Fireworks, as regulated herein, shall not include devices
that ignite or explode and are commonly used for purposes other than
§ 285-3 FINES § 285-3
283:273
§ 285-4. Use of private fireworks.
the display of fireworks for recreational purposes, including, but not
limited to:
(1) Flare guns, intended to signal distress;
(2) Road flares, designed for road safety;
(3) Firearms.
H. Penalties for offenses.
(1) Any person or persons or entities committing an offense against
this chapter or any section or provision thereof shall be subject to
the penalties imposed by §§ 270.00 and 405.05 of the Penal Law,
including the provisions relating to the seizure of fireworks
contained in § 405.05.
(2) Notwithstanding a conviction for an offense against any provisions,
a person or entity committing an offense under this chapter shall be
subject to revocation of any permit herein granted without
reimbursement of fees paid thereof.
(3) In addition to any fine or imprisonment imposed for a conviction of
an offense to this chapter, each such offense shall be subject to a
civil penalty of at least $1,000, not to exceed $2,500, to be
recovered in an action or proceeding or pursuant to an order on
consent with the defendant in a court of competent jurisdiction.
I. Fees. The City Council may from time to time approve by simple
resolution the fees and deposits to be charged pursuant to this chapter.
Such fees shall be adequate for recovery by the City of its costs
incurred in the administration and enforcement of this chapter.
J. Conflicting standards. Where the requirements of this chapter impose a
different restriction or requirement than imposed by other sections of
the Code of the City of Port Jervis, the City Law of the State of New York
or other applicable rules or regulations, the requirements of this
chapter shall prevail.
A. Offense. Except as herein otherwise provided, or except where a permit
is obtained pursuant to this chapter, any person who shall possess, use,
explode or cause to explode any fireworks or dangerous fireworks as
defined by § 270.00 of the Penal Law of the State of New York shall be
guilty of a violation of this chapter.
B. Penalty for offenses. Any person or persons or entities committing an
offense against this chapter or any section or provision thereof shall be
subject to the penalties imposed by §§ 270.00 and 405.05 of the Penal
Law, including the provisions relating to the seizure of fireworks
contained in § 405.05.
§ 285-3 PORT JERVIS CODE § 285-4
283:274
Chapter 288
FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Zoning — See Ch. 535.
§ 285-4 FINES § 285-4
283:275

ARTICLE I
Statutory Authorization and Purpose
§ 288-1. Findings.
The Common Council of the City of Port Jervis finds that the potential and/
or actual damages from flooding and erosion may be a problem to the
residents of the City of Port Jervis and that such damages may include:
destruction or loss of private and public housing, damage to public facilities,
both publicly and privately owned, and injury to and loss of human life. In
order to minimize the threat of such damages and to achieve the purposes
and objectives hereinafter set forth, this chapter is adopted.
§ 288-2. Purpose.
It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety, and
general welfare, and to minimize public and private losses due to flood
conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to:
§ 288-3. Objectives.
The objectives of this chapter are to:
A. Regulate uses which are dangerous to health, safety and property due
to water or erosion hazards, or which result in damaging increases in
erosion or in flood heights or velocities;
B. Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve
such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial
construction;
C. Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and
natural protective barriers which are involved in the accommodation of
floodwaters;
D. Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may
increase erosion or flood damages;
E. Regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert
floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands; and
F. Qualify for and maintain participation in the National Flood Insurance
Program.
A. Protect human life and health;
B. Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects;
C. Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding
and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;
D. Minimize prolonged business interruptions;
§ 288-1 FINES § 288-3
283:277
E. Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas
mains, electric, telephone, sewer lines, streets and bridges located in
areas of special flood hazard;
F. Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and
development of areas of special flood hazard so as to minimize future
flood blight areas;
G. To provide that developers are notified that property is in an area of
special flood hazard; and
H. Ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard assume
responsibility for their actions.
§ 288-3 PORT JERVIS CODE § 288-3
283:278
ARTICLE II
Word Usage; Definitions
§ 288-4. Word usage.
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter
shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common
usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application.
§ 288-5. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
APPEAL — A request for a review of the local administrator's interpretation
of any provision of this chapter or a request for a variance.
AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING — A designated AO, AH or VO Zone on
a community's Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) with a one-percent-orgreater
annual chance of flooding to an average annual depth of one to
three feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path
of flooding is unpredictable and where velocity flow may be evident. Such
flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow.
AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD — The land in the floodplain within
a community subject to a one-percent-or-greater chance of flooding in any
given year. This area may be designated as Zone A, AE, AH, AO, A1-A30,
A99, V, VO, VE, or V1-V30. It is also commonly referred to as the base
floodplain or one-hundred-year floodplain. For purposes of this chapter, the
term "special flood hazard area (SFHA)" is synonymous in meaning with the
phrase "area of special flood hazard."
BASE FLOOD — The flood having a one-percent chance of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year.
BASEMENT — That portion of a building having its floor subgrade (below
ground level) on all sides.
BUILDING — See "structure."
CELLAR — Has the same meaning as "basement."
CRAWL SPACE — An enclosed area beneath the lowest elevated floor, 18
inches or more in height, which is used to service the underside of the
lowest elevated floor. The elevation of the floor of this enclosed area, which
may be of soil, gravel, concrete or other material, must be equal to or above
the lowest adjacent exterior grade. The enclosed crawl space area shall be
properly vented to allow for the equalization of hydrostatic forces which
would be experienced during periods of flooding.
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real
estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining,
dredging, filling, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of
equipment or materials.
§ 288-4 FINES § 288-5
283:279
ELEVATED BUILDING — A nonbasement building built, in the case of a
building in Zones A1-A30, AE, A, A99, AO, AH, B, C, X, or D, to have the top
of the elevated floor, or in the case of a building in Zones V1-30, VE, or V, to
have the bottom of the lowest horizontal structure member of the elevated
floor, elevated above the ground level by means of pilings, columns (posts
and piers), or shear walls parallel to the flow of the water and adequately
anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of the building during
a flood of up to the magnitude of the base flood. In the case of Zones
A1-A30, AE, A, A99, AO, AH, B, C, X, or D, "elevated building" also includes
a building elevated by means of fill or solid foundation perimeter walls with
openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movement of floodwaters.
In the case of Zones V1-V30, VE, or V, "elevated building" also includes
a building otherwise meeting the definition of "elevated building," even
though the lower area is enclosed by means of breakaway walls that meet
the federal standards.
FEDERAL EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY — The Federal agency
that administers the National Flood Insurance Program.
FLOOD or FLOODING —
FLOOD BOUNDARY AND FLOODWAY MAP (FBFM) — An official map of the
community published by the Federal Emergency Management Agency as
part of a riverine community's Flood Insurance Study. The FBFM delineates
a regulatory floodway along watercourses studied in detail in the Flood
Insurance Study.
FLOOD ELEVATION STUDY — An examination, evaluation and
determination of the flood hazards and, if appropriate, corresponding water
surface elevations, or an examination, evaluation and determination of
flood-related erosion hazards.
FLOOD HAZARD BOUNDARY MAP (FHBM) — An official map of a
community, issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, where
the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard have been designated as
Zone A but no flood elevations are provided.
A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of
normally dry land areas from:
(1) The overflow of inland or tidal waters;
The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters
from any source.
(2)
A.
Also the collapse or subsidence of land along the shore of a lake or
other body of water as a result of erosion or undermining caused by
waves or currents of water exceeding anticipated cyclical levels or
suddenly caused by an unusually high water level in a natural body of
water, accompanied by a severe storm, or by an unanticipated force of
nature, such as a flash flood or an abnormal tidal surge, or by some
similarly unusual and unforeseeable event which results in flooding as
defined in A(1) above.
B.
§ 288-5 PORT JERVIS CODE § 288-5
283:280
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM) — An official map of a community,
on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated both
the areas of special flood hazard and the risk premium zones applicable to
the community.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY — See "flood elevation study."
FLOODPLAIN or FLOOD-PRONE AREA — Any land area susceptible to
being inundated by water from any source. (See definition of "flooding.")
FLOODPROOFING — Any combination of structural and nonstructural
additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate
flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary
facilities, structures and their contents.
FLOODWAY — Has the same meaning as "regulatory floodway."
FUNCTIONALLY DEPENDENT USE — A use which cannot perform its
intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to
water, such as a docking or port facility necessary for the loading and
unloading of cargo or passengers, shipbuilding, and ship repair facilities.
The term does not include long-term storage, manufacturing, sales, or
service facilities.
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE — The highest natural elevation of the ground
surface, prior to construction, next to the proposed walls of a structure.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE — Any structure that is:
LOCAL ADMINISTRATOR — The person appointed by the community to
administer and implement this chapter by granting or denying development
permits in accordance with its provisions. This person is often the Building
Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing
maintained by the Department of the Interior) or preliminarily
determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the
requirements for individual listing on the National Register;
A.
Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior
as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic
district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify
as a registered historic district;
B.
Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states
with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the
Secretary of the Interior; or
C.
Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities
with historic preservation programs that have been certified either:
By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of
the Interior; or
(1)
Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved
programs.
(2)
D.
§ 288-5 FINES § 288-5
283:281
Inspector, Code Enforcement Officer, or employee of an engineering
department.
LOWEST FLOOR — Lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement or cellar). An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, usable
solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or storage in an area other
than a basement area is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided
that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of
the applicable nonelevation design requirements of this chapter.
MANUFACTURED HOME — A structure, transportable in one or more
sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used with
or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities.
The term does not include a "recreational vehicle."
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A parcel (or
contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home
lots for rent or sale.
MEAN SEA LEVEL — For purposes of the National Flood Insurance
Program, the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929, the North
American Vertical Datum of 1988 (NAVD 88), or other datum, to which base
flood elevations shown on a community's Flood Insurance Rate Map are
referenced.
MOBILE HOME — Has the same meaning as "manufactured home."
NEW CONSTRUCTION — Structures for which the start of construction
commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain management
regulation adopted by the community and includes any subsequent
improvement to such structure.
ONE-HUNDRED-YEAR FLOOD or 100-YEAR FLOOD — Has the same
meaning as "base flood."
PRINCIPALLY ABOVE GROUND — At least 51% of the actual cash value of
the structure, excluding land value, is above ground.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — A vehicle which is:
REGULATORY FLOODWAY — The channel of a river or other watercourse
and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge
the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation
more than a designated height as determined by the Federal Emergency
A. Built on a single chassis;
Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest
horizontal projections;
B.
Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-duty
truck; and
C.
Not designed primarily for use as a permanent dwelling but as
temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal
use.
D.
§ 288-5 PORT JERVIS CODE § 288-5
283:282
Management Agency in a flood insurance study or by other agencies as
provided in § 288-14B of this chapter.
START OF CONSTRUCTION — The date of permit issuance for new
construction and substantial improvements to existing structures, provided
that actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction rehabilitation,
addition placement, or other improvement is within 180 days after the date
of issuance. The actual start of construction means the first placement of
permanent construction of a building (including a manufactured home) on
a site, such as the pouring of a slab or footings, installation of pilings
or construction of columns. Permanent construction does not include land
preparation (such as, clearing, excavation, grading, or filling) or the
installation of streets or walkways, or excavation for a basement, footings,
piers or foundations, or the erection of temporary forms, or the installation
of accessory buildings such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling
units or not part of the main building. For a substantial improvement, the
actual "start of construction" means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling,
floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration
affects the external dimensions of the building.
STRUCTURE — A walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid
storage tank, that is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured
home.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE — Damage of any origin sustained by a structure
whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged condition
would equal or exceed 50% of the market value of the structure before the
damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Any reconstruction, rehabilitation,
addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals
or exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure before the start
of construction of the improvement. The term includes structures which
have incurred substantial damage, regardless of the actual repair work
performed. The term does not, however, include either:
VARIANCE — A grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter which
permits construction or use in a manner that would otherwise be prohibited
by this chapter.
Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations
of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which
have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which
are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or
A.
Any alteration of an historic structure, provided that the alteration
will not preclude the structure's continued designation as an historic
structure.
B.
§ 288-5 FINES § 288-5
283:283

ARTICLE III
General Provisions
§ 288-6. Applicability.
This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the
jurisdiction of the City of Port Jervis, Orange County.
§ 288-7. Basis for establishing areas of special flood hazard.
§ 288-8. Interpretation; conflict with other laws.
§ 288-9. Penalties for offenses.
No structure in an area of special flood hazard shall hereafter be
constructed, located, extended, converted, or altered and no land shall be
excavated or filled without full compliance with the terms of this chapter
and any other applicable regulations. Any infraction of the provisions of
this chapter by failure to comply with any of its requirements, including
infractions of conditions and safeguards established in connection with
conditions of the permit, shall constitute a violation. Any person who
A. The areas of special flood hazard for the City of Port Jervis, Community
Number 360976, are identified and defined on the following documents
prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency:
(1) Flood Insurance Rate Map Panel Numbers:
36071C0214E 36071C0218E 36071C0377E 36071C0381E
The effective date of which is August 3, 2009, and any
subsequent revisions to these map panels that do not affect areas
under our community's jurisdiction.
(2) A scientific and engineering report entitled "Flood Insurance Study,
Orange County, New York, All Jurisdictions" dated August 3, 2009.
B. The above documents are hereby adopted and declared to be a part of
this chapter. The Flood Insurance Study and/or maps are on file at the
Office of the City Clerk-Treasurer, 14-20 Hammond Street, Port Jervis,
New York 12771.
A. This chapter includes all revisions to the National Flood Insurance
Program through March 20, 1997, and shall supersede all previous laws
adopted for the purpose of flood damage prevention.
B. In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter
shall be held to be minimum requirements, adopted for the promotion
of the public health, safety, and welfare. Whenever the requirements of
this chapter are at variance with the requirements of any other lawfully
adopted rules, regulations, ordinances, or local laws, the most
restrictive, or that imposing the higher standards, shall govern.
§ 288-6 FINES § 288-9
283:285
violates this chapter or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall,
upon conviction thereof, be fined no more than $250 or imprisoned for not
more than 15 days or both. Each day of noncompliance shall be considered
a separate offense. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the City of
Port Jervis from taking such other lawful action as necessary to prevent
or remedy an infraction. Any structure found not compliant with the
requirements of this chapter for which the developer and/or owner has
not applied for and received an approved variance under Article VI will
be declared noncompliant and notification sent to the Federal Emergency
Management Agency.
§ 288-10. Warning and disclaimer of liability.
The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and
engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare
occasions. Flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes.
This chapter does not imply that land outside the area of special flood
hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or
flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the City
of Port Jervis, any officer or employee thereof, or the Federal Emergency
Management Agency, for any flood damages that result from reliance on this
chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder.
§ 288-9 PORT JERVIS CODE § 288-10
283:286
ARTICLE IV
Administration
§ 288-11. Designation of local administrator.
The Building Official is hereby appointed local administrator to administer
and implement this chapter by granting or denying floodplain development
permits in accordance with its provisions.
§ 288-12. Floodplain development permit.
§ 288-13. Application for permit.
The applicant shall provide the following information as appropriate.
Additional information may be required on the permit application form.
A. Purpose. A floodplain development permit is hereby established for all
construction and other development to be undertaken in areas of
special flood hazard in this community for the purpose of protecting its
citizens from increased flood hazards and ensuring that new
development is constructed in a manner that minimizes its exposure to
flooding. It shall be unlawful to undertake any development in an area
of special flood hazard, as shown on the Flood Insurance Rate Map
enumerated in § 288-7, without a valid floodplain development permit.
Application for a permit shall be made on forms furnished by the local
administrator and may include, but not be limited to, plans, in
duplicate, drawn to scale and showing the nature, location, dimensions,
and elevations of the area in question; existing or proposed structures,
fill, storage of materials, drainage facilities, and the location of the
foregoing.
B. Fees. All applications for a floodplain development permit shall be
accompanied by an application fee of $100. In addition, the applicant
shall be responsible for reimbursing the City of Port Jervis for any
additional costs necessary for review, inspection and approval of this
project. The local administrator may require a deposit of no more than
$500 to cover these additional costs.
A. The proposed elevation, in relation to mean sea level, of the lowest floor
(including basement or cellar) of any new or substantially improved
structure to be located in Zones A1-A30, AE or AH, or Zone A if base
flood elevation data are available. Upon completion of the lowest floor,
the permittee shall submit to the local administrator the as-built
elevation, certified by a licensed professional engineer or surveyor.
B. The proposed elevation, in relation to mean sea level, to which any new
or substantially improved nonresidential structure will be floodproofed.
Upon completion of the floodproofed portion of the structure, the
permittee shall submit to the local administrator the as-built
floodproofed elevation, certified by a professional engineer or surveyor.
§ 288-11 FINES § 288-13
283:287
§ 288-14. Duties and responsibilities of local administrator.
Duties of the local administrator shall include but not be limited to the
following.
C. A certificate from a licensed professional engineer or architect that any
utility floodproofing will meet the criteria in § 288-16C, Utilities.
D. A certificate from a licensed professional engineer or architect that any
nonresidential floodproofed structure will meet the floodproofing
criteria in § 288-18, Nonresidential, structures.
E. A description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or
relocated as a result of proposed development. Computations by a
licensed professional engineer must be submitted that demonstrate
that the altered or relocated segment will provide equal or greater
conveyance than the original stream segment. The applicant must
submit any maps, computations or other material required by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) to revise the
documents enumerated in § 288-7, when notified by the local
administrator, and must pay any fees or other costs assessed by FEMA
for this purpose. The applicant must also provide assurances that the
conveyance capacity of the altered or relocated stream segment will be
maintained.
F. A technical analysis, by a licensed professional engineer, if required by
the local administrator, which shows whether proposed development to
be located in an area of special flood hazard may result in physical
damage to any other property.
G. In Zone A, when no base flood elevation data are available from other
sources, base flood elevation data shall be provided by the permit
applicant for subdivision proposals and other proposed developments
(including proposals for manufactured home and recreational vehicle
parks and subdivisions) that are greater than either 50 lots or five
acres.
A. Permit application review. The local administrator shall conduct the
following permit application review before issuing a floodplain
development permit:
(1) Review all applications for completeness, particularly with the
requirements of § 288-13, Application for permit, and for
compliance with the provisions and standards of this chapter.
(2) Review subdivision and other proposed new development,
including manufactured home parks to determine whether
proposed building sites will be reasonably safe from flooding. If a
proposed building site is located in an area of special flood hazard,
all new construction and substantial improvements shall meet the
applicable standards of Article V, Construction Standards, and, in
particular § 288-15A, Subdivision proposals.
§ 288-13 PORT JERVIS CODE § 288-14
283:288
(3) Determine whether any proposed development in an area of special
flood hazard may result in physical damage to any other property
(e.g., stream bank erosion and increased flood velocities). The local
administrator may require the applicant to submit additional
technical analyses and data necessary to complete the
determination. If the proposed development may result in physical
damage to any other property or fails to meet the requirements of
Article V, Construction Standards, no permit shall be issued. The
applicant may revise the application to include measures that
mitigate or eliminate the adverse effects and resubmit the
application.
(4) Determine that all necessary permits have been received from
those governmental agencies from which approval is required by
state or federal law.
B. Use of other flood data.
(1) When the Federal Emergency Management Agency has designated
areas of special flood hazard on the community's Flood Insurance
Rate Map (FIRM) but has neither produced water surface elevation
data (These areas are designated Zone A or V on the FIRM.) nor
identified a floodway, the local administrator shall obtain, review
and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data
available from a federal, state or other source, including data
developed pursuant to § 288-13G, as criteria for requiring that new
construction, substantial improvements or other proposed posed
development meet the requirements of this chapter.
(2) When base flood elevation data are not available, the local
administrator may use flood information from any other
authoritative source, such as historical data, to establish flood
elevations within the areas of special flood hazard for the purposes
of this chapter.
C. Alteration of watercourses.
(1) Notification to adjacent communities and the New York State
Department of Environmental Conservation prior to permitting any
alteration or relocation of a water-course, and submittal of
evidence of such notification to the Regional Director, Region II,
Federal Emergency Management Agency.
(2) Determine that the permit holder has provided for maintenance
within the altered or relocated portion of said watercourse so that
the flood-carrying capacity is not diminished.
D. Construction stage.
(1) In Zones A1-A30, AE and AH, and also Zone A if base flood
elevation data are available, upon placement of the lowest floor or
completion of floodproofing of a new or substantially improved
§ 288-14 FINES § 288-14
283:289
structure, obtain from the permit holder a certification of the asbuilt
elevation of the lowest floor or floodproofed elevation, in
relation to mean sea level. The certificate shall be prepared by
or under the direct supervision of a licensed land surveyor or
professional engineer and certified by same. For manufactured
homes, the permit holder shall submit the certificate of elevation
upon placement of the structure on the site. A certificate of
elevation must also be submitted for a recreational vehicle if it
remains on a site for 180 consecutive days or longer (unless it is
fully licensed and ready for highway use).
(2) Any further work undertaken prior to submission and approval of
the certification shall be at the permit holder's risk. The local
administrator shall review all data submitted. Deficiencies detected
shall be cause to issue a stop-work order for the project unless
immediately corrected.
E. Inspections. The local administrator and/or the developer's engineer or
architect shall make periodic inspections at appropriate times
throughout the period of construction in order to monitor compliance
with permit conditions and enable said inspector to certify, if requested,
that the development is in compliance with the requirements of the
floodplain development permit and/or any variance provisions.
F. Stop-work orders.
(1) The local administrator shall issue or cause to be issued, a stopwork
order for any floodplain development found ongoing without a
development permit. Disregard of a stop-work order shall subject
the violator to the penalties described in § 288-9 of this chapter.
(2) The local administrator shall issue, or cause to be issued, a stopwork
order for any floodplain development found noncompliant
with the provisions of this chapter and/or the conditions of the
development permit. Disregard of a stop-work order shall subject
the violator to the penalties described in § 288-9 of this chapter.
G. Certificate of compliance.
(1) In areas of special flood hazard, as determined by documents
enumerated in § 288-7, it shall be unlawful to occupy or to permit
the use or occupancy of any building or premises, or both, or part
thereof hereafter created, erected, changed, converted or wholly or
partly altered or enlarged in its use or structure until a certificate
of compliance has been issued by the local administrator stating
that the building or land conforms to the requirements of this
chapter.
(2) A certificate of compliance shall be issued by the local
administrator upon satisfactory completion of all development in
areas of special flood hazard.
§ 288-14 PORT JERVIS CODE § 288-14
283:290
(3) Issuance of the certificate shall be based upon the inspections
conducted as prescribed in § 288-14E, Inspections, and/or any
certified elevations, hydraulic data, floodproofing, anchoring
requirements or encroachment analyses which may have been
required as a condition of the approved permit.
H. Information to be retained. The local administrator shall retain and
make available for inspection, copies of the following:
(1) Floodplain development permits and certificates of compliance;
(2) Certifications of as-built lowest floor elevations of structures,
required pursuant to § 288-14D(1) and (2), and whether or not the
structures contain a basement;
(3) Floodproofing certificates required pursuant to § 288-14D(1), and
whether or not the structures contain a basement;
(4) Variances issued pursuant to Article VI, Variance Procedure; and
(5) Notices required under sub-section § 288-14C, Alteration of
watercourses.
§ 288-14 FINES § 288-14
283:291

ARTICLE V
Construction Standards
§ 288-15. General standards.
The following standards apply to new development, including new and
substantially improved structures, in the areas of special flood hazard
shown on the Flood Insurance Rate Map designated in § 288-7.
A. Subdivision proposals. The following standards apply to all new
subdivision proposals and other proposed development in areas of
special flood hazard (including proposals for manufactured home and
recreational vehicle parks and subdivisions):
(1) Proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood
damage;
(2) Public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and
water systems shall be located and constructed so as to minimize
flood damage; and,
(3) Adequate drainage shall be provided to reduce exposure to flood
damage.
B. Encroachments.
(1) Within Zones A1-A30 and AE, on streams without a regulatory
floodway, no new construction, substantial improvements or other
development (including fill) shall be permitted unless:
(a) The applicant demonstrates that the cumulative effect of the
proposed development, when combined with all other existing
and anticipated development, will not increase the water
surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any
location; or
(b) The City of Port Jervis agrees to apply to the Federal
Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) for a conditional
FIRM revision, FEMA approval is received and the applicant
provides all necessary data, analyses and mapping and
reimburses the City of Port Jervis for all fees and other costs in
relation to the application. The applicant must also provide all
data, analyses and mapping and reimburse the City of Port
Jervis for all costs related to the final map revision.
(2) On streams with a regulatory floodway, as shown on the Flood
Boundary and Floodway Map or the Flood Insurance Rate Map
adopted in § 288-7, no new construction, substantial improvements
or other development in the floodway (including fill) shall be
permitted unless:
§ 288-15 FINES § 288-15
283:293
§ 288-16. Standards for all structures.
(a) A technical evaluation by a licensed professional engineer
shows that such an encroachment shall not result in any
increase in flood levels during occurrence of the base flood; or
(b) The City of Port Jervis agrees to apply to the Federal
Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) for a conditional
FIRM and floodway revision, FEMA approval is received and
the applicant provides all necessary data, analyses and
mapping and reimburses the City of Port Jervis for all fees and
other costs in relation to the application. The applicant must
also provide all data, analyses and mapping and reimburse the
City of Port Jervis for all costs related to the final map
revisions.
A. Anchoring. New structures and substantial improvement to structures
in areas of special flood hazard shall be anchored to prevent flotation,
collapse, or lateral movement during the base flood. This requirement is
in addition to applicable state and local anchoring requirements for
resisting wind forces.
B. Construction materials and methods.
(1) New construction and substantial improvements to structures shall
be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to
flood damage.
(2) New construction and substantial improvements to structures shall
be constructed using methods and practices that minimize flood
damage.
(3) Enclosed areas.
(a) For enclosed areas below the lowest floor of a structure within
Zones A1-A30, AE or AH, and also Zone A if base flood
elevation data are available, new and substantially improved
structures shall have fully enclosed areas below the lowest
floor that are useable solely for parking of vehicles, building
access or storage in an area other than a basement and which
are subject to flooding, designed to automatically equalize
hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the
entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this
requirement must either be certified by a licensed professional
engineer or architect or meet or exceed the following minimum
criteria:
[1] A minimum of two openings having a total net area of not
less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed
area subject to flooding; and
§ 288-15 PORT JERVIS CODE § 288-16
283:294
§ 288-17. Elevation of residential structures.
The following standards apply to new and substantially improved residential
structures located in areas of special flood hazard, in addition to the
requirements in § 288-15A, Subdivision proposals, and § 288-15B,
Encroachments, and § 288-16, Standards for all structures.
[2] The bottom of all such openings no higher than one foot
above the lowest adjacent finished grade.
(b) Openings may be equipped with louvers, valves, screens or
other coverings or devices provided they permit the automatic
entry and exit of floodwaters. Enclosed areas subgrade on all
sides are considered basements and are not permitted.
C. Utilities.
(1) New and replacement electrical equipment, heating, ventilating,
air conditioning, plumbing connections, and other service
equipment shall be located at or above the base flood elevation or
be designed to prevent water from entering and accumulating
within the components during a flood and to resist hydrostatic and
hydrodynamic loads and stresses. Electrical wiring and outlets,
switches, junction boxes and panels shall be elevated to or above
the base flood elevation unless they conform to the appropriate
provisions of the electrical part of the Building Code of New York
State or the Residential Code of New York State for location of such
items in wet locations;
(2) New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system;
(3) New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed
to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters. Sanitary sewer
and storm drainage systems for buildings that have openings below
the base flood elevation shall be provided with automatic backflow
valves or other automatic backflow devices that are installed in
each discharge line passing through a building's exterior wall; and
(4) On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid
impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding.
A. Within Zones A1-A30, AE and AH and also Zone A if base flood elevation
data are available, new construction and substantial improvements
shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to or above
two feet above the base flood elevation.
B. Within Zone A, when no base flood elevation data are available, new
and substantially improved structures shall have the lowest floor
(including basement) elevated at least three feet above the highest
adjacent grade.
§ 288-16 FINES § 288-17
283:295
§ 288-18. Nonresidential structures.
The following standards apply to new and substantially improved
commercial, industrial and other nonresidential structures located in areas
of special flood hazard, in addition to the requirements in § 288-15A,
Subdivision proposals, and § 288-15B, Encroachments, and § 288-16,
Standards for all structures.
C. Within Zone AO, new and substantially improved structures shall have
the lowest floor (including basement) elevated above the highest
adjacent grade at least as high as two feet above the depth number
specified in feet on the community's Flood Insurance Rate Map
enumerated in § 288-7 (at least two feet if no depth number is
specified).
D. Within Zones AH and AO, adequate drainage paths are required to
guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures on
slopes.
A. Within Zones A1-A30, AE and AH, and also Zone A if base flood
elevation data are available, new construction and substantial
improvements of any nonresidential structure, together with attendant
utility and sanitary facilities, shall either:
(1) Have the lowest floor, including basement or cellar, elevated to or
above two feet above the base flood elevation; or
(2) Be floodproofed so that the structure is watertight below two feet
above the base flood elevation with walls substantially
impermeable to the passage of water. All structural components
located below the base flood level must be capable of resisting
hydrostatic and hydrodynamics loads and the effects of buoyancy.
B. Within Zone AO, new construction and substantial improvements of
nonresidential structures shall:
(1) Have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated above the
highest adjacent grade at least as high as two feet above the depth
number specified in feet on the community's FIRM (at least two
feet if no depth number is specified); or
(2) Together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, be
completely floodproofed to that level to meet the floodproofing
standard specified in § 288-18A(2).
C. If the structure is to be floodproofed a licensed professional engineer or
architect shall develop and/or review structural design, specifications,
and plans for construction. A floodproofing certifies or other
certification shall be provided to the local administrator that certifies
the design and methods of construction are in accordance with
accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions of
§ 288-17 PORT JERVIS CODE § 288-18
283:296
§ 288-19. Manufactured homes and recreational vehicles.
The following standards in addition to the standards in § 288-15, General
standards, and § 288-16, Standards for all structures, apply, as indicated,
in areas of special flood hazard to manufactured homes and to recreational
vehicles which are located in areas of special flood hazard.
§ 288-18A(2), including the specific elevation (in relation to mean sea
level) to which the structure is to be floodproofed.
D. Within Zones AH and AO, adequate drainage paths are required to
guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures on
slopes.
E. Within Zone A, when no base flood elevation data are available, the
lowest floor (including basement) shall be elevated at least three feet
above the highest adjacent grade.
A. Recreational vehicles.
(1) Recreational vehicles placed on sites within Zones A1-A30, AE and
AH shall either:
(a) Be on site fewer than 180 consecutive days;
(b) Be fully licensed and ready for highway use; or
(c) Meet the requirements for manufactured homes in § 288-19B
through D.
(2) A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels
or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick-disconnecttype
utilities and security devices and has no permanently attached
additions.
B. A manufactured home that is placed or substantially improved in Zones
A1-A30, AE and AH shall be elevated on a permanent foundation such
that the lowest floor is elevated to or above two feet above the base
flood elevation and is securely anchored to an adequately anchored
foundation system to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement.
C. Within Zone A, when no base flood elevation data are available, new
and substantially improved manufactured homes shall be elevated such
that the manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced piers or
other foundation elements of at least equivalent strength that are no
less than 36 inches in height above grade and are securely anchored to
an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse
or lateral movement.
D. Within Zone AO, the floor shall be elevated above the highest adjacent
grade at least as high as the depth number specified on the Flood
Insurance Rate Map enumerated in § 288-7 (at least two feet if no depth
number is specified).
§ 288-18 FINES § 288-19
283:297

ARTICLE VI
Variance Procedure
§ 288-20. Appeals Board.
A. The Zoning Board of Appeals as established by the City of Port Jervis
shall hear and decide appeals and requests for variances from the
requirements of this chapter.
B. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall hear and decide appeals when it is
alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision, or determination
made by the local administrator in the enforcement or administration of
this chapter.
C. Those aggrieved by the decision of the Zoning Board of Appeals may
appeal such decision to the Supreme Court pursuant to Article 78 of the
Civil Practice Law and Rules.
D. In passing upon such applications, the Zoning Board of Appeals shall
consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, standards
specified in other sections of this chapter and:
(1) The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the
injury of others;
(2) The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;
(3) The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood
damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner;
(4) The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to
the community;
(5) The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where
applicable;
(6) The availability of alternative locations for the proposed use which
are not subject to flooding or erosion damage;
(7) The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated
development;
(8) The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan
and floodplain management program of that area;
(9) The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary
and emergency vehicles;
(10) The costs to local governments and the dangers associated with
conducting search and rescue operations during periods of
flooding;
§ 288-20 FINES § 288-20
283:299
§ 288-21. Conditions for variances.
(11) The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment
transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if
applicable, expected at the site; and
(12) The costs of providing governmental services during and after
flood conditions, including search and rescue operations,
maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as
sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems and streets and bridges.
E. Upon consideration of the factors of § 288-20D and the purposes of this
chapter, the Zoning Board of Appeals may attach such conditions to the
granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of
this chapter.
F. The local administrator shall maintain the records of all appeal actions
including technical information and report any variances to the Federal
Emergency Management Agency upon request.
A. Generally, variances may be issued for new construction and
substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of 1/2 acre or less in
size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures
constructed below the base flood level, provided that the items in
§ 288-20 D(1) through (12) have been fully considered. As the lot size
increases beyond the 1/2 acre, the technical justification required for
issuing the variance increases.
B. Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic
structures upon determination that:
(1) The proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the
structure's continued designation as an historic structure; and
(2) The variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic
character and design of the structure.
C. Variances may be issued by a community for new construction and
substantial improvements and for other development necessary for the
conduct of a functionally dependent use, provided that:
(1) The criteria of Subsection A, D, E and F of this section are met; and
(2) The structure or other development is protected by methods that
minimize flood damages during the base flood and create no
additional threat to public safety.
D. Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any
increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result.
E. Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is
the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief.
§ 288-20 PORT JERVIS CODE § 288-21
283:300
F. Variances shall only be issued upon receiving written justification of:
(1) A showing of good and sufficient cause;
(2) A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in
exceptional hardship to the applicant; and
(3) A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in
increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety,
extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or
victimization of the public or conflict with existing local laws or
ordinances.
G. Notification.
(1) Any applicant to whom a variance is granted for a building with the
lowest floor below the base flood elevation shall be given written
notice over the signature of a community official that:
(a) The issuance of a variance to construct a structure below the
base flood level will result in increased premium rates for flood
insurance up to amounts as high as $25 for $100 of insurance
coverage; and
(b) Such construction below the base flood level increases risks to
life and property.
(2) Such notification shall be maintained with the record of all variance
actions as required in § 288-14H of this chapter.
§ 288-21 FINES § 288-21
283:301
Chapter 295
FUEL DELIVERY AND STORAGE
§ 295-1. Applicability.
This chapter shall apply to the delivery of distillate fuels and the filling of all
storage tanks with holding capacities of 500 gallons or more.
§ 295-2. Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms shall have the meaning
indicated:
DISTILLATE FUEL — The wastes set forth in § 445-20 of the City Code.
§ 295-3. Procedures.
§ 295-4. Penalties for offenses; enforcement.
Chapter 300
GAMES OF CHANCE
A. The delivery truck must not be left unattended by the truck operator
once the filling nozzle has been set in place for filling.
B. While filling is taking place, the delivery truck operator must remain
within 10 feet of the truck turnoff controls until filling is complete and
the nozzle removed.
C. All filling nozzles must be protected from accidental dislodgment by the
use of a manhole guardrail.
D. The type and nature of the manhole guardrail shall be approved by the
Director of Public Works.
E. In those cases where the truck operator cannot see the fill nozzle and
still remain within 10 feet of the turnoff controls, a representative of the
owner or lessee of the holding tank shall stand watch over the fill nozzle
so as to be able to advise the truck operator of any occurrence.
A. Violation shall be punishable as provided for in Article I of Chapter 1 of
the City Code.
B. In addition to the penalty set forth above, any violator shall be
responsible for any and all costs incurred by the City of Port Jervis
resulting from violation of this chapter.
C. This chapter may be enforced by any police officer, member of the City
Fire Department, the Director and all employees of the Public Works
Department, the Fire Inspector and the Building Official.
§ 288-21 PORT JERVIS CODE § 300-1
295:302
§ 300-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Games of Chance Licensing Law."
§ 300-2. Raising of funds for charitable causes.
The Common Council hereby declares that the raising of funds for
promotion of bona fide charitable, educational, scientific, health, religious
and patriotic causes and undertakings, where the beneficiaries are
undetermined, is in the public interest.
§ 300-3. Definitions.
All terms, including "authorized organizations" and "games of chance," shall
be interpreted and defined in conformity with the meanings as set forth in
Article 9-A, § 186 of the General Municipal Law, which by reference is made
a part hereof.
§ 300-4. License required.
It shall be lawful for any authorized organization, upon obtaining a license
therefor, to conduct games of chance within the territorial limits of the City
of Port Jervis, subject to the provisions of this chapter, the provisions of
Article 9-A of the General Municipal Law and the provisions set forth by the
New York State Racing and Wagering Board.
§ 300-5. Conduct on Sundays.
The conduct of games of chance under this chapter is hereby permitted
between the hours of 12:00 noon and 12:00 midnight on Sundays pursuant
to § 195 of the General Municipal Law.
Chapter 305
GARAGE AND YARD SALES
§ 305-1. Purpose.
This chapter is established to control, regulate and license the conducting
of sales, commonly referred to as "garage sales," "yard sales," "porch sales,"
"barn sales," etc., within residential areas of the City of Port Jervis in
order to protect the public health, safety and convenience and to restrict
such sales to casual and/or occasional occurrences only in keeping with
the charter of the neighborhood where this activity is carried on. The
further purpose of this chapter is to eliminate the perpetual, prolonged and
extended garage sales in residential areas.
§ 305-2. Intent.
It is not the intent of this chapter to change or amend the Zoning Law of the
City of Port Jervis.
§ 300-1 GARAGE AND YARD SALES § 305-3
305:303
§ 305-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
GARAGE SALES, YARD SALES, PORCH SALES OR BARN SALES — The
sale of household merchandise owned by the resident of the premises or a
person acting together with such resident.
§ 305-4. Days and hours of operation.
§ 305-5. Owner or occupant to be present.
The owner or tenant of the premises where the sale is being held must be
present on the premises during this sale.
§ 305-6. Advertising and signs.
§ 305-7. Enforcement.
This chapter shall be enforced by the Police Department or the Building
Official of the City of Port Jervis.
§ 305-8. Penalties for offenses.
Any person committing an offense against any provision of this chapter shall
be guilty of a violation punishable by a fine of not less than $75 nor more
than $250 or by imprisonment for a term not exceeding 15 days, or by
both such fine and imprisonment. The continuation of an offense against
A. Sales, as defined and regulated by this chapter, may be held for threeday
consecutive periods, no more than four times per year per
household property.
B. Said sale may commence no earlier than 8:00 a.m. and must terminate
no later than 5:00 p.m.
A. Garage sales may be advertised through the newspaper or other media.
B. A sign no larger in size than two by two feet may be installed on the
property where the sale is being conducted. The sign shall be displayed
only during the sale and shall be removed within 24 hours after the sale
is concluded.
C. No sign or other display advertising the sale shall be placed on the
public right-of-way or on private property other than where the sale is
conducted. No lighted or illuminated signs shall be used. Any other sign
posted elsewhere, other than on the premises where the sale is to be
held, shall be presumptive evidence of an illegal sign placed by the
holder of the sale and shall constitute a violation of this chapter and a
violation of § 145.30 of the New York State Penal Law.
§ 305-3 PORT JERVIS CODE § 305-8
305:304
the provisions of this chapter shall constitute, for each day the offense is
continued, a separate and distinct offense hereunder.
Chapter 310
HABITUAL OFFENDERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Animals — See Ch. 215.
Dangerous buildings — See Ch. 234.
Numbering of buildings — See Ch. 238.
Housing standards — See Ch. 319.
Noise — See Ch. 381.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 398.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 417.
Rental property — See Ch. 430.
Solid waste — See Ch. 457.
Streets, sidewalks and public property — See
Ch. 464.
Trees — See Ch. 492.
Unlicensed, inoperative or discarded vehicles
— See Ch. 508.
Zoning — See Ch. 535.
§ 310-1. Findings; purpose; legislative intent.
A. The Common Council finds that nuisances exist in the City of Port Jervis
in the use or alteration of residential and commercial property which
interfere with the interest of the public and the quality of life and
environment of the community, property values and public health,
safety and welfare of the residents of the City of Port Jervis. Many of
these buildings, structures, erections or places are used in flagrant
violation of the building and housing codes, zoning ordinances, health
laws, and Multiple Residence Law.119 The Common Council further finds
that the continued occurrence of such activities and violations is
detrimental to the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the City.
The Common Council further finds that such public nuisances are often
conducted by habitual offenders.
B. It is the purpose of this chapter to authorize and empower the
authorized officers and officials of the City of Port Jervis to impose
sanctions and penalties for such nuisances and specifically the habitual
offenders who conduct them. Such powers may be exercised either in
conjunction with, in addition to, or apart from the powers contained in
other laws without prejudice to the use of procedures and remedies
available under such other laws. The Common Council further finds that
the sanctions and penalties imposed pursuant to this chapter constitute
an additional and appropriate method of law enforcement in response
to the proliferation of the above-described public nuisances. The
sanctions and penalties contained herein are reasonable and necessary
119. Editor's Note: This refers to the Multiple Residence Law of the State of New York.
§ 305-8 GARAGE AND YARD SALES § 310-1
305:305
§ 310-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
HABITUAL OFFENDER — Any person who shall be convicted of or who
shall have judgment entered against them for three separate and distinct
public nuisances, as defined in this chapter below, within a twenty-fourmonth
period shall be considered an habitual offender. Such twenty-fourmonth
period shall begin at the date the first conviction or judgment is
entered.[Amended 12-11-2017 by L.L. No. 15-2017]
INCIDENT — An event, circumstance or activity.
MORTGAGEE — The person in whose name the real estate affected by the
order is recorded in the office of the Orange County Clerk.
OWNER — The person in whose name the real estate affected by the order
is recorded in the office of the Orange County Clerk.
PERSON — Any individual, owner, mortgagee or legal entity. A person can
also include a lessee(s), tenant(s), or occupant(s) of a premises.
PREMISES — A building, structure, erection, place, real property, or any
part thereof.
§ 310-3. Public nuisances enumerated.
Public nuisance includes but shall not be limited to:
in order to protect the health and safety of the people of the City of Port
Jervis and to protect and promote the general welfare.
C. Ultimately, it is the intent of the Common Council to create a
standardized procedure for securing legal and equitable remedies
where such nuisances exist in addition to and to supplement
procedures available under existing laws and to strengthen existing
laws against nuisances and the habitual offenders who conduct them.
A. Any premises wherein occupants, guests or business invitees commit
incidents which interfere with the rights common to all members of the
community to the use and enjoyment of their own property. Such
chronic public nuisances include, but are not limited to, the following
violations of chapters of the City of Port Jervis Code:
(1) Animals, Chapter 215, limited to § 215-12, Removal of Feces.
(2) Dangerous Buildings, Chapter 234.
(3) Numbering of Buildings, Chapter 238.
(4) Housing Standards, Chapter 319.
(5) Noise, Chapter 381.
§ 310-1 PORT JERVIS CODE § 310-3
305:306
§ 310-4. Penalties for offenses.
Any person who is deemed an habitual offender pursuant to this chapter
shall be guilty of a violation and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined an
amount not less than $1,000 and not more than $5,000 or be imprisoned for
a period not to exceed 15 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment.
§ 310-5. Severability.
It is the intention of the Port Jervis Common Council that each separate
provision of this chapter shall be deemed independent of all provisions
herein, and it is further the intention of the Port Jervis Common Council that
if any provision of this chapter be declared to be invalid, all other provisions
thereof shall remain valid and enforceable.
(6) Peace and Good Order, Chapter 398, limited to § 398-1, Abandoned
refrigerators.
(7) Property Maintenance, Chapter 417.
(8) Rental Property, Chapter 430, limited to the following sections:
§§ 430-2, Posting of notice; 430-3, Exceptions, and 430-4,
Nonresident landlord; resident agent; change of ownership.
(9) Solid Waste, Chapter 457, limited to the following sections:
§§ 457-5, Placement of refuse for collection; 457-8, Exterior
Property areas to be maintained; 457-9, Accumulation of refuse
prohibited; 457-12, Properly packaged;120 and 457-14, Storage of
Refuse.
(10) Streets, Sidewalks and Public Property, Chapter 464, limited to the
following sections: §§ 464-8, Responsibility of lot owner; 464-43,
Snow and ice removal required; and 464-45, Removal from
structures.
(11) Trees, Chapter 492, limited to § 492-2, Responsibility for trimming.
(12) Unlicensed, Inoperative or Discarded Vehicles, Chapter 508.
(13) Zoning, Chapter 535, limited to the following sections: §§ 535-12,
Prohibited uses; 535-55, Nonconforming uses; 535-72, Building
permit; and 535-73, Certificate of occupancy/compliance.
B. Any premises used for the purpose of a business, activity or enterprise
which is not licensed as required by law.
120. Editor's Note: Section 457-12 is titled "Collection regulations; fees." For proper
packaging, see § 457-12C refers to the Multiple Residence Law of the State of New York.
§ 310-3 GARAGE AND YARD SALES § 310-5
305:307
Chapter 319
HOUSING STANDARDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Dangerous buildings — See Ch. 234.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 417.
Zoning — See Ch. 535.
§ 310-5 PORT JERVIS CODE § 310-5
305:308
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 319-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Housing Code of the
City of Port Jervis."
§ 319-2. Definitions and word usage.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
A. Words defined.
APPROVED — Constructed, installed and maintained in accordance
with the provisions of this chapter and other pertinent ordinances or
regulations of the City or applicable therein.
BASEMENT — A story partly underground but having at least 1/2 of its
height above the average level of the adjoining ground. A "basement"
shall be counted as a story for the purposes of height measurement
if vertical distance between the ceiling and the average level of the
adjoining ground is more than five feet or if used for business or
dwelling purposes.
BUILDING — Any structure having a roof for the shelter, housing or
enclosure of persons, animals, chattels or property of any kind.
CELLAR — An enclosed space within the foundation walls of a building
and having more than 1/2 of its height below the average level of the
adjoining ground. In no event shall a "cellar" be considered a dwelling.
DWELLING — A building designed or used as the living quarters for
one or more families. The terms "dwelling," "one-family dwelling," "twofamily
dwelling" and "dwelling group" shall not be deemed to include
automobile court, rooming or tourist home.
DWELLING UNIT — One or more rooms with provisions for living,
cooking, sanitary, and sleeping facilities arranged for the use of one
family and not having more than one kitchen or kitchenette. The term
"dwelling unit" shall not be deemed to include a hotel, motel,
automobile court, tourist home, furnished rooming house, dormitory,
boarding home, convalescent home, rest home, nursing home, or other
accomodations used for transient occupancy.[Amended 4-8-2013 by
L.L. No. 3-2013]
ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — The Building Official or the person
designated by a majority of the Common Council to carry out the duties
of enforcement and administration specified in this chapter.
EXTERIOR PROPERTY AREAS — Open space on the premises and
vacant open space on adjacent premises.
§ 319-1 GARAGE AND YARD SALES § 319-2
305:309
EXTERMINATION — The control and elimination of insects, rodents
or other pests by eliminating their harborage places, by removing
or making inaccessible materials that may serve as their food or by
any recognized and legal pest elimination method approved by the
enforcement officer.
GARBAGE — The animal, vegetable and mineral waste resulting from
the handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food.
GRADE — Natural surface of the ground, or surface of the ground after
completion of any change in contour, including the completed surfaces
of lawns, walks and roads brought to grades as shown on official plans
or designs relating thereto.
HABITABLE ROOM — A room or enclosed floor space used or intended
to be used for living, sleeping, cooking or eating purposes, excluding
stairways, bathrooms, water closet compartments, laundries, pantries,
foyers, communicating corridors, closets or storage spaces.
INFESTATION — The presence, within or around a dwelling, dwelling
unit, rooming house, rooming unit or premise, of insects, rodents,
vermin or other pests.
KITCHEN — Space, 60 square feet or more in floor area, with a
minimum width of five feet, used in cooking or preparation of food and
deemed habitable space.[Amended 4-8-2013 by L.L. No. 3-2013]
KITCHENETTE — Space, less than 60 square feet in floor area, used
for cooking or preparation of food and not deemed habitable
space.[Amended 4-8-2013 by L.L. No. 3-2013]
MULTIPLE RESIDENCE — A building containing three or more
dwelling units; a building containing living, sanitary and sleeping
facilities occupied by one or two families and more than four lodgers
residing with either of one of such families; a building with one or
more sleeping rooms, other than a one- or two-family dwelling, used or
occupied by permanent or transient paying guests or tenants.
OCCUPANT — Any person, including an owner or operator, over one
year of age, living, sleeping, cooking or eating in or having actual
possession of a dwelling unit or room in a rooming house.
OPENABLE AREA — Any part of a window or door which is available
for unobstructed ventilation and which opens directly to the outdoors.
OPERATOR — Any person having charge, care, management or control
of any dwelling or part of it in which dwelling units or rooming units are
let.
OWNER — Any person who, alone, jointly or severally with others,
holds legal or equitable title to any dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming
house or rooming unit.
PERSON — An individual, firm, corporation, association or partnership.
§ 319-2 PORT JERVIS CODE § 319-2
305:310
§ 319-3. Scope.
Every building used in whole or in part as a dwelling unit or as two or
more dwelling units, or used in whole or in part as a rooming house, shall
conform to the requirements of this chapter irrespective of other uses
in such building and irrespective of when such building may have been
constructed, altered or repaired.
PLUMBING — All of the following supplied facilities and equipment:
gas pipes, gas-burning equipment, water pipes, garbage disposal units,
waste pipes, water closets, sinks, installed dishwashers, lavatories,
bathtubs, shower baths, installed clothes-washing machines, catch
basins, drains, vents and any other similar supplied fixtures, together
with all connections to water, sewer or gas lines.
PREMISES — A plotted lot or part thereof or unplotted lot or parcel of
land or plot of land, either occupied or unoccupied by any dwelling or
nondwelling structure, including the dwelling or structures thereon.
PUBLIC HALL — Any hall, corridor or passageway not within the
exclusive control of one family.
ROOMING HOUSE — Any dwelling or part thereof which contains one
or more rooming units, in which space is let by the occupant or owner
to three or more persons not directly related to him.
ROOMING UNIT — Any room or group of rooms forming a single
habitable unit used or intended to be used for living or sleeping but not
for cooking or eating purposes.
RUBBISH — All combustible and noncombustible waste, except
garbage.
SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLING — A dwelling occupied by one family
alone.
SUPPLIED — Paid for, furnished or provided by or under the control of
the owner or operator, his agents and or representatives.
VENTILATION, MECHANICAL — Any ventilation by power-driven
devices.
VENTILATION, NATURAL — Any ventilation by opening to outer air
through windows, skylights, doors, louvers or stacks, with or without
wind-driven devices.
WATER CLOSET — A toilet, with a bowl and trap, which is connected to
the City water and sewer system or to other approved water supply and
sewer system.
B. Meaning of certain words. Whenever the words "building," "dwelling,"
"dwelling unit," "rooming house" and "premises" are used in this
chapter, they shall be construed as though they were followed by the
words "or any part thereof."
§ 319-2 GARAGE AND YARD SALES § 319-4
305:311
§ 319-4. Compliance required.
No person shall occupy as owner-occupant or let or rent to another for
occupancy any dwelling, rooming house, dwelling unit or rooming unit for
the purpose of living, sleeping, cooking or eating therein which does not
comply with the requirements of this chapter.
§ 319-4 PORT JERVIS CODE § 319-4
305:312
ARTICLE II
Minimum Standards
§ 319-5. Lighting, ventilation and electricity.
§ 319-6. Heating.
A. Habitable rooms. Every habitable room shall have a window or skylight
opening directly to the outside. The total area of such window or
skylight shall not be less than 8% of the floor area of such room. All
windows and skylights shall be enclosed with glass and shall be
provided with suitable hardware and sash cords and made to open to
the extent of 4% of the floor area. Every dwelling, habitable room and
hall shall be equipped with a safe, artificial lighting service, and all
electrical wiring, outlets and fixtures thereof shall be installed and
maintained in accordance with the provisions of local municipal
ordinances and statutes of this state. In the absence of natural
ventilation, every habitable room shall be ventilated by approved
mechanical means.
B. Bathrooms and water closet compartments. Every bathroom and water
closet compartment shall have at least one window facing to the
outdoors and having a minimum openable area of 4% of the floor area of
such room except where there is supplied some other device approved
by the enforcement officer as affording adequate ventilation.
C. Electricity.121 Every dwelling shall be supplied with electricity. Within
such dwelling:
(1) Every habitable room shall contain at least two separate floor- or
wall-type electric convenience outlets, or one such convenience
outlet and one supplied ceiling-type electric light fixture.
(2) Every water closet compartment, bathroom, laundry room, furnace
room and public hall shall contain at least one supplied ceiling- or
wall-type electric light fixture.
(3) Every outlet and fixture shall be properly installed and maintained
in good and safe working condition.
A. Generally. Every dwelling shall have heating facilities which are
properly installed, maintained in safe and good working condition and
are capable of safely and adequately heating all habitable rooms,
bathrooms and water closet compartments to a temperature of at least
70° F. at a distance three feet above floor level when the outside
temperature is at 10° F.
B. Venting and insulation. Every space heater shall be properly vented
through an approved flue leading to the outer air and shall be
adequately insulated from all combustible materials.
121. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 267, Electrical Standards and Requirements.
§ 319-5 GARAGE AND YARD SALES § 319-7
305:313
§ 319-7. Plumbing facilities.122
§ 319-8. Space requirements.
A. Connection. All plumbing fixtures required by this section shall be
connected to an approved source of water supply and to an approved
system of sewage disposal.
B. Condition. All plumbing fixtures shall be properly installed and
maintained in good working order.
C. Water closets and lavatory basins. Every dwelling unit shall contain
within its walls a room, separate from the habitable rooms, which
affords privacy and which is equipped with a flush water closet and a
lavatory basin.
D. Bathtubs and showers. Every dwelling unit shall contain within its walls
a room, separate from the habitable rooms, which affords privacy to a
person in the room and which is equipped with a bathtub or shower.
E. Kitchen sink. Every dwelling unit shall contain a kitchen sink properly
connected to the hot- and cold-water supply and sewer system.
F. Facilities in rooming houses. In every rooming house, the following
minimum plumbing fixtures are required for each multiple of six
sleeping rooms: water closet, bathtub or shower and lavatory.
G. Hot- and cold-water connections. Every kitchen sink, lavatory and
bathtub or shower required by these standards shall be properly
connected with both hot- and cold-water lines. The hot-water lines shall
be connected with supplied water-heating facilities.
A. Dwelling unit. Every dwelling unit shall contain at least 150 square feet
of habitable floor area for the first occupant and at least 75 square feet
of additional habitable floor area for each additional occupant.
B. Sleeping rooms. In every dwelling unit and in every rooming unit, every
room occupied for sleeping purposes by one occupant shall contain at
least 70 square feet of floor area, and every room occupied for sleeping
purposes by more than one occupant shall contain at least 50 square
feet of floor area for each occupant 12 years of age or over and at least
35 square feet of floor area for each occupant under 12 years of age.
C. Calculation of floor area. Floor area shall be calculated on the basis of
habitable room area. However, closet area and hall area within the
dwelling unit, where provided, may count for not more than 10% of the
required habitable floor area. At least 1/2 of the floor area of every
habitable room shall have a ceiling height of at least seven feet; and the
floor area of any part of any room where the ceiling height is less than
4 1/2 feet shall not be considered as part of the floor area in computing
122. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 410, Plumbing.
§ 319-7 PORT JERVIS CODE § 319-8
305:314
§ 319-9. Firesafety.
the total floor area of the room to determine maximum permissible
occupancy.
D. Scope of term "occupant." For the purpose of this section, a person
under one year of age shall not be counted as an occupant.
E. Use of cellar. No cellar space shall be used as a habitable room or
dwelling unit. Play or recreation rooms may be located below grade.
F. Use of basement. No basement shall be used as a habitable room or
dwelling unit unless:
(1) The floors and walls are substantially watertight.
(2) The total window area, total openable area and ceiling height are in
accordance with these standards.
(3) The required minimum window area of every habitable room is
entirely above grade of the ground adjoining such window area, not
including stairwells and accessways.
A. Location. No dwelling unit or rooming unit shall be located within a
building containing any establishment handling, dispensing or storing
flammable liquids in any manner which constitutes a danger to the lives
of the occupants.
B. Egress. Every dwelling unit and every rooming unit shall have safe,
unobstructed means of egress leading to safe and open space at ground
level.
C. Exits, etc., to be clear. Every hallway, stairway, corridor, exit, fire escape
door and other means of egress shall be kept clear at all times.
D. Use of storage rooms. Storage rooms and storage lockers shall not be
used for storage of junk, rubbish or waste.
E. Storage under stairways. Closets or storage beneath stairways are
prohibited in any multifamily dwelling or any rooming house.
F. Egress from multifamily dwellings. There shall be at least two means of
egress available from each story of every multifamily dwelling and of
every rooming house if the dwelling is four or more stories in height or
is three stories in height and has at least five habitable rooms on the
third story. A basement used as a dwelling unit shall not count as a story
for the purpose of this section.
G. Course of exit facilities. Exit facilities from dwellings or dwelling units
shall lead to a public thoroughfare either directly or through a court or
yard, and passage to such exits shall not lead through any other
dwelling or dwelling unit.
§ 319-8 GARAGE AND YARD SALES § 319-9
305:315
§ 319-10. Infestation prevention.
H. Cooking equipment standards. No owner, operator or occupant shall
furnish or use any cooking equipment which does not comply with these
standards.
I. Construction, installation and maintenance of cooking equipment.
Every piece of cooking equipment shall be so constructed and installed
that it will function safely and effectively and shall be maintained in
sound working condition.
J. Portable cooking equipment. Portable cooking equipment employing
gasoline as fuel for cooking is prohibited.
K. Connections to flues and supply lines. All heating, cooking and waterheating
equipment burning solid fuels shall be rigidly connected to a
chimney or flue, and such heating equipment burning liquid or gaseous
fuels shall be connected to a supply line with rigid pipe or with
approved flexible metal hose line approved by either the American Gas
Association or the Underwriters' Laboratories and, where required, to a
chimney, flue or vent.
L. Heating equipment. Heating equipment shall be installed in a manner
which will avoid the dangerous concentration of fumes and gases.
Unvented portable space heaters burning liquid or gaseous fuels shall
be prohibited. Heating equipment shall not be forced to operate beyond
the safe capacity for which it was designed.
M. Fuel storage. Fuels shall be stored in accordance with generally
accepted practice and in a manner which will minimize the danger of
fire. No fuel oil, gasoline or highly flammable fuel shall be stored within
any structure used for human habitation except in a manner approved
by the New York State Building Code and the Fire Department of the
City.
A. Screening generally. During the period from May 1 to September 30
every door opening directly from any dwelling to outdoor space, which
said doorway is used for ventilation, shall be supplied with a screen,
together with a self-closing device in good working condition; and in
each room at least one window or other device with openings to outdoor
space, used or intended to be used for ventilation, shall likewise be
provided with a screen.
B. Basement and cellar openings. Every basement or cellar window used
or intended to be used for ventilation and every other opening to a
basement which might provide an entry for rodents shall be
permanently equipped with screens or such other device as will
effectively prevent their entrance.
C. Extermination. Dwellings shall be kept free from rodents and other
vermin at all times, with the responsibility for extermination resting
with the occupant or owner as hereinafter specified.
§ 319-9 PORT JERVIS CODE § 319-10
305:316
§ 319-11. General structural requirements; alterations.
§ 319-12. Responsibilities of occupants and owners.
D. Garbage, rubbish storage and disposal. Every dwelling unit shall have
approved garbage and rubbish storage or disposal facilities. In every
multifamily dwelling, such facilities shall be placed in an approved
location.123
A. Exterior. All foundations, exterior walls, roofs, windows, exterior doors,
basement hatchways and other exterior portions of dwellings shall be
watertight, weatherproof, rodent- and insect-proof and maintained in a
good state of repair.
B. Interior. Interior partitions, walls, floors and ceilings shall be
reasonably tight, capable of affording privacy, maintained in a good
state of repair and kept clean and sanitary.
C. Stairways, porches and balconies. Inside and outside stairways,
porches and balconies shall be so constructed as to be safe to use and
capable of supporting the load that normal use may cause to be placed
thereon.
D. Facilities and equipment. Every supplied facility, piece of equipment or
utility which is required under this chapter shall be so constructed and
installed that it will function safely and effectively and shall be
maintained in good working condition.
E. Alterations. Any alteration shall be in conformity with the New York
State Building Code.124 [Amended 9-28-1981 by L.L. No. 4-1981]
A. Occupants. Occupants of dwellings shall have the following
responsibilities:
(1) To keep the dwelling and premises the occupant occupies in a clean
and sanitary condition.
(2) To dispose of rubbish and garbage in a clean and sanitary manner
as prescribed by City regulation.125
(3) To hang and remove screens provided by the owner except where
the owner has agreed to supply such services.
(4) To keep plumbing fixtures in a clean and sanitary condition and to
exercise all reasonable care in their proper use and operation.
(5) To exterminate insects, rodents or other pests in the case of an
occupant of a single-family dwelling or occupant of a dwelling unit
123. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 457, Solid Waste.
124. Editor's Note: Original § 99-12, Rooming houses, which immediately followed this section,
was repealed 6-10-1996 by L.L. No. 8-1996.
125. Editor's Note: See Ch. 457, Solid Waste.
§ 319-10 GARAGE AND YARD SALES § 319-12
305:317
in a multiple-unit structure where that dwelling unit is the only one
infested.
B. Owners. Owners of dwellings shall have the following responsibilities:
(1) To let no dwelling or room to anyone for occupancy unless it meets
the minimum standards set forth in this chapter.
(2) To have the dwelling unit or room in a clean, sanitary and habitable
condition; to free from infestation before renting; and to clean,
repair and exterminate if needed to meet the requirements of this
chapter before offering for rent.
(3) To provide screens in accordance with § 319-10A.
(4) To exterminate insects, rodents or other pests if infestation exists
in two or more units of a multiple-unit structure, where infestation
exists in shared or public areas of multiple-unit structures and
where infestation exists in a single unit of a multiple-unit structure
or in a single-family structure when infestation is due to failure of
the owner to maintain the dwelling in a rodentproof and reasonably
insectproof condition.
(5) Surface and subsurface water shall be appropriately drained to
protect buildings and structures and to prevent development of
stagnant ponds. Gutters, culverts, catch basins, drain inlets,
stormwater sewers, approved combined storm and sanitary sewers
or other satisfactory drainage systems shall be utilized where
deemed necessary.126 [Added 2-8-1965]
(6) Fences and other minor constructions shall be maintained in safe
and substantial condition. [Added 2-8-1965]
(7) Steps, walks, driveways, parking spaces and similar paved areas
shall be maintained so as to afford safe passage under normal use
and weather conditions. [Added 2-8-1965]
(8) Yards and courts shall be kept clean and free of physical hazards.
[Added 2-8-1965]
(9) Heavy undergrowths and accumulations of plant growth which are
noxious or detrimental to health shall be eliminated.127 [Added
2-8-1965]
(10) Exterior wood surfaces of buildings and structures that are not
inherently resistant to deterioration shall be periodically treated
with a protective coating of paint or other suitable preservative.
[Added 2-8-1965]
126. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 464, Streets, Sidewalks and Public Property, and Ch. 445,
Sewers and Sewage Disposal.
127. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 417, Property Maintenance.
§ 319-12 PORT JERVIS CODE § 319-12
305:318
(11) Floors, walls, ceilings, furnishings and fixtures of residential
buildings shall be maintained in clean and sanitary condition.
[Added 2-8-1965]
(12) Accessory structures shall be maintained so as to be free of
conditions detrimental to safety or health. [Added 2-8-1965]
(13) Grounds, buildings and structures shall be maintained free of
insect, vermin and rodent harborage and infestation. Methods used
for exterminating insects, vermin and rodents shall conform to
generally accepted practice. [Added 2-8-1965]
(14) Where the potential for rodent or vermin infestation exists,
windows and other openings in basements and cellars shall be
appropriately screened with wire mesh or other suitable materials.
[Added 2-8-1965]
(15) From May 1 to October 1, entrances to residential buildings shall
be provided with self-closing-type devices or screens, and windows
and other openings used for ventilation shall be appropriately
screened. Screens shall not be required in rooms located
sufficiently high in the upper stories of multiple dwellings as to be
free of mosquitoes, flies and other flying insects. [Added
2-8-1965]
C. Owners of premises shall be responsible for compliance with this
chapter and shall remain responsible therefor regardless of the fact
that this section may also place certain responsibilities on operators
and occupants and regardless of any agreements between owners and
operators or occupants as to which party shall assume such
responsibility. [Added 2-8-1965]
§ 319-12 GARAGE AND YARD SALES § 319-12
305:319

ARTICLE III
Administrative Provisions
§ 319-13. Duties of enforcement officer. [Amended 8-10-1964;
6-23-1986 by L.L. No. 5-1986]
§ 319-14. Service of notices.
Whenever the enforcement officer finds that there has been a violation of
this chapter or of any rule or regulation adopted pursuant thereto, he shall
give notice to the person or persons responsible, a copy of which said notice
shall be concurrently filed with the City Clerk-Treasurer. Such notice shall:
§ 319-15. Abatement of violations.
A. Inspections. Upon the personal knowledge by the enforcement officer of
any violations of the provisions of this chapter or upon a written or
verbal complaint, filed with the enforcement officer, of the violation of
any provisions of this chapter, or, in the course of an area survey, the
enforcement officer or his duly authorized representative is hereby
authorized, upon showing proper identification, to enter, examine and
survey at any reasonable time all dwellings, dwelling units, rooming
houses, rooming units and premises located within the City.
B. Right of entry. The occupant of every dwelling, dwelling unit or rooming
unit, or the person in charge thereof, shall give the enforcement officer
or his representative free access to such unit and premises at all
reasonable times for the purpose of such inspection, examination and
survey.
C. Adoption of rules and regulations. The enforcement officer is hereby
authorized to make and adopt, upon approval of the Common Council,
such rules and regulations as may be necessary for the clarification and
proper enforcement of the provisions of this chapter. Such rules and
regulations shall not be in conflict with the provisions of this chapter. A
certified copy of such rules and regulations shall be filed with the City
Clerk-Treasurer and shall have the same force and effect as the
provisions of this chapter, and the penalty for violation thereof shall be
the same as for violation of the provisions of this chapter.
A. Be in writing.
B. Include a description of the real estate sufficient for identification.
C. Include a statement of the reason or reasons why the notice is being
issued.
D. Set a reasonable time for the performance of any act it requires.
E. Be served upon the owner or his agent or upon the occupant, as the
case may require, such service to be in person or by registered or
certified letter or in any other manner authorized or required by law.
§ 319-13 GARAGE AND YARD SALES § 319-15
305:321
A. Order to repair, alter or improve. When upon reexamination, after the
expiration of the time for compliance, the enforcement officer finds that
the violation has not been corrected, then he is authorized to cause
such dwelling to be repaired, altered or improved or to be vacated or
closed.
B. Order to remove or demolish.
(1) Whenever the enforcement officer finds that any dwelling
constitutes a serious hazard to the health or safety of the occupants
or to the public because it is dilapidated, unsanitary, vermininfested
or lacking in the facilities required by these standards, he
shall designate such dwelling unfit for human habitation and shall
cause to be posted on the main entrance of any dwelling so closed,
a placard with the following words: "This building for human
habitation is prohibited and unlawful."
(2) If the owner fails to comply with an order to remove or demolish
the dwelling, the enforcement officer may cause such dwelling to
be removed or demolished.
C. Collection of costs. The amount of the cost of such repairs, alterations
or improvements, or vacating and closing, or removal or demolition,
when done by the enforcement officer, shall be a municipal lien against
the real property upon which such cost was incurred. If the dwelling is
removed or demolished by the enforcement officer, he shall sell the
materials of such dwelling at public sale as provided by law and shall
credit the proceeds of such sale, after the deduction of the expenses
thereof, against the cost of the removal or demolition, and any balance
remaining shall be deposited in City Court of the City by the
enforcement officer, shall be secured in such manner as may be
directed by such Court, and shall be disbursed by such Court to the
persons found to be entitled thereto by final order or decree of such
Court; provided, however, that nothing in this section shall be
construed to impair or limit in any way the power of the municipality to
define and declare nuisances and to cause their removal or abatement,
by summary proceedings or otherwise.128
D. Service of complaints and orders. Complaints or orders issued by the
enforcement officer pursuant to this chapter shall be served upon
persons either personally or by registered mail, but if the whereabouts
of such persons is unknown and the same cannot be ascertained by the
enforcement officer in the exercise of reasonable diligence, and the
enforcement officer shall make an affidavit to that effect, then the
serving of such complaint or order upon such persons may be made by
publishing the same once each week for two consecutive weeks in the
official newspaper of the City. A copy of such complaint or order shall be
posted in a conspicuous place on the premises affected by the complaint
128. Editor's Note: For provisions concerning the power of the Common Council in the removal
and abatement of nuisances, see Charter § C4-11.
§ 319-15 PORT JERVIS CODE § 319-15
305:322
§ 319-16. Amendment procedure.
§ 319-17. Conflicts with provisions.
Whenever a provision of this chapter is found to be in conflict with a
provision of the Building, Zoning or Sanitary Ordinance or other ordinance
or Charter of this City, or with county or state regulations applicable to this
City, the provision which establishes the higher standard for the promotion
and protection of the health and safety of the people shall prevail.
or order. A copy of such complaint or order shall be duly recorded or
lodged for record with the City Clerk-Treasurer of the City.
A. From time to time, on its own motion or on petition, the Common
Council may, after public hearing, amend, supplement or repeal the
provisions of this chapter or of the rules and regulations adopted by the
enforcement officer pursuant to this chapter.
B. All proposed amendments to this chapter shall be submitted to the City
Planning Commission for an advisory report thereon. Such report shall
be submitted to the Common Council within 45 days from the date of
submission to the Planning Commission.
§ 319-15 GARAGE AND YARD SALES § 319-17
305:323

ARTICLE IV
Board of Appeals
§ 319-18. Establishment; composition; terms; vacancies; adoption
of rules.
§ 319-19. Appeals to Board.
An appeal from a determination of the enforcement officer may be taken by
any aggrieved person or by an officer, department or board of the City. Such
an appeal may be taken within such time as the Board shall specify in its
rules of procedure. All appeals shall be made in writing on forms provided
by the Board. Appeals shall be submitted to the enforcement officer, who
shall then transmit to the Board all the papers constituting the record upon
which the action appealed from was taken.
§ 319-20. Powers and duties.
The Board of Appeals shall have the powers and duties prescribed by statute
and by this chapter, which powers and duties are hereby summarized and
more particularly specified:
A. Terms; vacancies in membership. A Board of Appeals is hereby
established in accordance with the provisions of Article 3 of the General
City Law, to consist of the same personnel as appointed to the Zoning
Board of Appeals.129 The Board of Appeals shall consist of seven
members, each to serve for a term of three years. The terms of office of
the members of the Board of Appeals and the manner of their
appointment shall be in accordance with the provisions of the General
City Law applicable thereto. Vacancies for the unexpired term shall be
filled for such unexpired period only.
B. Adoption of rules. Rules of procedure may be adopted by the Board for
the conduct of its business, provided such rules and any amendments
and additions thereto be a part of its written record and that they be in
conformity with law and the provisions of this chapter.
A. Interpretation. On appeal from a determination of the enforcement
officer or on request by any official, department or board of the City, the
Board of Appeals shall decide any questions involving the interpretation
of any provision of this chapter.
B. Variances. On appeal from a determination of the enforcement officer,
the Board of Appeals may grant a variance where the strict application
of this chapter would result in practical difficulty or unnecessary
hardship.
129. Editor's Note: For provisions concerning the Zoning Board of Appeals, see Ch. 535,
Zoning.
§ 319-18 GARAGE AND YARD SALES § 319-21
305:325
§ 319-21. Notification of decisions; contents of notice; records.
All decisions of the Board shall be in writing, and a copy of each decision
shall be sent to the applicant and to the enforcement officer. The Board shall
also retain in its files a copy of each decision, which files shall be available
for inspection by the public. Each decision shall set forth fully the reasons
for the decision of the Board and the findings of fact on which the decision
was based.
§ 319-22. Reports.
The Board of Appeals shall report to the Mayor periodically, at intervals of
not greater than six months. The report shall summarize all applications
and appeals made to it since the last report and shall contain a summary of
the Board's decisions on each case. A copy of the report shall be filed with
the enforcement officer, the Planning Commission and the Common Council.
The Board of Appeals may also submit to the Common Council or Planning
Commission advisory reports recommending changes or modifications in
the housing standards.
§ 319-23. Appeals from Board.
Any person or persons jointly or severally aggrieved by any final order of
the Board of Appeals may seek to have such order reviewed by the Supreme
Court in the manner prescribed by Article 78 of the New York State Civil
Practice Law and Rules.
§ 319-21 PORT JERVIS CODE § 319-23
305:326
ARTICLE V
Penalties
§ 319-24. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 9-28-1981 by L.L. No.
4-1981]
A. Any person who shall commit an offense against any provision of this
chapter or any provision of any rule or regulation adopted by the
enforcement officer pursuant to authority granted by this chapter shall,
upon conviction, be punishable as provided in Chapter 1, General
Provisions, Article I.
B. Each 30 days that such offense is permitted to exist shall constitute a
separate violation.
§ 319-24 GARAGE AND YARD SALES § 319-24
305:327
Chapter 370
MULTIPLE DWELLING UNITS
§ 370-1. Definitions.
The following terms in this chapter are defined as follows:
BUILDING OFFICIAL — The Building Official of the City of Port Jervis.
DWELLING UNIT — One or more rooms with provisions for living, cooking,
sanitary, and sleeping facilities arranged for the use of one family and not
having more than one kitchen or kitchenette. The term "dwelling unit"
shall not be deemed to include a hotel, motel, automobile court, tourist
home, furnished rooming house, dormitory, boarding home, convalescent
home, rest home, nursing home, or other accomodations used for transient
occupancy.[Added 4-8-2013 by L.L. No. 3-2013]
FAMILY — [Amended 3-25-2013 by L.L. No. 2-2013]
Occupancy.
(1) One, two, or three persons occupying a dwelling unit; or
Four or more persons occupying a dwelling unit and living together
as a traditional family or the functional equivalent of a traditional
family.
(2)
A.
It shall be presumptive evidence that four or more persons living in a
single dwelling unit who are not related by blood or marriage or legal
adoption do not constitute the functional equivalent of a traditional
family, except as defined below.
B.
In determining whether individuals are living together as the functional
equivalent of a traditional family, the following criteria must be present:
The group is one which in theory, size, appearance, structure and
function resembles a traditional family unit.
(1)
The occupants must share the entire dwelling unit and live and
cook together as a single housekeeping unit. A unit in which the
various occupants act as separate roomers may not be deemed to
be occupied by the functional equivalent of a traditional family.
(2)
The group shares expenses for food, rent or ownership costs,
utilities or other household expenses.
(3)
The group is permanent and stable. Evidence of such permanency
and stability may include:
The presence of minor dependent children regularly residing
in the household who are enrolled in local schools;
(a)
(4)
C.
§ 319-24 PORT JERVIS CODE § 370-1
305:328
MULTIPLE DWELLING — A detached building, or portion thereof,
containing three or more dwelling units.[Amended 4-8-2013 by L.L. No.
3-2013]
OWNER — The owner or owners of a freehold of the premises or lessor
estate therein, a mortgagee or vendee in possession, assignee or rents,
receiver, executor, trustee, lessee, agent or any other person, firm or
corporation directly or indirectly in control of a dwelling.
§ 370-2. Identification of owner and managing agent.
The owner of any building defined herein as a multiple dwelling shall
post and maintain in a conspicuous place in such dwelling a legible notice
identifying the owner and managing agent of such dwelling, together with
the residence and business addresses and telephone numbers of the owner
and managing agent. Where the owner is a corporation, the sign shall
contain the names, addresses and telephone numbers of the officers
thereof, together with the residence and business address and telephone
numbers of the officers and of the corporation.
§ 370-3. Registration statement.
Members of the household have the same address for purposes
of voter registration, driver’s license, motor vehicle
registration and filing of taxes;
(b)
(c) Members of the household are employed in the area;
The household has been living together as a unit for a year or
more whether in the current dwelling unit or other dwelling
units;
(d)
Common ownership of furniture and appliances among the
members of the household; and
(e)
(f) The group is not transient or temporary in nature.
Any other factor reasonably related to whether or not the group is
the functional equivalent of a family.
(5)
A. Every owner of a multiple dwelling as above defined shall file with the
Building Official within 60 days after the adoption of this chapter a
written registration statement, on forms to be provided by the Building
Official, containing the following information:
(1) A description of the premises by street number or block and lot
number.
(2) The name and residence and business addresses of such owner,
together with his or her residence and business telephone numbers
or, if such owner is a corporation, the name and address of such
corporation and the name and residence and business addresses of
§ 370-1 GARAGE AND YARD SALES § 370-3
305:329
all officers thereof, together with residence and business telephone
numbers of the corporation and all officers.
(3) Designation of managing agent.
(a) The name, residence and business addresses and residence
and business telephone numbers of a natural person, 21 years
of age or over, who actually resides within the City of Port
Jervis and who shall be designated by such owner as a
managing agent in control of and responsible for the
maintenance and operation of such dwelling, and who shall be
designated as the person upon whom process may be served on
behalf of the owner. The managing agent shall keep a current
record of all the tenants and their names and addresses who
are renting, leasing or living in the premises. There shall be
endorsed upon such statement a written consent to such
designation signed by such managing agent. Any owner who is
a natural person and who meets the requirements of this
subsection as to the location of the residence or place of
transacting business of a managing agent may designate
himself as such managing agent.
(b) Nothing contained in this section shall be construed as
preventing a corporation which is an owner of a multiple
dwelling from designating as its managing agent with respect
thereto any officer of such corporation who meets the
requirements of this subsection as to the location of the
residence or place of transacting business of a managing
agent.
(c) Any designation as managing agent made pursuant to the
provisions of this section shall remain in full force and effect
until changed or terminated as hereinafter provided.
(4) Where, after the filing of any registration statement in relation to
any multiple dwelling under the applicable provisions of this
section, the owner of such dwelling shall have granted or
transferred his or her right, title or interest therein or in any part
thereof, such owner shall file with the Building Official, within 10
days after such grant or transfer, a written statement which shall
contain the name and residence and business addresses of the
grantee, transferee or other successor of such right, title or
interest, or, if such grantee, transferee or successor is a
corporation, the name and address of such corporation.
(5) Where, after the filing of any registration statement with the
Building Official pursuant to the applicable provisions of this
chapter, any change other than the designation of a different
managing agent or a change of ownership or interest occurs in any
name, residence or business address or list of officers required to
be included in such statement, the owner, within 10 days after such
§ 370-3 PORT JERVIS CODE § 370-3
305:330
§ 370-4. Penalties for offenses.
Any person, firm or corporation who violates, disobeys, neglects or refuses
to comply with any of the terms of this chapter shall be guilty of a violation
and be subject to a fine of not more than $500. Each week a violation
continues shall be deemed a separate offense.
Chapter 381
NOISE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alarm systems — See Ch. 206.
Animals — See Ch. 215.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 398.
change, shall file in duplicate, on forms to be provided by the
Building Official, a statement setting forth the particulars of such
change so as to supply the information necessary to make currently
correct the last registration statement filed pursuant to the
applicable provisions of this chapter.
(6) Any designation of a managing agent made pursuant to the
applicable provisions of this chapter shall cease to be effective if
such agent shall die or be judicially declared incompetent.
(7) An owner may terminate such designation by filing with the
Building Official a written designation of a new managing agent
made in conformity with the provisions hereinabove cited.
(8) If any owner shall fail, on or before the effective date of any notice
of termination served and filed by a managing agent or within 15
days after such agent shall die or be judicially declared
incompetent, to file with the Building Official a designation of a
new managing agent made in conformity with the provisions
herein, such owner shall be guilty of a violation of this chapter.
B. Any registration statement or designation of a managing agent required
to be filed with the Building Official by any owner or lessee of a multiple
dwelling under the provisions of this chapter shall be signed by such
owner or lessee or, if such owner or lessee is a corporation, by an officer
thereof.
C. Any such registration statement or designation of managing agent shall
be deemed prima facie proof of the statements therein contained in any
criminal prosecution instituted by a City agency against the owner or
managing agent of a multiple dwelling.
§ 370-3 GARAGE AND YARD SALES § 381-1
305:331
§ 381-1. Legislative intent.
The making and creating of disturbing, excessive or offensive noises within
the jurisdictional limits of the City is a condition which has persisted,
and the level and frequency of occurrences of such noises continue to
increase. These noise levels are a detriment to the public health, comfort,
convenience, safety and welfare of the citizens. Every person is entitled
to an environment in which disturbing, excessive or offensive noise is not
detrimental to his or her life, health or enjoyment of property. This chapter
is to be construed liberally, but it is not intended to be construed as to
discourage the enjoyment by residents of normal, reasonable and usual
activities.
§ 381-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms have the meanings indicated:
SOUND-REPRODUCTION DEVICE — Any device that is designed to be used
or is actually used for the production or reproduction of sound, including
but not limited to any amplified musical instrument, radio, tape player,
compact disc player, phonograph, television, subwoofer, or any other soundamplifying
device.
§ 381-3. Prohibited acts.
A. No person, with the intent to cause public inconvenience, annoyance or
alarm, or recklessly creating a risk thereof, shall cause, suffer, allow or
permit to be made unreasonable noise. For the purpose of this chapter,
"unreasonable noise" is any disturbing, excessive or offensive sound
that disturbs a reasonable person of normal sensitivities.
B. The following acts are declared to be prima facie evidence of a violation
of this chapter. This enumeration shall not be deemed exclusive.
(1) Any unnecessary noise from any source between the hours of 10:00
p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
(2) Noise from a dog or other pet animal that is continuous and
exceeds 15 minutes.
(3) Noise from any sound-reproduction device, subwoofer, amplified
musical instrument, operating or playing any radio, tape player,
television, compact disc player, or similar device that reproduces or
amplifies sound in such a manner as to be heard 25 feet from its
source.
(4) The erection, including excavation, demolition, alteration or repair,
of any building between 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. the following day,
and on weekends between 9:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m., except in case
of a public safety emergency.
§ 381-1 PORT JERVIS CODE § 381-3
305:332
(5) The operation of power equipment in residential zones outdoors
weekdays between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. the
following day, and on weekends between 9:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m.
(6) Vehicles.
(a) The sounding of any horn or signaling device of an automobile,
motorcycle or other vehicle for any unnecessary or
unreasonable period of time.
(b) The making of improper noise or disturbance or operating an
automobile or motorcycle in such a manner as to cause
excessive squealing or other excessive noise of the tires.
(c) The use of any automobile, motorcycle or vehicle in such
manner or so out of repair or so loaded as to create loud and
unnecessary grating, grinding, rattling or other noise.
(d) The testing of automobile alarms through the sounding of the
alarm at an establishment for the installation or repair of
automobile alarms located within 100 feet of a residential
zoning district, unless said testing occurs within a building in
an area within said building which has no open windows or
doors during the time of testing or unless a muffler has been
attached to said car alarm so as to prevent the emanation of
unreasonable noise which would disturb the quiet and comfort
of the neighborhood inhabitants. Noise audible at a distance of
50 feet from the source of the noise shall constitute prima facie
evidence of a violation of this subsection.
(7) Yelling, shouting, loudly conversing, hooting or singing on the
public streets of the City or at any time or place so as to annoy the
peace, quiet, comfort or repose of persons in the vicinity.
(8) The creation of any excessive noise on any street adjacent to any
school, institution of learning, church, synagogue, religious
institution or court while the same is in use or adjacent to any
hospital which unreasonably interferes with the workings of such
institution or which disturbs or unduly annoys patients in the
hospital, provided that conspicuous signs are displayed in such
street indicating that the same is a school, hospital or court street.
(9) The creation of a loud and excessive noise in connection with
loading or unloading any vehicle or the opening and destruction of
bales, boxes, crates and containers.
(10) The shouting and crying of peddlers, hawkers and vendors which
disturb the peace and quiet of the neighborhood and are
unreasonable under the circumstances.
(11) Air conditioning, air-handling devices and refrigeration units,
including those on trucks, audible at a distance of 50 feet.
§ 381-3 GARAGE AND YARD SALES § 381-3
305:333
§ 381-4. Exceptions.
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to the following acts:
(12) The creation of unreasonable or unnecessary noise in the
operation, conduct and/or maintenance of any business, factory,
plant yard or manufacturing establishment (except as otherwise
provided in this chapter), including but not limited to excavating,
blasting, grinding, breaking, crushing or processing of any
substance (where permitted).
A. The emission of sound for the purpose of alerting persons to the
existence of an emergency. This shall include sounds created by any
government agency by the use of public warning devices.
B. Noise from municipally sponsored celebrations or events.
C. Noise from individually sponsored events where a permit for public
assembly or other relevant permission has been obtained from the City.
D. The operation or use of any organ, radio, bell, chimes or other
instrument, apparatus or device by any church, synagogue or school
licensed or chartered by the State of New York, provided that such
operation or use does not occur between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and
8:00 a.m.
E. Noise generated by the installation and maintenance of utilities.
F. Sounds created by lawn mowers, leaf blowers, or other yard
maintenance devices with an operating muffler or sound-dissipating
device as designed by the manufacturer between the hours of 7:00 a.m.
and 9:00 p.m. on weekdays and 8:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. on weekends.
G. The use of snowblowers or all-terrain vehicles (ATVs) to remove snow.
H. The operation of any restaurant, tavern, bar, nightclub, disco or other
similar use, whether public or private, provided that:
(1) Between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 12:00 p.m. (noon) that day, no
noise shall be caused by and/or emanates from said use such that
said noise can be heard inside any residence, regardless of whether
the windows of such residence are open; or
(2) At any other time, if said noise is unnecessary or unreasonable
under the circumstances; and
(3) That it also shall be the responsibility any owner, operator or
proprietor of such a business use or the owner, licensee or person
in control of any private premises to so limit the level of noise
emanating from the premises.
§ 381-3 PORT JERVIS CODE § 381-4
305:334
§ 381-5. Penalties for offenses.
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of
a violation and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined in the following
manner.
§ 381-6. Temporary confiscation of equipment.
The City of Port Jervis Police Department or any other authorized law
enforcement officer is hereby authorized to temporarily confiscate a sound
reproduction device upon the issuance of an appearance ticket for violating
the provisions of this chapter as evidence until the prosecution of this
violation has concluded.
§ 381-7. Enforcement.
Enforcement shall be the responsibility of the City of Port Jervis Police
Department or any other authorized law enforcement officer.
§ 381-8. Additional remedy.
As an additional remedy, the operation or maintenance of any device,
instrument, vehicle or machinery in violation of any provision hereof and
which causes discomfort or annoyance to reasonable persons of normal
sensitivities or which endangers the comfort or the health or peace of
residents in area shall be deemed, and is declared to be a public nuisance
and may be subject to abatement summarily by a restraining order or
injunction issued by a court of competent jurisdiction.
I. The operation of fraternities and sororities, dormitories, private clubs,
and meeting halls in the City shall be conducted so that no noise is
caused by and/or emanates from said use:
(1) Between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 12:00 p.m. (noon) that day,
such that said noise can be heard inside any residence, regardless
of whether the windows of such residence are open; or
(2) At any other time, if said noise is unnecessary or unreasonable
under the circumstances.
(3) That it also shall be the responsibility any owner, operator or
proprietor of such a business use or the owner, licensee or person
in control of any private premises to so limit the level of noise
emanating from the premises.
A. First offense: a fine of not less than $100 nor more than $250 or to be
imprisoned for a period not to exceed 15 days, or by both such fine and
imprisonment.
B. Second offense: If the second offense occurs within six months of the
first offense, the fine of not less than $200 nor more than $500 or
imprisonment not to exceed 15 days, or by such fine and imprisonment.
§ 381-4 GARAGE AND YARD SALES § 381-9
305:335
§ 381-9. Repeal of current Chapter 381.
Chapter 381, as it now exists, of the City Code of the City of Port Jervis is
hereby repealed and this chapter is designated as Chapter 381 of the City
Code of the City of Port Jervis in its place and stead.
§ 381-10. Severability.
It is the intention of the Port Jervis Common Council that each separate
provision of this chapter shall be deemed independent of all provisions
herein; and it is further the intention of the Port Jervis Common Council that
if any provision of this chapter be declared to be invalid, all other provisions
thereof shall remain valid and enforceable.
Chapter 389
PARKS AND RECREATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Animals — See Ch. 215. Recreation fees — See Ch. 280.
§ 381-9 PORT JERVIS CODE § 381-10
305:336
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
[Adopted 6-10-1996 by L.L. No. 10-1996 (Ch. 113 of the 1981 Code)]
§ 389-1. City parks, beaches and recreation areas.
§ 389-2. Prohibited activities.
A. The following areas, facilities, parcels or locations are hereby
designated parks, beaches or recreation areas for the purpose of this
chapter:
Veterans Park (formerly Orange Square)
Elks-Brox Park
West End Beach
Church Street Park
Riverside Park
Tri-State Parks
Mother's Park
John Glenn Park
Chris Marion Park
Health Center
B. Hours of operation. City parks, beaches and recreation areas, or
portions thereof as designated by the Common Council, shall be open to
the public on such days and during such hours as the Common Council
shall from time to time fix by resolution. Notice of such hours of
operation shall be clearly posted at the entrance(s) to any such area.
City-authorized and sanctioned recreational activities or programs shall
be exempt from the normal hours of operation as set forth herein or as
adopted by resolution of the Common Council.
C. Facilities; supervision. Operations of the City parks, beaches and
recreation areas shall be under the supervision of the Superintendent
of Recreation. It shall be the duty of the Superintendent and his
department to equip and supervise such area as desired.
A. Loitering. No person or persons shall loiter or remain in or about a City
park, beach or recreation area during any time such area is not open to
the public as such hours are designated by the Common Council as set
forth in § 389-1B above.
B. Parking. Except as permitted and only then in designated areas, no
person or persons shall park a motor vehicle, motorcycle or
recreational vehicle of any type in a City park, beach or recreation area.
The foregoing shall not apply to any authorized or supervised activities
of the Recreation Department or such other department having
jurisdiction thereof.
§ 389-1 GARAGE AND YARD SALES § 389-2
305:337
C. Alcoholic beverages. It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to
carry upon, have in their possession upon or cause to be carried upon
any City park, beach or recreation area any alcoholic beverage,
including wine, beer or liquor.
D. Glass containers. It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to carry
upon, have in their possession upon or cause to be carried upon, sell or
use upon any City park, beach or recreation area any glass container.
E. Animals. No animals shall be allowed in or on the grounds of any City
park, beach or recreational area. Such shall be enforced by any police
officer, peace officer or the Animal Control Officer as defined in § 215-8.
[Amended 11-26-2012 by L.L. No. 4-2012]
F. Swimming. No swimming shall be permitted at West End Beach except
during those hours designated for swimming and when lifeguards are
on duty.
G. Smoking. [Added 2-27-2012 by L.L. No. 1-2012]
(1) Findings. The City of Port Jervis finds that smoking shall be
prohibited upon or within all City parks, beaches and recreation
areas and within 25 feet of all public entrances to City buildings in
order to:
(a) Protect the public health, safety and general welfare by
eliminating exposure to secondhand smoke.
(b) Acknowledge the need of nonsmokers, especially children, to
breathe smoke-free air, recognizing the danger to public health
which secondhand smoke causes.
(c) Recognize that the need to breathe air free of the diseasecausing
toxins in secondhand smoke should have priority over
the desire and convenience of smoking upon or within all City
parks, beaches and recreation areas and within 25 feet of all
public entrances to City buildings.
(d) Recognize the right and benefit to municipal residents and
visitors to be free from unwelcome secondhand smoke upon or
within all City parks, beaches and recreation areas and within
25 feet of all public entrances to City facilities.
(2) Applicability. Smoking shall be banned upon or within all City
parks, beaches and recreation areas as defined in § 389-1A of this
chapter. It shall also be banned within 25 feet of all public
entrances to City facilities.
(3) Definition. As used in this chapter, the following term shall have the
meaning indicated:
§ 389-2 PORT JERVIS CODE § 389-2
305:338
§ 389-3. Penalties for offenses.
Any person committing an offense against any provisions of this chapter
shall be punishable as provided in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article I.
SMOKING — Inhaling of, exhaling of, burning of, or carrying of any
lighted cigar, cigarette, pipe, weed, or other plant in any manner or
any form.
(4) Posting of signs. Signs clearly stating "Smoking is Prohibited" or
"No Smoking" and/or signs consisting of the universal pictorial
representation of a burning cigarette enclosed in a red circle with a
red bar across it shall be predominantly and conspicuously posted
upon the entrance to all areas where smoking is regulated by this
City Code chapter. If such a sign is placed at the entrance to a
public building it shalt also state that there exists a 25 feet distance
requirement as previously defined in this chapter.
(5) Enforcement. Enforcement shall be the responsibility of the City of
Port Jervis Police Department, the City of Port Jervis Building
Official or Deputy Building Official, or any other authorized law
enforcement officer. The enforcement officer may cause to have
issued and served upon the person complained against a written
notice, together with a copy of the complaint made against him,
which shall specify the provisions of this chapter of the City Code of
which such person is said to be in violation and a statement of the
manner in which that person is said to violate it and shall require
the person so complained against to answer the charges of such
complaint at the Port Jervis City Court.
§ 389-2 GARAGE AND YARD SALES § 389-3
305:339

ARTICLE II
Watershed Recreational Area
[Adopted 1-9-2017 by L.L. No. 3-2017]
§ 389-4. Statement of policy; creation of area.
§ 389-5. Requirements; prohibited and permitted activities.
A. The City of Port Jervis does hereby create the Watershed Recreational
Area within the areas occupied by existing City parklands and the City's
water reservoirs; the City tax lots contained within the Watershed
Recreational Area are designated as:__________.130 This area contains
abundant natural, scenic and recreational resources, including walking,
hiking and biking trails. The City encourages and facilitates the use and
enjoyment of this recreational area and the facilities the City has
created for the use and enjoyment of the public believing that the use of
these facilities promotes and enhances the well-being of the citizens of
the City of Port Jervis and visitors to the City.
B. However, there may be dangers created by natural hazards within the
recreational area, and the use of the recreational area and its facilities
by the public for varied and divergent purposes may also, if not
controlled, endanger the safety of individual users and the environment
of the area.
C. Therefore, in order to enhance and promote the safety, well-being and
enjoyment of each individual in the use of the Watershed Recreational
Area, the enjoyment of the facilities within the area and the protection
of the natural, scenic and recreational resources, this article has been
created to establish rules and regulations to govern the conduct of the
public with respect to the use of the area.
A. Activities by incorporated groups, school groups, legally formed
entities, clubs and organizations must be approved in advance by a vote
of the Common Council of the City of Port Jervis.
B. No parking of a motor vehicle, motorcycle or recreational vehicle of any
type shall be permitted within the recreational area, except 10
designated parking areas established by the City. This prohibition shall
not apply to any authorized or supervised activities of the Recreation
Department or any other City Department having jurisdiction over the
recreational area.
C. No loitering by a person or persons within the recreational area shall be
permitted.
D. It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to carry upon, have in
their possession upon or cause to be carried upon or within the
recreational area any alcoholic beverage, including wine, beer or liquor.
130. Editor's Note: So in original.
§ 389-4 GARAGE AND YARD SALES § 389-5
305:341
§ 389-6. Penalties for offenses.
Penalties for violation of any section of this article are those set forth in the
general provisions of Chapter 1, Article 1, of the Port Jervis City Code.
E. It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to carry upon or within
the recreational area, in their possession, or to sell or use any glass
containers.
F. Dogs on leashes shall be permitted in the recreational area.
G. No swimming, boating, selling or offering for sale, hire or lease of any
merchandise, service or thing of value shall be permitted within the
recreational area.
H. No form of entertainment, performance, contest or any such event for
commercial purposes nor the posting of advertising or handbills in
connection therewith shall be permitted within the recreational area,
except with the specific consent of the Common Council of the City of
Port Jervis.
I. No posting or distributing of advertising materials or soliciting in
connection with the same shall be permitted within the recreational
area.
J. No camping, campsites, campfires or open fires shall be permitted
within the recreational area.
K. No picnics or outings or group activities shall be permitted within the
recreational area except in specifically designated areas.
L. No fishing, hunting or the use of bows and arrows, guns or firearms
shall be permitted within the recreational area.
M. The pollution of waters within the recreational area, injury to property
and the environment shall be prohibited within the recreational area.
N. Disorderly conduct, abusive or obscene language or gestures,
obstruction of pedestrian traffic, climbing upon any tree, fence,
structure or monument, violent or threatening behavior, unreasonable
noise, gambling, use of a snowmobile or ATV or any other motorized
vehicle shall be prohibited within the recreational area.
§ 389-5 PORT JERVIS CODE § 389-6
305:342
Chapter 394
PAWNBROKERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Auctions and auctioneers — See Ch. 220. Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 403.
§ 394-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meaning
indicated:
PAWNBROKER — Any person or member of a firm or corporation who shall
loan money on deposit or pledge of personal property other than earnings,
securities or evidences of indebtedness.
§ 394-2. License required.
No person shall carry on the business of a pawnbroker within the City
without having procured a license as required by the terms of this chapter.
§ 394-3. License fee; bond; renewal. [Amended 7-27-1992 by L.L.
No. 5-1992; 2-26-2007 by L.L. No. 2-2007; 5-27-2014 by L.L. No.
5-2014]
The Common Council of the City of Port Jervis may grant to any person who
shall produce satisfactory evidence of good character a license to carry on
the business of pawnbroker within said City upon payment of the sum as
provided in § 41 of the General Business Law and the execution of a bond
to the City in the penal sum as provided in § 41 of the General Business
Law, with sureties to be approved by the Common Council, conditioned
for the faithful observance of the ordinances of said City then in force or
thereafter enacted relating to pawnbrokers and the payment of all damages
incurred as such pawnbroker. Every license shall expire at the end of the
calendar year in which it is issued and may be renewed on application to the
Common Council each and every year in January of each calendar year on
the payment of the same sum and upon performance of the other conditions
contained in this chapter.
§ 394-4. Action upon bond.
If any person shall be damaged by the misconduct of any licensed
pawnbroker and shall recover judgment against him therefor, such person,
after the return unsatisfied, either in whole or in part, of any execution
issued upon a judgment, may maintain an action in his own name and
upon the bond of said pawnbroker in any court having jurisdiction of the
amount claimed, provided that said court shall, upon application made for
that purpose, grant such leave to prosecute.
§ 389-6 GARAGE AND YARD SALES § 394-5
305:343
§ 394-5. Proration of license fee. [Amended 5-27-2014 by L.L. No.
5-2014]
Should application for any pawnbroker's license be made after the first day
of August in any year, the Common Council may, in its discretion, issue such
license upon payment of 1/2 of the amount at which such license may be
issued for a full year and upon the execution and delivery of the bond as
provided in § 394-3.
§ 394-6. Payment of fees; report to Common Council. [Amended
5-27-2014 by L.L. No. 5-2014]
The City Clerk-Treasurer shall receive all moneys paid for pawnbroker
licenses granted hereunder and report to the Common Council at each
regular meeting the licenses granted during the preceding month and the
amounts received therefore.
§ 394-7. Contents of license; expiration. [Amended 5-27-2014 by
L.L. No. 5-2014]
Every license granted hereunder shall designate the building in which the
licensee shall be authorized to act as pawnbroker, and said business shall
not be carried on in any other place than the other so designated without
the written consent of the Common Council endorsed on said license. Every
such license shall expire on December 31 next succeeding the date of its
issue.
§ 394-8. Sign required. [Amended 5-27-2014 by L.L. No. 5-2014]
Every person carrying on the business of a pawnbroker within said City
shall place or suspend in a conspicuous manner in front of his place of
business a sign with his name and the words "Licensed Pawnbroker"
thereon; said sign shall be approved in advance by the City official and/or
board having authority to approve same.
§ 394-9. Daily report to police.
A. Required; contents. Every person carrying on the business of a
pawnbroker shall report daily in writing to the Chief of Police, on blank
forms to be furnished by the Police Department, a description of all
articles pledged or purchased by said pawnbroker during the preceding
day, together with the number of the pawn ticket issued therefor, the
amount loaned thereon and the name, residence and description of the
person making the pledge. The contents of such report shall not be
communicated to any person for the purpose of publication, but shall be
used expressly for the purpose of protecting the public.
B. Effect of report. No person shall make any false entry in such report,
and whenever the Chief of Police shall notify any pawnbroker not to sell
or permit to be redeemed any property so received on deposit, such
§ 394-5 PORT JERVIS CODE § 394-9
305:344
§ 394-10. Records. [Amended 2-26-2007 by L.L. No. 2-2007;
5-27-2014 by L.L. No. 5-2014]
§ 394-11. Hours.
No person shall transact business as a pawnbroker within the City except
between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m., except Saturdays, when
business may be transacted between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 12:00
midnight, and such business shall not be transacted on Sunday.
§ 394-12. Business and employment associations restricted.
No pawnbroker or person in the employ of a pawnbroker within the City
shall in any manner receive any personal property in pledge from any minor,
intoxicated person, habitual drunkard or notorious thief, known by him to
be such, nor shall such pawnbroker employ any person as an assistant in
such business who is under 16 years of age.
property shall not be sold or permitted to be redeemed until the said
Chief of Police shall so direct.
A. Required; contents. Every pawnbroker within the City shall keep a book
in which shall be legibly written in ink, at the time any loan is made, an
account and description of the articles pawned or purchased, as well as
a photograph of the articles pawned or purchased, the amount of money
loaned thereon, the time of pawning or purchasing the same, the rate of
interest to be paid on such loan and the name, residence and a general
description of the person pawning or selling said personal property and
a notation of whether the pledgor claims to be the owner, consignee or
agent of the owner.
B. Access to records. Said book shall be opened and goods exposed at all
reasonable time to the inspection of the Mayor and members of the
Common Council, Corporation Counsel, City Court, Chief of Police, or
City Detective. Such books and records shall be retained in the
possession of the pawnbroker, in good condition and in an orderly
fashion, for at least a period of six years. A list of all articles pawned or
purchased shall be delivered to the Chief of Police of the City of Port
Jervis at the end of each calendar week; items pawned or purchased
through Saturday of each calendar week should be included on the list,
delivered to the Police Chief on the following Monday.
C. Memorandum. Every such pawnbroker, at the time any loan is made,
shall deliver to the person pledging any personal property a
memorandum signed by him, containing the substance of the entry
required to be made as aforesaid, and no charge shall be made by any
pawnbroker for such entry or memorandum.
§ 394-9 GARAGE AND YARD SALES § 394-13
305:345
§ 394-13. Redemption requirements. [Amended 2-26-2007 by L.L.
No. 2-2007]
No pawnbroker within the City shall sell any article received by him in
pledge before the time to redeem the same has expired, nor willfully
disclose the name of the purchaser nor the price paid for any article sold,
and no pawnbroker shall sell any pawn or pledge until the same shall
remain in his possession for the time period prescribed by § 48 of the
General Business Law.
§ 394-14. Stolen goods.
No pawnbroker within the City who has received any stolen goods shall
refuse to exhibit them during the regular business hours to the owner of
said goods or his authorized agent at the written order of the Chief of Police.
§ 394-15. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 2-26-2007 by L.L. No.
2-2007; 5-27-2014 by L.L. No. 5-2014]
Any person committing an offense against any provisions of this chapter
shall be punishable by a fine as set by § 51 of the General Business Law, in
addition to the punishment, fine or imprisonment established by any other
City, county, state or federal law, rule or regulation.
Chapter 398
PEACE AND GOOD ORDER
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alarm systems — See Ch. 206.
Alcoholic beverages — See Ch. 210.
Animals — See Ch. 215.
Dangerous buildings — See Ch. 234.
Noise — See Ch. 381.
Parks and recreation — See Ch. 389.
Sex offenders — See Ch. 447.
§ 394-13 PORT JERVIS CODE § 394-15
305:346
ARTICLE I
General Regulations
[Adopted 7-27-1964 as part of Ch. 18 of the 1964 Code of
Ordinances (Ch. 117, Art. I of the 1981 Code)]
§ 398-1. Abandoned refrigerators. [Amended 2-26-2007 by L.L. No.
2-2007]
It shall be unlawful for any person to permit or allow a discarded
refrigerator or one not in use to remain in any place accessible to children
without removing the door, lid, or locking or fastening device.
§ 398-2. Advertising matter.
§ 398-3. Bathing in public places.
No person shall bathe in any creek, pond, millrace or river within the
City except with suitable covering or bathing suit. Nothing in this section
shall be so construed as to give the right to any person to bathe in any
creek, pond, millrace or river within the City where the same is otherwise
prohibited by law.131
§ 398-4. Obstruction of drains and watercourses.
No person shall throw or deposit any substance into the Neversink River
or into any creek, watercourse or drain within said City which may in any
manner tend to interfere with the free passage of water within such river,
creek, watercourse or drain.
§ 398-5. Discharging of explosives restricted.
No person shall discharge any fireworks or explosives of any kind in any
public street, square or place in the City except at such time and place as
A. Throwing handbills on private property. No person shall, without
permission from the owner or occupant, throw or place or cause to be
thrown or placed in any yard, doorway, porch, house or vestibule,
dodgers or handbills which may litter such place or cause annoyance or
inconvenience to such owner or occupant.
B. Distribution in public places. No person shall deposit, cast, strew or
throw upon the streets or public places of said City, nor hand to or
distribute among passersby or other persons upon any of the streets or
public places of the City, any circulars, dodgers, handbills, printed or
pictured papers, advertising matter or devices or any like material
whereby the streets, alleys of places or the premises neighboring
thereto are or may be or become littered or strewn or rendered
unsightly, unclean, foul and offensive.
131. Editor's Note: Original § 117-4, Coin-operated amusement devices, which immediately
followed this section, was deleted 2-26-2007 by L.L. No. 2-2007.
§ 398-1 GARAGE AND YARD SALES § 398-5
305:347
the Mayor may designate; nor shall any person at any time discharge any
instrument commonly known as a "toy pistol" in or upon which any loaded or
blank cartridges are used, or discharge or explode any cannon firecracker
which shall be more than five inches in length, or dynamite cracker or other
firecracker containing a high explosive substance, within the limits of the
City.
§ 398-6. Permission required for use of explosives.
No person shall fire any cannon, gun, fire ball, firecracker, torpedo,
fireworks or other explosives within the City without permission of the
Mayor.132
§ 398-7. Slingshots; throwing stones or snowballs.
No person shall fire any slingshot or throw or cast any stone or other hard
substance in any public street, square or place in the City, nor throw any
snowball in such a manner as to endanger or annoy any person or animal.
§ 398-8. Unlawful assemblies.
It shall be unlawful for persons unnecessarily to assemble in any public
street, square or place in said City in such numbers as to obstruct travel or
annoy pedestrians.133
§ 398-9. Firearms.
No person shall discharge any firearms within the City, except that a duly
organized rifle or sportsmen's club may operate and conduct a shooting
range or shooting gallery within said City for its members or guests using
small caliber rifles or pistols only, provided the same is operated and
conducted in a place and under circumstances which will not create a
nuisance or expose the public to danger, and provided the same is approved
by the Chief of Police, who shall impose such rules and regulations for its
operation as he shall deem necessary and proper in the premises.
§ 398-10. Loaded firearms prohibited. [Added 3-9-1987 by L.L. No.
2-1987]
No person shall possess in a public place a loaded machine gun, rifle,
shotgun or gas- or air-powered rifle/pistol within the corporate limits of the
City of Port Jervis. The terms "machine gun," "rifle" and "shotgun" shall
have the same definition as is set forth in § 265.00 of the Penal Law of the
State of New York. This section shall not apply to any police officer in the
discharge of his official duty.
132. Editor's Note: Original § 117-8, Noises similar to emergency vehicles prohibited, which
immediately followed this section, was deleted 2-26-2007 by L.L. No. 2-2007.
133. Editor's Note: Original § 117-11, Vandalism; stone rolling, which immediately followed this
section, was deleted 2-26-2007 by L.L. No. 2-2007.
§ 398-5 PORT JERVIS CODE § 398-11
305:348
§ 398-11. Penalties for offenses. [Added 2-26-2007 by L.L. No.
2-2007]
Any person committing an offense against any provision of this article
shall be punishable as provided in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article I,
General Penalty.
§ 398-11 GARAGE AND YARD SALES § 398-11
305:349

ARTICLE II
Littering
[Adopted 4-13-2009 by L.L. No. 3-2009]
§ 398-12. Prohibition on littering in public and private places.
A. Definitions and word use. As used within this section, the following
terms shall have the meanings indicated:
AUTHORIZED PRIVATE RECEPTACLE — A litter storage and collection
receptacle of steel, aluminum or plastic of ten-to-thirty-five-gallons
capacity, with tight cover or a larger steel container with closed lid.
CITY — The City of Port Jervis
GARBAGE — Putrescible animal and vegetable wastes resulting from
handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food.
LITTER — Garbage, refuse, and rubbish as defined herein and all other
waste material which, if thrown or deposited are herein prohibited,
tend to create a danger to public health, safety and welfare, or tend to
create blight.
PARK — A park, reservation, playground, beach, recreation center or
any other public area in the City, owned or operated by the City and
devoted to active or active and passive recreation.
PERSON — Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company, or organization of any kind.
PRIVATE PREMISES — Any pond, stream, body of water, or any house,
building or other structure now owned or operated by the City or other
governmental unit, whether inhabited or temporarily or continuously
uninhabited or vacant, including any yard, ground, parking lot, walk,
driveway, porch steps, vestibule or mailbox belonging or appurtenant to
such house, building or structure.
PUBLIC PLACES — Any and all streets, roads, sidewalks, boulevards,
alleys or other public ways, and any and all public parks, beaches,
squares, spaces, grounds and buildings, and any and all public
waterways, streams, stream beds, ponds, and rivers.
REFUSE — Includes garbage and rubbish.
RUBBISH — Nonputrescible solid wastes consisting of both
combustible wastes and noncombustible wastes, such as, but not
limited to, paper wrappings, cardboard, tin cans, wood, glass, bedding
and crockery.
B. Word usage. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the
present tense include the future, words used in plural number include
the singular, words used in the singular number include the plural, and
words in the masculine include the feminine and the neuter. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
§ 398-12 GARAGE AND YARD SALES § 398-12
305:351
C. Public Places.
(1) No person shall throw, deposit, or place litter, or cause same to be
thrown, placed, or deposited in or upon any street, road, sidewalk,
or other public place within the City, except in public receptacles or
in authorized private receptacles for collection.
(2) Persons placing litter or causing litter to be thrown or deposited in
public receptacles or in authorized private receptacles shall do so
in such a manner as to prevent it from being carried or deposited
by the elements upon any street, road, sidewalk, or other public
place, or upon private property.
(3) No person shall sweep, throw, deposit, place, or cause to be swept,
thrown, dumped, placed or deposited in any gutter, street, road or
other public place within the City, the accumulation of litter from
any building or lot or from any public place or private sidewalk or
driveway.
(4) Persons owning or occupying property shall keep the sidewalk, if
any, in front of their premises free of litter.
D. Parks, beaches, and bodies of water.
(1) No person shall throw or deposit or cause litter to be thrown or
deposited in any park or beach within the City, except in public
receptacles and in such a manner that the litter will be prevented
from being carried or deposited by the elements upon any part of
the park or beach, or upon any street or other public or private
place. Where public receptacles are not provided, all such litter
shall be carried away from the park or beach by the person
responsible for its presence and properly disposed of elsewhere, as
provided herein.
(2) No person shall throw or deposit or cause litter to be thrown or
deposited in any pond, river, stream or other body of water or
within the limits of such pond, river, stream or other body of water
within the City of Port Jervis.
E. Private property.
(1) No person shall throw, deposit or place litter, or cause same to be
thrown, dumped, deposited or placed on any private property
within the City, whether owned by such person or not, and whether
occupied or vacant, except that the owner or person in control of
private property may maintain an authorized private receptacle for
collection in such a manner that litter will be prevented from being
carried or deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk, or
other public place, or upon private property.
(2) The owner or person in control of private property or any portion
thereof shall at all times maintain the premises of that portion
§ 398-12 PORT JERVIS CODE § 398-12
305:352
controlled by him free of litter, except when stored properly in
authorized private receptacles for collection, when such person
shall have actual notice thereof or when said litter shall have been
present a sufficient period of time to constitute constrictive notice.
F. Penalties for offenses. Any person who violates any provision of this
chapter shall be guilty of a violation and, upon conviction thereof, shall
be fined in the following manner:
(1) First offense: a fine of not less than $100 nor more than $250 or to
be imprisoned for a period not to exceed 15 days, or by both such
fine and imprisonment.
(2) Second offense: if the second offense occurs within six months of
the first offense, the fine of not less than $200 nor more than $500
or imprisonment not to exceed 15 days, or by such fine and
imprisonment.
§ 398-12 GARAGE AND YARD SALES § 398-12
305:353
Chapter 403
PEDDLING AND SOLICITING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Auctions and auctioneers — See Ch. 220.
Pawnbrokers — See Ch. 394.
Streets, sidewalks and public property — See
Ch. 464.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 505.
§ 403-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to promote and protect the health, safety and
general welfare of the community, and the preservation and protection of
the property of the City of Port Jervis and its residents.
§ 403-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the
meaning set forth unless the context of their use clearly indicates otherwise:
APPLICANT — Any person by or for whom an application is made under this
chapter.
CHARITABLE ORGANIZATION —
CITY — The City of Port Jervis, Orange County, New York.
MERCHANDISING —
Any benevolent, philanthropic, patriotic, military, veterans, not-forprofit,
educational or religious association, society or organization
qualified as a tax-exempt organization under Section 501 of the Internal
Revenue Code.
A.
Any governmental entity or organization, including, without limitation,
a school district, fire district and fire company.
B.
Selling or offering for sale, barter or exchange any property or service,
either for immediate or future delivery or performance upon any street,
road or highway or from house to house in the City.
A.
Seeking, taking or offering contracts or orders for any property for
future sale or delivery or performance of any service upon any street,
road or highway or from house to house in the City.
B.
Seeking or taking subscriptions or contributions of money or property
upon any street, road or highway or from house to house in the City.
C.
Delivery or distribution of advertising matter, literature, pamphlets,
samples or handbills house to house or on any of the streets, roads or
highways or by going from place to place in the City, but not including
D.
§ 398-12 PORT JERVIS CODE § 403-2
305:354
PEDDLER or SOLICITOR — Any person who goes from house to house or
from place to place without appointment, traveling on the streets and roads,
engaged in the practice of merchandising of any nature whatsoever. The
word "peddler" shall include the words "hawker," "solicitor" or "canvasser."
PERSON — A natural person, corporation, partnership, association, joint
venture, society or other organization or association of any kind, whether
acting as principal, agent, employer or employee.
PROPERTY — Any goods, wares, merchandise or other article or thing of
every kind or nature except newspapers.
§ 403-3. Permit or registration required.
No person shall engage in peddling, soliciting, hawking or canvassing
without first obtaining a permit or registering or both as required by this
chapter.
§ 403-4. Exemptions.
No permit under this chapter shall be required:
§ 403-5. Permitted hours for peddling.
No peddling or soliciting shall be conducted before 9:00 a.m. or after the
earlier of 1/2 hour after sunset or 8:00 p.m.
§ 403-6. Contents of application.
the delivery or distribution of newspapers, magazines or political or
religious materials.
A. For any person or organization that is participating in an event
approved by the Common Council of the City of Port Jervis where the
vendor has paid a fee and is located in a stationary booth at said event.
B. For the delivery of goods or services ordered by telephone, mail or
other method initiated by the person receiving the goods or services.
C. By any business, service or activity licensed under any other law,
regulation or ordinance of the City of Port Jervis.
D. By political parties and candidates for public office.
A. An application for a permit under this chapter shall contain the
following:
(1) The name, home address and local address, if any, of the applicant.
(2) A physical description of the applicant, giving the date of birth,
height, weight and color of hair and eyes. A photograph will be
required.
§ 403-2 GARAGE AND YARD SALES § 403-6
305:355
(3) The name and address of the person, if any, by whom the applicant
is employed and for whom orders are to be solicited, cleared, filled
or delivered.
(4) A description of the exact business or activity in which the
applicant intends to engage, and of the nature of any property or
services involved.
(5) A list of crimes for which the applicant has been arrested or
convicted, including dates and places.
(6) A statement as to the period of time during which the applicant
intends to engage in the business or activity regulated under this
chapter.
(7) Proof that the applicant, or his or her employer or principal is
registered for sales tax purposes, if the business or activity to be
conducted is subject to sales or use tax.
(8) A description of any motor vehicle that will be used for pickup or
delivery of property or for the purpose of bringing any such
property into the City for peddling or soliciting, to include the name
of manufacturer, year, type of vehicle, vehicle identification
number, registration plate number, title holder, and the name of the
person other than the title holder to whom the vehicle is registered,
if any.
(9) The name and address of the employer or firm representing,
together with credentials establishing the exact relationship.
(10) A brief statement of the nature of the business and a description of
the nature of the services to be sold.
(11) The geographic area to be canvassed or solicited.
(12) The place where the goods or property to be sold or offered for sale
are manufactured or produced, the place where such goods or
property are located at the time such application is filed and the
proposed method of delivery.
(13) Two business references located in the County of Orange, State of
New York, or in lieu thereof, such other available evidence of the
character and business responsibility of the applicant as will enable
an investigator to properly evaluate such character and
responsibility.
(14) Further information required by the City Clerk, including a
certificate of insurance with the City named as a co-insured.
(15) Performance regulations: [Amended 12-9-2013 by L.L. No.
9-2013]
§ 403-6 PORT JERVIS CODE § 403-6
305:356
(a) All applicants proposing to sell food items shall be required to
obtain a food handler’s license from the Orange County Health
Department.
(b) Locations shall be restricted to the following municipal
locations:
[1] Riverside Park in between signs posted by the City of Port
Jervis;
[2] West End Beach in between signs posted by the City of
Port Jervis; and
[3] Park Avenue Observatory in the parking area, although a
designated peddler cannot utilize more than two
designated parking spaces at any time.
(c) Peddlers shall be prohibited within 100 feet of an established
commercial business engaged in similar activity at the time of
the enactment of this section unless such peddler is
participating in a City-sponsored event.
(d) Temporary merchants, peddlers or solicitors shall be
prohibited from conducting business at the locations
referenced in § 403-6A(15)(b) without prior approval of the
Common Council. It shall the exclusive dominion of the
Common Council to determine who the permission be granted
to and how many permissions they shall issue for given
locations subject to the following two requirements:
[1] That only one peddler shall be allowed a seasonal
peddler’s permit at the Park Avenue Observatory per
season; and
[2] That permissions can be granted on a first-come-first
served basis for locations per permit period, although the
Common Council is allowed to give special consideration
to a peddler who occupied a location in a prior permit
period.
(e) The area to be occupied by a single temporary merchant,
including a wagon, truck, sign and trash receptacle, shall not
exceed 200 square feet.
(f) One freestanding sign per temporary merchant may be allowed
at the permitted site. Signs must be constructed of durable
material and maintained in a presentable condition. Flashing
lights or lights shall be prohibited. No sign shall be placed
within 15 feet of a property line or within an established sight
triangle for interior lanes or access driveways. All freestanding
signs must be removed and properly secured during nonoperating
hours of the temporary merchant. Maximum sign
§ 403-6 GARAGE AND YARD SALES § 403-6
305:357
§ 403-7. Action on permit applications; permit limitations.
[Amended 12-9-2013 by L.L. No. 9-2013134]
§ 403-8. Fees. [Amended 12-9-2013 by L.L. No. 9-2013]
face shall not exceed four square feet and shall not exceed four
feet in height.
(g) Provide and maintain trash receptacles and be responsible for
trash removal at the end of each day.
(h) Not sell or transfer the assigned space.
(i) Remove themselves and their property from the assigned
space each night and maintain the grounds in a clean and safe
condition each day.
B. The application shall be signed by the applicant and sworn to before a
notary public or other officer authorized to administer oaths.
A. The City Clerk shall issue the permit.
B. Permits under this chapter shall be issued to peddlers for the following
periods only:
(1) Any time during the year for door-to-door peddling activities.
[Amended 12-17-2018 by L.L. No. 1-2019]
(2) City fire parade permit: issued prior to the City of Port Jervis
Annual Fireman’s Day Parade for the period of that one day of the
parade only.
C. No permit under this chapter shall be required for those items listed in
§ 403-4, Exemptions.
D. A permit issued pursuant to this chapter may be revoked if, following its
issuance, the Police Department determines that the applicant was
convicted of any crime not reported in the application or is otherwise
not a person of good moral character and reputation. A permit may also
be revoked for any violation of this chapter committed after its
issuance.
A. The following fees shall be paid to the City Clerk with an application for
a permit:
(1) Seasonal peddler’s permit: $1,500.
(2) City fire parade permit: $100.
134. Editor's Note: This local law also renumbered former § 403-7, Fees, as § 403-8, and former
§ 403-8, Action on permit applications: permit limitations, as § 403-7.
§ 403-6 PORT JERVIS CODE § 403-8
305:358
§ 403-9. Additional requirements and prohibited conduct.
§ 403-10. Exhibition of license.
Every holder of a peddler's license or solicitor's license issued by the City
Clerk shall be required to carry such license with him while engaged in the
business or activity licensed within the corporate limits of the City. He shall
produce such license at the request of any official of said City or at the
request of any person with whom he wishes to conduct his said business or
activity.
§ 403-11. Records.
The City Clerk shall maintain a record of all licenses issued under the
provisions herein and shall record therein all convictions for violations
herein and other pertinent circumstances and incidents as reported by the
Chief of Police.
§ 403-12. Revocation of licenses.
B. The aforementioned fees and any other fees so needed for this section
are subject to amendment by resolution pursuant to § 280-10 of the Port
Jervis City Code from time to time as needed.
A. The Police Department may require reports from any permit holder at
any time and at such intervals as it deems necessary for the protection
of the public health, welfare and safety.
B. The owner or occupant of a residential building may post a notice
prohibiting peddlers and solicitors. The notice shall be placed in a
conspicuous place adjacent to the entrance door of the building. The
letters of the notice shall be at least 1/2 inch in height and shall contain
a statement saying in substance that "peddlers or solicitors are
prohibited." No person shall engage in any activity regulated by this
chapter by attempting to enter a building or ringing a doorbell or
knocking on an entrance door to any residence building at which
entrance such notice has been posted.
C. Any person engaged in an activity regulated under this chapter,
whether that person is exempt or not, who has entered upon private
property, whether invited or not, shall immediately and peacefully
depart therefrom when requested to do so by any occupant.
A. Licenses issued herein may be revoked by the Chief of Police or City
Clerk, after reasonable notice and hearing, for any of the following
causes:
(1) Misrepresentation or false statement contained in the application
for the license.
(2) Misrepresentation or false statement made in the course of
carrying on activities regulated herein.
§ 403-8 GARAGE AND YARD SALES § 403-12
305:359
§ 403-13. Appeals.
Any person aggrieved by the action of the Chief of Police or the City Clerk
in the denial of an application for a permit or license, or in the decision
with reference to the revocation of a license shall have the right of appeal
to the Common Council of the City of Port Jervis. Such appeal shall be
taken by the filing with the Common Council, within 14 days after notice
of the action complained of has been mailed to such person's last known
address, a written statement, setting forth fully the grounds for the appeal.
The Common Council shall set a time and place for a hearing on such
appeal, and notice of such hearing shall be given to the appellant in the
same manner as provided herein for notice of hearing on revocation. The
decision and order of the Common Council on such appeal shall be final and
conclusive.
§ 403-14. Penalties for offenses.
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a
violation. Each violation shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed $250 or
by imprisonment for a period not to exceed 15 days, or both.
§ 403-15. Repealer.
This chapter supersedes Chapter 403, which is hereby repealed. All permits
and licenses issued under that ordinance shall be used in compliance with
the provisions of this chapter and shall expire in accordance with their
terms.
(3) Conviction of any crime or misdemeanor relating adversely to the
occupation of peddling or soliciting.
(4) Conducting the business in an unlawful manner, in violation of this
section or in such manner as to constitute a breach of peace or to
constitute a menace to the health, safety or general welfare of the
public.
B. Notice of a hearing for revocation of a license shall be given, in writing,
setting forth the grounds of the complaint and the time and place of the
hearing. Such notice shall be served personally upon the licensee or
mailed, postage prepaid, to the licensee, at the address given by the
licensee in making application under § 403-6 herein, at least five days
prior to the date set for said hearing. The hearing shall be conducted by
the Common Council.
§ 403-12 PORT JERVIS CODE § 403-15
305:360
Chapter 410
PLUMBING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Housing standards — See Ch. 319.
Sewers and sewage disposal — See Ch. 445.
Water — See Ch. 513.
Water rules and regulations — See Ch. A615.
§ 403-15 GARAGE AND YARD SALES § 403-15
305:361

ARTICLE I
General and Administrative Provisions135
§ 410-1. Plumbing Inspectors.
§ 410-2. Appeal procedure.
Any person claiming to be aggrieved by a determination, decision or ruling
of the Inspector of Plumbing pursuant to this chapter shall have the right to
appeal therefrom to the Board of Examining Plumbers. The person desiring
to appeal from the decision, determination or ruling of the Inspector must
serve a notice in writing to the effect upon the Inspector and upon the
Secretary of the Board of Examining Plumbers within a period of five
days following the day upon which the decision, determination or ruling
of the Inspector is first made known to him. On any appeal so taken, the
said Board shall have power to modify, amend or vacate any decision,
determination or ruling of the Inspector.
A. Appointment; qualifications; compensation. The Common Council shall
detail, designate or appoint an Inspector or Inspectors of Plumbing. All
persons so detailed, designated or appointed shall be licensed master
plumbers in the City of Port Jervis or the Building Official of the City of
Port Jervis, if he has taken and passed the same test as given for
qualification as a master plumber. During the period of their
appointment, they shall not engage directly or indirectly in the business
of plumbing. They shall be entitled to receive compensation as fixed by
the Common Council. [Amended 4-11-1983 by L.L. No. 6-1983]
B. Duties. The Inspector or Inspectors of Plumbing appointed under the
provisions of Subsection A above, in addition to the duties prescribed by
law and those which may be enjoined or required by the City, shall
inspect the construction and alteration of all plumbing work performed
in such City and report in writing the results of such inspection to the
City. They shall also report in like manner any person engaged in or
carrying on the business of or employing a plumber without having the
certificate hereinbefore provided.
135. Editor's Note: The following is the text of a resolution adopted by the Common Council
10-10-1972: "Whereas the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development's
(hereinafter called "HUD") code adoption policy for certification or recertification of a
municipality's Workable Program for Community Improvement requires that localities
using State or local codes incorporate standards which are comparable to those in the
natural model codes with respect to the use of materials of construction and; whereas
HUD has agreed to accept the New York State Building Construction Code applicable to
Plumbing, July 1, 1972 edition, supplemented by the below mentioned stipulation as an
interim satisfaction of HUD's code adoption policy and; whereas Port Jervis has adopted
and uses the New York State Building Construction Code and therefore requires the
adoption of such stipulation in satisfaction of the codes requirement for recertification of
Port Jervis's Workable Program for Community Improvement. "Be it resolved, therefore,
by the Common Council of the City of Port Jervis that the statement which follows be and
hereby is adopted as the Port Jervis codes policy: "It is not the intent of the Building
Construction Code applicable to Plumbing to limit or exclude the use of any material or
system of plumbing Installation which has been produced or developed under nationally
recognized standards and certified by a recognized standards or testing agency, provided
the use of such material or system complies with such standards and is in accord with
acceptable health and safety criteria."
§ 410-1 GARAGE AND YARD SALES § 410-3
305:363
§ 410-3. Stages of work requiring inspection.
The Inspector of Plumbing and Drainage will make inspection at three
stages of the work, to wit: When the house sewer is laid, ready to cover;
when the rough work is completed; and when the entire job is completed;
and no part of the drainage or plumbing shall be covered or concealed until
duly approved. Written notice shall be filed with the Inspector of Plumbing
when from time to time the work has advanced to the several stages named.
§ 410-4. Premature covering of work; notice to uncover.
If any house drainage or plumbing system or part thereof is covered before
being regularly inspected, tested and approved as herein prescribed, it shall
be uncovered by the owner, lessee or person in charge or control of the
premises after service upon either individual of a written notice thereof by
the Plumbing Inspector.
§ 410-5. Plumber to furnish materials and labor for test. [Amended
6-27-1988 by L.L. No. 3-1988136]
All testing will be performed as prescribed in the New York State Uniform
Fire Prevention and Building Code.
§ 410-6. Defective fixtures. [Amended 9-28-1981 by L.L. No. 4-1981]
All installed fixtures found defective or in an unsanitary condition shall be
repaired, renovated, replaced or removed by the owner, lessee or person in
charge or control of the premises within 30 days upon written notice from
the Plumbing Inspector or any other duly authorized enforcement officer to
such owner, lessee or person in charge or control of the premises.137
§ 410-7. Modifications.
Whenever, in the opinion of the Inspector of Plumbing, special conditions
arise that render it impracticable to comply with all the provisions herein
specified, modifications may be allowed, provided that the premises are left
in a sanitary condition.
§ 410-8. Temporary toilets for workers.
Suitable toilet facilities shall be provided by the owner, lessee or person
in charge or control of the premises for the use of workmen during the
construction of any building. These toilet facilities shall be maintained in a
sanitary condition.
136. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
137. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 319, Housing Standards.
§ 410-3 PORT JERVIS CODE § 410-9
305:364
§ 410-9. Duty of owner upon notice of condemnation. [Amended
6-27-1988 by L.L. No. 3-1988]
Whenever plumbing or heating within the City shall be condemned as
being unsanitary, unsafe or constituting a menace to health, the owner
of the property shall, when duly notified, proceed forthwith to make such
improvements as may be necessary to place said plumbing, drainage and
heating in sanitary and safe condition in accordance with the requirements
of these and other applicable rules and regulations.
§ 410-10. Authorized workers; monthly report. [Amended 6-27-1988
by L.L. No. 3-1988]
None but licensed master plumbers or individual owners personally will be
permitted to make any extension, addition or new installation in connection
with the existing plumbing, plumbing system, house drain or house sewer
of any building, structure or dwelling.
§ 410-11. Filing of plans and specifications prior to work.
§ 410-12. Heating systems. [Added 10-13-1987 by L.L. No. 9-1987]
§ 410-13. Certificate of approval required.
When work is approved by the Inspector of Plumbing and Drainage, he shall
issue a certificate to that effect, and regular use of a plumbing system is
prohibited until so approved and certified by the Inspector.
§ 410-14. Violations.
A. Required; certificate of approval. Before any plumbing or drainage
work shall be commenced or any changes of or additions to any existing
plumbing or drainage are to be done in any building or upon any
premises, the owner, lessee or person desiring said work to be
performed shall file plans and specifications of the same in the office of
the Plumbing Inspector. No work shall be commenced until the said
plans and specifications are approved by the Plumbing Inspector and a
certificate of such approval is issued by said Inspector to the applicant.
B. Modifications. No modifications of plans or descriptions will be
permitted after approval unless amended plans and specifications shall
have first been filed and approved as required in the original case.
A. Prior to the installation of any heating systems in any building, the
plans and specifications shall be filed with and approved by the
Plumbing Inspector.
B. No heating systems shall be placed into operation until they shall have
been inspected and approved by the Plumbing Inspector, who shall
issue a certificate of approval stating that the system complies with all
applicable local and state codes.
§ 410-9 GARAGE AND YARD SALES § 410-14
305:365
§ 410-15. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 9-28-1981 by L.L. No.
4-1981]
Any person committing an offense against any provision of this chapter shall
be punishable as provided in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article I.
A. Notice required. Whenever any inspector or other person reports a
violation of any rules and regulations for plumbing and drainage or a
deviation from any officially approved plan or specification for
plumbing and drainage filed with any board or department, the City
shall first serve a notice of the violation thereof upon the master
plumber doing the work, if a registered plumber.
B. Service of notice; time for compliance. Such notice may be served
personally or by mail; and if by mail it may be addressed to such master
plumber at the address registered by him, but the failure of a master
plumber to register will relieve the board which appoints the Plumbing
Inspector from the requirement of giving notice of violation. Unless the
violation is removed within three days after the day of serving or
mailing such notice, exclusive of the day of serving or mailing, the City
may proceed according to law.
§ 410-14 PORT JERVIS CODE § 410-15
305:366
ARTICLE II
Examination and Licensing of Plumbers
§ 410-16. Creation and composition of the Examining Board of
Plumbers. [Amended 9-28-1981 by L.L. No. 4-1981; 5-13-1985 by
L.L. No. 3-1984; 6-27-1988 by L.L. No. 3-1988; 6-14-1994 by L.L. No.
12-1994]
A board for the examination of plumbers is hereby created and shall be
known as the "Examining Board of Plumbers," which shall consist of nine
persons appointed by the Mayor. A representative of the Building
Department shall serve as the Executive Secretary. The Board shall include
the following:
§ 410-17. Examining Board: terms, vacancies, membership,
compensation.
A. Two master plumbers having not less than five years' experience in the
business of plumbing.
B. One journeyman plumber actually working at the plumbing trade.
C. The Plumbing Inspector of the City of Port Jervis.
D. The Chief Engineer or other person having charge of the sewers of the
City of Port Jervis.
E. Two lay citizens of the City of Port Jervis.
F. One member of the Common Council.
G. The Building Official of the City of Port Jervis.
A. Terms of office; vacancies. The term of office of each member of such
Board shall be three years from the first day of January following his
appointment. Vacancies occurring by expiration of a term shall be filled
by the Mayor for a full term; vacancies by death, removal, inability to
act, resignation or removal from the City of any member shall be filled
by him for the unexpired term.
B. Ex officio members. The Chief Inspector of Plumbing and Drainage and
the engineer in charge of sewers or the officers holding equivalent
positions or acting in like capacities, designated or appointed by the
Mayor as herein provided, shall be ex officio members of such
Examining Board, and when they shall cease to hold the offices by
reason or on account of which they were so designated or appointed,
their successors shall act on the Examining Board in their stead.
C. Compensation. Board members who are not otherwise employed by the
City of Port Jervis shall be paid $15 for each regular, monthly meeting
attended. [Amended 6-27-1988 by L.L. No. 3-1988138]
§ 410-16 GARAGE AND YARD SALES § 410-17
305:367
§ 410-18. Operational expenses of Examining Board.
§ 410-19. Application for examination.
§ 410-20. Time for receiving applications. [Amended 9-28-1981 by
L.L. No. 4-1981; 6-27-1988 by L.L. No. 3-1988]
The Board shall receive applications on the nights of its regular scheduled
meetings between the hours of 7:30 p.m. and 8:30 p.m.
§ 410-21. Duration of application.
All applications will expire and be canceled after a period of three months if
the applicant does not appear for examination within that period.
§ 410-22. Eligibility for examination.
D. The Board will elect its own Chairman. [Added 6-27-1988 by L.L. No.
3-1988]
A. The Examining Board of Plumbers shall have power to procure suitable
quarters for the transaction of business, to provide the necessary books
and stationery and to employ a clerk to keep such books and record the
transactions of said Board.
B. The Common Council shall annually insert in its tax levy a sufficient
sum to meet all the expenditures incurred under the provisions of this
chapter. The expenses incurred by the Examining Board of Plumbers in
the execution and performance of the duties imposed by this chapter
shall be a charge on the City and shall be audited, levied, collected and
paid in the same manner as other City charges are audited, levied,
collected and paid.
A. Form. Persons applying for examination for certificates to engage in the
business of master or employing plumber shall, before being examined,
file with the Board an application on such forms as may be prescribed
by the Board, and shall furnish to the Board such information as it may
require concerning the applicant's fitness and qualifications to receive
a certificate as aforesaid. All applications must be under oath.
B. Refusal of application. The Board shall refuse to receive an application
from any person who at the time of making application may be
unlawfully engaged in business as a master or employing plumber.
A. No person shall be examined unless he shall have had an experience of
at least five years as journeyman plumber under a duly qualified
plumber and is able to furnish satisfactory evidence of such fact, or two
years in an accredited plumbing trade school or the equivalent and
three years as an apprentice under a duly qualified plumber. For the
138. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 410-17 PORT JERVIS CODE § 410-22
305:368
§ 410-23. Examination fees. [Amended 7-27-1992 by L.L. No.
5-1992; 2-26-2007 by L.L. No. 2-2007]
Each applicant for examination shall pay the sum as provided in Chapter
280, Fees, at the time of making his application. When an applicant has paid
the first fee for examination and failed, he shall pay an additional sum as
provided in Chapter 280, Fees, for each subsequent examination given him
by the Board.
§ 410-24. Conduct of examinations.
§ 410-25. Effect of passing or failing examination.
purposes of this subsection, “duly qualified plumber” shall mean a
plumber holding a master plumbers license from the City of Port Jervis
or a plumber holding a license from a municipality in the State of New
York with equal or greater licensing standards than the requirements
of the City of Port Jervis plumbing licensing standards, as determined
in the discretion of the Board. [Amended 11-28-1988 by L.L. No.
7-1988; 6-27-2011 by L.L. No. 3-2011]
B. No application will be received from any person who is not a citizen of
the United States and who cannot read and write the English language.
A. Contents. The examination of the Board shall be in two parts, namely, a
practical test to determine the applicant's skill as a journeyman and a
written examination. The written examination shall consist of questions
and plans to determine the applicant's fitness and qualifications to
engage in the business of master and employing plumber.
B. Examinations to be written. All examinations which shall be written by
the applicant must be in English.
C. Time and place. The time and place of holding examinations shall be left
to the discretion of the Board. Ample notice shall be given to applicants.
A. Effect of passing. Persons who pass the tests as prescribed by the Board
shall be eligible to receive a certificate of competency as master or
employing plumber.
B. Effect of failing; reexaminations. An applicant who fails in the practical
test shall not be eligible for another test until the expiration of three
months; should he fail in the second test he will not be eligible for a
third test until the expiration of six months; and failing in the third test,
he will not be eligible for a fourth test until the expiration of one year.
An applicant who fails in the written examination shall not be eligible
for reexamination until the expiration of one month; should he fail in the
second examination he will not be eligible for another examination until
the expiration of three months; should he fail in the third examination
he will not be eligible for another examination until the expiration of six
§ 410-22 GARAGE AND YARD SALES § 410-25
305:369
§ 410-26. Inquiry preliminary to issuance of certificate.
Before issuing a certificate to engage in the business of master or employing
plumber, the Board shall inquire into the applicant's fitness and
qualifications for conducting such business and may require the applicant
to submit under oath such evidence, in addition to the examinations and
tests hereinbefore provided, as will satisfy the Board that he is a person of
good repute, character and responsibility and otherwise qualified to engage
in business as a master or employing plumber.139
§ 410-27. Unlawful display of sign.
It shall be a violation of law, punishable by fine and/or imprisonment, for
any person to open a shop or display a sign, the regulation and issuance
of which is provided for in this chapter, before obtaining a certificate of
competency.
§ 410-28. (Reserved)140
§ 410-29. Expiration and renewal of certificate and license.
[Amended 3-27-1967; 10-22-1984 by L.L. No. 6-1984; 6-27-1988 by
L.L. No. 3-1988; 7-27-1992 by L.L. No. 5-1992]
months; and should he fail in the fourth examination he will not be
eligible for another examination until the expiration of one year.
A. All certificates of registration issued under the provisions of this
chapter and all licenses authorizing connections with street sewers or
water mains shall expire on the 31st day of December of the year in
which they shall be issued and may be renewed within 30 days
preceding such expiration, such renewals to be for one year from the
first day of January in each year. A fee as provided in Chapter 280, Fees,
shall be required to be submitted with any application for the renewal
of a certificate of competency, and the receipt of the same by the Board
shall be a condition precedent to this issuance of any renewal
certificate hereunder.141
B. Leave of absence.
(1) Any holder of a license issued pursuant to this section may take a
leave of absence by notifying the City Clerk-Treasurer's office, in
writing, of his or her intention to take a leave of absence and by
turning in to the City Clerk-Treasurer his or her license.
139. Editor's Note: Original § 121-26, Metal sign required upon engaging in business, which
immediately followed this section, was repealed 6-27-1988 by L.L. No. 3-1988.
140. Editor's Note: Former § 410-28, Holder of certificate to maintain qualified shop, was
repealed 6-27-2011 by L.L. No. 3-2011.
141. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 410-25 PORT JERVIS CODE § 410-29
305:370
§ 410-30. Forfeit of certificate for violations. [Amended 6-27-1988
by L.L. No. 3-1988]
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter or any rules or
regulations of the Orange County Department of Health, Environmental
Health Division, and/or of the New York State Uniform Fire Prevention
and Building Code or of the Examining Board of Plumbers regulating the
plumbing and drainage of buildings in such City shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and, on conviction, if a master plumber, shall forfeit any
certificate of competency which he may hold.
§ 410-31. Duplicate certificates; certificates of record; fees.
[Amended 9-28-1981 by L.L. No. 4-1981; 6-27-1988 by L.L. No.
3-1988142]
A license will be issued to every plumber who passes the examination, with
a wallet-size card issued upon subsequent annual renewals. Lost licenses
will be replaced for a charge as provided in Chapter 280, Fees.143
§ 410-32. Reciprocal and one-time licenses. [Added 9-28-1981 by
L.L. No. 4-1981; 6-23-1986 by L.L. No. 3-1986]
Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, one-time licenses may
be issued as follows:
(2) Upon turning in the license, the licensee shall be entitled to a
refund of the license fee for the unexpired term of the license.
(3) At any time within five years of the taking of the leave of absence,
the licensee may reacquire his or her license, without a
competency exam, by paying the required fee to the City Clerk-
Treasurer.
A. One-time licenses. Any person, firm or corporation duly licensed by
another municipality in New York State which has licensing standards
and requirements, including examinations, substantially the same as
those provided by this chapter may be issued, without examination, a
one-time license, equivalent to that held in the other municipality, for
the performance of a specific contract or job, upon application to and
approval by the Board.
(1) Such application shall be accompanied by substantiating
documents and evidence supporting the claim that he is the holder
of a valid license from the other municipality and by a fee as
provided in Chapter 280, Fees. [Amended 6-27-1988 by L.L. No.
142. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
143. Editor's Note: Original § 121-32, Certificate prerequisite to license for sewer and water
main work, which immediately followed this section, was repealed 6-27-1988 by L.L. No.
3-1988.
§ 410-29 GARAGE AND YARD SALES § 410-32
305:371
§ 410-33. Fine for working as plumber without license. [Added
7-22-1996 by L.L. No. 13-1996]
Any person found to have been doing plumbing work within the City of
Port Jervis without first having obtained a license from the appropriate City
authorities, as required by this chapter, shall be automatically subject to a
mandatory fine of not less than $300 and not more than $3,000.
3-1988; 6-12-1989 by L.L. No. 18-1989; 6-26-1995 by L.L. No.
10-1995144]
(2) Such one-time license shall be valid only for a specific contract or
job, at a specific location, and shall expire upon issuance of a
certificate of approval for the work covered by the contract or job.
(3) Notwithstanding any other provision of this Subsection A, where a
candidate for a one-time license is a resident of a municipality not
licensing plumbers, the Board may consider other evidence of
qualifications, such as a statement from the local Building or
Plumbing Inspector, and may make such investigation and inquiry
into the candidate's qualifications as it may deem necessary, and
may thereupon, in its discretion, issue a one-time license, with such
conditions as it may deem proper to secure the purposes of this
chapter.
(4) Any one-time license shall be subject to all conditions and
provisions of this chapter not otherwise inconsistent with this
section.145
144. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
145. Editor's Note: Original § 121-34, Fees for licenses, added 12-8-1986 by L.L. No. 8-1986,
which immediately followed this section, was repealed 6-27-1988 by L.L. No. 3-1988.
§ 410-32 PORT JERVIS CODE § 410-33
305:372
Chapter 415
PROPERTIES, ABANDONED, VACANT, BOARDED, AND
FORECLOSED
GENERAL REFERENCES
Dangerous buildings — See Ch. 234.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 417.
Rental property — See Ch. 430.
§ 415-1. Legislative findings and intent.
A. The Common Council of the City of Port Jervis, Orange County, New
York, recognizes that there is a rising number of properties within the
City that have become abandoned, vacant, or boarded up as the result
of the mortgage foreclosure process under New York State law or for
other reasons, including but not limited to the inability of the owner or
owners of such property to make real property tax payments, insurance
payments, property maintenance requirements as established by local,
county, state or federal codes, or for various other reasons. The
Common Council recognizes that buildings, both residential and
commercial, have remained abandoned, vacant or boarded up for long
periods of time, some for many years. As such, these buildings and the
properties upon which they are constructed are unsightly and unsafe
and have a negative effect on their surroundings and upon the
community in general. The purpose of this chapter is to establish a
program for identifying and registering abandoned and vacant
buildings and properties; to determine the responsibility of the owners
or mortgagees of these properties; to set forth the process for securing,
maintaining and rehabilitating these properties and to require the
registration of these properties with the Building Official/Code
Enforcement Officer of the City of Port Jervis.
B. The Common Council of the City of Port Jervis intends that the
provisions of this chapter are to prevent properties that have been
abandoned, are vacant and/or may be involved in the mortgage
foreclosure process from becoming dangerous, blighted, overgrown,
susceptible to vandalism and otherwise nuisances to the public in
general and specifically to surrounding property owners. The Common
Council recognizes that properties involved in the mortgage foreclosure
process in particular are left abandoned, vacant, blighted and locations
that might breed nuisance and criminal activity for months and often
years. Accordingly, the Common Council believes that the provisions of
this chapter requiring registration of properties; posting of properties;
designation of local agents for properties; the securing of properties;
penalties for the failure to comply with the requirements of this chapter
and other ordinances, sanitary codes, building codes, and other local
regulations dealing with the external and internal maintenance of
§ 410-33 GARAGE AND YARD SALES § 415-1
305:373
§ 415-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BUILDING OFFICIAL/CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER/INSPECTOR —
Duly authorized representative of the City of Port Jervis, Orange County,
New York, holding the position of Building Official, Deputy Building Official,
Code Enforcement Officer, Building or Fire Inspector.
EVIDENCE OF VACANCY — Any condition that on its own, or combined
with other conditions present, would lead a reasonable person to believe
that the property is vacant. Such conditions may include, but not be limited
to, overgrown and/or dead vegetation, accumulation of abandoned real
property, as defined herein, statements by neighbors, passers-by, delivery
agents or government agents, among other evidence that the property is
vacant.
FORECLOSURE — The legal process by which any parcel, tract, lot or other
defined area of real property, including the improvements located thereon,
placed as security for a real estate loan, is sought to be sold by the lender/
mortgagee to satisfy the debt if the borrower/mortgagor defaults. This
definition shall include all processes, activities, and actions by whatever
name associated with the described process.
LOCAL AGENT — The agent designated by the owner or mortgagee upon
registration as required by this chapter.
MORTGAGE — The creditor, including but not limited to, service companies,
lenders in a mortgage agreement and any agent, servant, or employee of the
mortgagee, or any successor in interest and/or assignee of the mortgagee's
rights, interests or obligations under the mortgage agreement.
NOTICE OF DEFAULT — A recorded notice that a default has occurred
under a mortgage and that the mortgagee intends to proceed with a
foreclosure sale.
OWNER — Owner or owners of record on the assessment rolls in the Office
of the Assessor of the City of Port Jervis; those identified as owner or
owners on a vacant building registration form; a mortgagee in possession;
a mortgagor in possession; a receivor or assignee of rents; an executor,
trustee, or other person, firm, entity or corporation in control of the
property or premises; persons or entities may have a joint and several
obligations for compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
SECURING — Any measures that assist in making the property inaccessible
to unauthorized persons.
VACANT OR ABANDONED BUILDING OR PROPERTY — A building or
property or portion of same which is unoccupied and unsecured;
unoccupied and secured by other than normal means; unoccupied and
properties is in the best interests of the public health, safety and
welfare.
§ 415-1 PORT JERVIS CODE § 415-2
305:374
unsafe as determined by the Building Official/Code Enforcement Officer of
the City of Port Jervis; unoccupied and has multiple housing or Building
Code violations; illegally occupied; unoccupied and the subject of Code
violation notices issued by the Building Official/Code Enforcement Officer
of the City of Port Jervis. This shall not include individual condominium
units or other individual units in a common-interest community where all
exterior elements and common areas are jointly owned and maintained by a
homeowners' or community association.
VACANT STRUCTURES — A building or structure that is not legally
occupied.
§ 415-3. Registration.
A. Within 10 days of the filing of a lis pendens and/or an action to foreclose
upon a mortgage or similar security instrument, all mortgagees must
register with the Building Official/Code Enforcement Officer of the City
of Port Jervis on forms provided by said official all property in
foreclosure within the City of Port Jervis. For properties for which a lis
pendens and/or action for foreclosure upon a mortgage or a similar
security instrument has been instituted prior to the effective date of this
chapter and which has not yet been registered pursuant to this chapter,
all mortgagees must register such properties within 60 days of the
effective date of this chapter.
B. Mortgagees must designate and retain a local individual or local agent
or property management company as the local agent responsible for the
security and maintenance of the property. Owners of property that do
not reside in the City of Port Jervis must provide a name, address and
contact information of a local agent with whom the owner has entered
into a contract or agreement for property management.
C. All owners of abandoned and vacant properties shall register with the
Building Official/Code Enforcement Officer of the City of Port Jervis not
later than 10 days after any building in the City becomes an abandoned
or vacant building and not later than 20 days after being notified by the
Building Official/Code Enforcement Officer of the City of Port Jervis of
the requirement to register. The Building Official/Code Enforcement
Officer may identify vacant buildings through his/her routine inspection
process as well as through notification by residents, neighbors,
neighborhood groups or other community groups that a building may
be abandoned or vacant and eligible for inclusion on the required
registry. Registration by owners shall be submitted on forms provided
by the Building Official/Code Enforcement Officer of the City of Port
Jervis.
D. All owners and mortgagees must supply the following information to
the Building Official/Code Enforcement Officer of the City of Port Jervis:
(1) A description of the premises, including the property address as
well as the section, block and lot number of the property as set
§ 415-2 GARAGE AND YARD SALES § 415-3
305:375
§ 415-4. Notices.
forth in the tax records of the City of Port Jervis located in the
Office of the Assessor of the City of Port Jervis.
(2) The names and addresses of the owner or owners, or mortgagee or
mortgagees.
(3) Whether or not the owner or owners, mortgagee or mortgagees
reside in the City of Port Jervis, the name and address for the
owner, owners, mortgagee, or mortgagees, mailing address,
telephone number, local agent's name, mailing address, telephone
number, e-mail address for the owner, owners, mortgagee or
mortgagees. Mailing addresses may not be a post office box but
must be an actual street address where the owner, owners,
mortgagee, mortgagees reside or do business.
(4) The name, street address, telephone number and e-mail address of
a natural person 21 years of age or older designated by the owner,
owners, mortgagee, mortgagees as the authorized agent for
receiving notices of Code violations and/or receiving process in any
Court proceeding or administrative enforcement proceeding on
behalf of such owner, owners, mortgagee or mortgagees in
connection with the enforcement of any applicable code, ordinance,
local law, regulation or statute. The agent for service of process
must maintain an office or reside in Orange County, New York.
(5) The name, street address, telephone number and e-mail address of
the firm or individual responsible for maintaining the property. The
individual or representative of the firm responsible for maintaining
the property must maintain an office or reside within Orange
County, New York and shall be available by telephone or in person
on a twenty-four-hour per day, seven day per week basis.
(6) A statement or plan as to what will be done to secure the structure
and property so that it will not become open to the general public.
(7) The status of water, sewer, natural gas and electric utilities
winterization of pipes at the structure and property.
A. By designating an authorized agent as set forth above under the
provisions of this chapter, the owner and/or mortgagee consents to
receive any and all notices of Code violations concerning the registered
abandoned or vacant property and all process in any Court proceeding
or administrative enforcement proceeding brought to enforce Code
provisions concerning the registered building or property by service of
the notice or process on the authorized agent. Any owner who has
designated an authorized agent under the provisions of this section
shall be deemed to consent to the continuation of the owner's
designation for the purpose of this section until the owner notifies the
Building Official/Code Enforcement Officer of the City of Port Jervis in
§ 415-3 PORT JERVIS CODE § 415-4
305:376
§ 415-5. Obligation of owners and/or mortgagees.
The owner or mortgagee of any structures that become abandoned or
vacant property and any person designated as an agent or responsible
for maintaining such structure or vacant property shall within 30 days of
the structure becoming abandoned or vacant or 30 days of the owner or
mortgagee taking title to the property, whether or not the deed for said
property has been recorded with the Orange County Clerk:
writing of a change of authorization or until the owner files a new
annual registration statement.
B. Any owner who fails to register an abandoned or vacant property under
the provisions of this chapter shall further be deemed to consent to
receive, by posting at the building, any and all notices of Code violation
and all processing of administrative or legal proceedings brought to
enforce Code provisions or other laws or regulations concerning the
structure or property.
A. Close and secure the structures owned by or mortgaged to the
applicant as imposed by this chapter and/or the State of New York or as
set forth in the rules and regulations provided by the Building Official/
Code Enforcement Officer of the City of Port Jervis.
B. Insure that the grounds of the structure, including yards, fences,
sidewalks, walks and driveways, are well maintained and kept free from
trash or debris.
C. Post a sign affixed to the structure with a name, address and telephone
number of the owner and/or mortgagee and the owner and/or
mortgagees authorized agent for the purposes of service of process and
the name, address and telephone number of the entity responsible for
the maintenance of the property. The sign shall be at least 18 inches by
24 inches in dimension and shall include the words "To Report Problems
with this Building/Property Call and/or E-mail" and shall be placed in a
location where it is clearly legible from the nearest public street or
sidewalk, whichever is nearer.
D. Maintain the structure in a secured and closed condition, keep the
grounds in a clean and well maintained condition and insure that the
sign is visible and intact until the building is again occupied or
demolished or until repair or rehabilitation of the building is complete.
E. All vacant real property shall at all times be properly maintained. A
vacant building or structure shall be considered properly maintained if:
(1) It has all doors and windows and other openings weather-tight and
secured against entry by the general public as well as animals.
(2) All roof and roof flashings shall be sound and tight such that no rain
will penetrate the structure and must allow for appropriate
drainage so as to prevent deterioration of the interior walls or other
§ 415-4 GARAGE AND YARD SALES § 415-5
305:377
interior portions of the building. No temporary measures shall be
permitted such as tarps, canvas, plastic, boards, etc. Temporary
boarding of windows may be permitted upon application and
consent by the Building Official of the City of Port Jervis. The
Building Official shall have the discretion to determine how long
boarding may be permitted.
(3) The building must be maintained in good repair, be structurally
sound and free from rubbish, garbage, and other debris.
(4) Structured members of the building shall be capable of bearing
both live and dead loads and the foundation walls likewise shall be
capable of supporting an appropriate load.
(5) The exterior of the structure shall be free of loose or rotten
materials as well as holes. Any exposed metal, wood or other
surface shall be protected from the element by appropriate
weather-coating materials (paint or similar treatment).
(6) Any balconies, canopies, signs, metal awnings, stairways, fire
escapes or other overhanging extensions shall be in good repair,
appropriately anchored. The exposed metal and wood surface of
such overhanging extensions shall also be protected from the
element against rust or decay by appropriate application of paint or
similar weather-coating.
(7) Any accessories or appurtenant structures, including but not
limited to garages, sheds, and other storage facilities, shall meet
the same standards.
(8) The property contains a posting with the name and twenty-fourhour
contact phone number of the local individual or property
management company responsible for the maintenance. This sign
must be posted on the front of the property so it is clearly visible
from the street.
(9) All bushes must be trimmed so as to provide an unobstructed view
of the front of the house from the public roadway.
(10) Snow removal pursuant to § 464-43A and B of the Port Jervis City
Code.
(11) Grass and weeds compliance pursuant to § 417-1A and B of the Port
Jervis City Code.
(12) Yards and lawns requirements pursuant to § 319-12B(8) of the Port
Jervis City Code.
(13) All combustibles must be removed from the interior of all buildings
and the exterior of the property.
(14) Smoke and carbon monoxide detectors are installed and
maintained in operable condition at all times.
§ 415-5 PORT JERVIS CODE § 415-5
305:378
§ 415-6. Inspections.
The Building Official/Code Enforcement Officer, fire inspector and/or Police
Department shall have the authority to inspect properties subject to this
statute for compliance with same and to issue citations for any violations.
§ 415-7. Certification of abandonment.
Upon the Building Official/Code Enforcement Officer or his/her designee
determining a property has been abandoned, he/she shall cause a
certification of abandonment to be filed with the Building Department's
records and such certification shall be served upon the owner of the
premises either personally or by posting a copy of the certification in a
conspicuous place on the property and by mailing a copy by certified mail
to the owner(s) last known address.
§ 415-8. Insurance.
The owner or mortgagee of any abandoned or vacant property shall acquire
or otherwise maintain liability insurance in the amount of not less than
$300,000 for buildings designated primarily for a one- or two-unit
residential use and not less than $1,000,000 for any other building including
but not limited to buildings designed for multifamily, manufacturing,
storage or commercial uses covering any damage to any person or any
property caused by any physical condition of or in the building. The City
of Port Jervis shall be named as an additional insured and shall be entitled
to notification of any renewal or lapse of coverage in writing of said policy.
The owner and/or mortgagee shall attach evidence of insurance to the
(15) The Building Official/Code Enforcement Officer of the City of Port
Jervis is provided with proof of inspection of the premises by the
agent or responsible party at least every 30 days after the
abandonment commences.
A. Upon the Building Official/Code Enforcement Officer filing a
certification of abandonment, the Building Official/Code Enforcement
Officer, Police Department and/or Fire Inspector may, without further
notice to the owner, take necessary steps to ensure the property and/or
dwelling is properly maintained pursuant to this chapter. Costs
incurred under this section shall be paid out of the municipal treasury
on certificate of the Building Official/Code Enforcement Officer. Such
costs shall be charged against the land on which the building existed, as
a municipal lien, or shall be added to the tax roll as an assessment or
shall be levied as a special tax against the land upon which the building
stands or stood or shall be recovered in a suit at law against the owner.
B. The owner of a property declared abandoned may petition the Building
Department to remove the certification of abandonment by providing
proof to the Building Official/Code Enforcement Officer that the basis of
the certificate of abandonment no longer exists and the owner is in
compliance with this chapter.
§ 415-5 GARAGE AND YARD SALES § 415-8
305:379
registration statement required by this chapter. Failure to attach the
insurance statement to the registration form submitted to the City shall
cause the registration form to be invalid. The alternative to insurance, the
owner and/or mortgagee must supply a cash bond acceptable in form to the
Building Official/Code Enforcement Officer of the City of Port Jervis in a sum
of $10,000 to secure the continued maintenance of the property throughout
its abandoned or vacant state and to remunerate the City of Port Jervis for
any expenses incurred in inspecting, securing, marketing or making such
building safe.
§ 415-9. Registry.
§ 415-10. Fees. [Amended 8-11-2014]
A. The City of Port Jervis shall establish an online registry of all properties
registered with the City under this chapter and shall include a
procedure by which citizens can provide the Building Official/Code
Enforcement through electronic means with information on
unregistered properties that may be subject to this chapter.
B. New owners shall register or re-register the abandoned or vacant
building or properties with the Building Official/Code Enforcement
Officer within 30 days of any transfer of ownership interest in the
abandoned or vacant building or property whether or not the deed to
said property has been recorded with the Orange County Clerk.
A. The owner/mortgagee of a vacant or abandoned building or property
shall pay an annual fee of $1,200 for the first year the building remains
vacant or abandoned or any portion of said year. The fee shall cover the
administrative costs for registering and processing the vacant or
abandoned building or property and the cost for the City in monitoring
the abandoned or vacant property or building. The fee shall be paid
upon filing of the registration form as required by this chapter.
Subsequent annual fees shall be:
(1) For the second year the building remains abandoned or vacant:
$2,200.
(2) For the third year the building remains abandoned or vacant:
$3,200.
(3) For the fourth year the building remains abandoned or vacant:
$4,200.
(4) For the fifth year the building remains abandoned or vacant:
$5,200.
(5) For the sixth year the building remains abandoned or vacant:
$6,200.
(6) For the seventh year the building remains abandoned or vacant:
$7,200.
§ 415-8 PORT JERVIS CODE § 415-10
305:380
§ 415-11. Exceptions.
§ 415-12. Penalties for offenses.
If an owner and/or mortgagee shall violate any portion of this chapter, they
shall be subject to a fine of not more than $500 or 30 days in jail, or both,
with the understanding that each day a violation continues shall be deemed
a separate offense.
(7) For the eighth year the building remains abandoned or vacant:
$8,200.
(8) For the ninth year the building remains abandoned or vacant:
$9,200.
(9) For the tenth year the building remains abandoned or vacant:
$10,200.
B. For ownership interest in any abandoned or vacant property whether or
not the deed has been recorded with the Orange County Clerk. The
owners shall be responsible for any unpaid fees.
A. A building or property which has suffered fire damage or damage
caused by extreme weather conditions shall be exempt from the
registration requirement for a period of 180 days after the date of the
fire or extreme weather event if the property owner/mortgagee submits
a request for exemption in writing to the Building Official/Code
Enforcement Officer of the City of Port Jervis. This request shall include
a description of the property; the names and addresses of the owner
and/or mortgagee; a statement of intent to repair and re-occupy the
building in an expedient manner or intent to demolish the building.
B. Additional exceptions to this statute shall be if in the sole and
reasonable discretion of the Building Official/Code Enforcement Officer
the property is subject to any one or more of the following:
(1) A valid open building permit being pursued with diligence;
(2) A pending land use application including site plan, subdivision or
special permit application being pursued with diligence;
(3) A pending application to a governmental body being pursued with
diligence for an approval pertaining to the physical improvement of
the property;
(4) Utilization of the building by the City of Port Jervis on a temporary
basis not to exceed 12 months for City purposes including but not
limited to fire training.
§ 415-10 GARAGE AND YARD SALES § 415-12
305:381
Chapter 417
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Housing standards — See Ch. 319. Tree maintenance and removal — See Ch. 492.
§ 415-12 PORT JERVIS CODE § 415-12
305:382
ARTICLE I
Brush, Grass and Weeds
[Adopted 7-27-1964 as part of §§ 13-9 through 13-11 of the 1964
Code of Ordinances (Ch. 65 of the 1981 Code)]
§ 417-1. Height regulated; poisonous plants prohibited.
§ 417-2. Duty to cut and remove. [Amended 11-10-1997 by L.L. No.
7-1997]
It shall be the duty of any owner, lessee or occupant of any lot or land to cut
and remove or cause to be cut and removed all weeds, grass or other rank,
poisonous or harmful vegetation as often as may be necessary to comply
with the provisions of § 417-1, provided that cutting and removing such
weeds, grass and vegetation at least once in every two weeks between May
15 and September 15 shall be deemed to be a compliance with this section.
§ 417-3. City action for noncompliance. [Amended 9-28-1981 by L.L.
No. 4-1981; 8-23-1999 by L.L. No. 2-1999]
If the provisions of §§ 417-1 and 417-2 are not complied with, the Building
Official of the City of Port Jervis may elect to do one of the following:
A. Height regulated. It shall be unlawful for any owner, lessee or occupant,
or any agent, servant, representative or employee of any such owner,
lessee or occupant, having control of any occupied or unoccupied lot or
land or any part thereof in the City, to permit or maintain on any such
lot or land or on or along the sidewalk, street or alley adjacent to the
same between the property line and the curb or middle of the alley or
for 10 feet outside the property line if there be no curb, any growth of
weeds, grass or other rank vegetation to a greater height than nine
inches on the average, or any accumulation of dead weeds, grass or
brush. [Amended 11-10-1997 by L.L. No. 7-1997]
B. Poisonous plants prohibited. It shall also be unlawful for any such
person or persons to cause, suffer or allow poison ivy, ragweed or other
poisonous plants or plants detrimental to health to grow on any such lot
or land in such manner that any part of such ivy, ragweed or other
poisonous or harmful weed shall extend upon, overhang or border any
public place, or allow the seed, pollen or other poisonous particles or
emanations therefrom to be carried through the air into any public
place.
A. Serve written notice, either personally or by mail, upon the owner,
lessee or occupant or any person having the care and/or control of any
such lot or land to comply with the provisions of § 417-1 and/or 417-2. If
the person upon whom the notice is served fails, neglects or refuses to
cut and remove or to cause to be cut and removed such weed, grass or
other vegetation within five days after receipt of such notice, or if no
person can be found in the City who either is or claims to be the owner
§ 417-1 GARAGE AND YARD SALES § 417-3
305:383
§ 417-4. Penalties for offenses. [Added 8-23-1999 by L.L. No.
2-1999]
Any person who shall be found to have violated § 417-3B of this chapter
shall be guilty of a violation and shall be subject to a fine of between $100
and $250 for each offense.
of said lot or land or who represents or claims to represent such
owner, the Building Official shall cause such weeds, grass and/or other
vegetation to be cut and removed. The actual cost for such cutting
and removal, plus 25% for inspection and other additional costs in
connection therewith, shall be certified by the Building Official to the
City Clerk-Treasurer and shall there upon become and be a lien upon
the property and shall become and form a part of the taxes next to be
assessed and levied upon such lot or land and shall bear interest at the
same rate as taxes and shall be collected and enforced by the same
officer and in the same manner as taxes.
B. Issue a court appearance ticket to the owner, lessee or occupant or any
person having the care and/or control of said lot or land alleging a
violation of §§ 417-1 and/or 417-2 and requiring a court appearance to
defend against same.
§ 417-3 PORT JERVIS CODE § 417-4
305:384
ARTICLE II
Use of Road Paving Materials in Front Yards or for Sidewalks
[Adopted 4-25-2016 by L.L. No. 11-2016]
§ 417-5. Blacktop and other paving materials prohibited.
Use of blacktop or other road materials, such as concrete, gravel, chips, and
crushed stone, shall be prohibited as cover for front yards on residential
lots in the City of Port Jervis. Blacktopping or other road materials shall
not be permitted between the front line and the front elevation of the
principal building in all residential districts. This prohibition shall not apply
to driveways or walkways from the front sidewalk to the front door or other
doors of residential buildings. The City actions for noncompliance with this
section and penalties for offenses of this section shall be the same as those
set forth in §§ 417-3 and 417-4 of Article I of Chapter 417 of the Port Jervis
City Code. "Front yard" is defined in § 535-4 of Article II of Chapter 535 of
the Port Jervis City Code.146
146. Editor's Note: See the definition of "yard, front" in said section.
§ 417-5 GARAGE AND YARD SALES § 417-5
305:385
Chapter 430
RENTAL PROPERTY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Multiple dwelling units — See Ch. 370.
§ 417-5 PORT JERVIS CODE § 417-5
305:386
ARTICLE I
Absentee Landlords
[Adopted 2-10-1997 by L.L. No. 1-1997 (Ch. 26 of the 1981 Code)]
§ 430-1. Definitions.
For the purposes of this article the terms used herein are defined as follows:
ACTION or PROCEEDING — Any action or proceeding which may be
instituted in the City Court of the City of Port Jervis in connection with the
alleged violation of any ordinance or local law of the City of Port Jervis or of
the Multiple Residence Law of the State of New York.
BUILDING — Any improved real property occupied by a commercial
building or use or occupied or used as a one- or two-family residence and
which is located within the City of Port Jervis, which building is, in whole or
in part, leased.[Amended 12-14-2015 by L.L. No. 6-2015]
OWNER — Any individual or individuals, partnership or corporation,
whether for profit or otherwise, in whose name title to the building stands.
PROCESS — A summons or any notice, mandate or other paper or process
issued under any provision of the Code of the City of Port Jervis, the New
York Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code or the Multiple Residence
Law of the State of New York.
§ 430-2. Posting of notice.
A. Every owner of a building, as herein defined, located within the City of
Port Jervis shall post and keep posted, affixed to the entry wall inside
the front or main entrance to each building on the affected property, a
notice, at least six inches by eight inches in size, in a frame with a glass
or plastic front, setting forth: [Amended 12-14-2015 by L.L. No.
6-2015]
(1) The name, address and telephone number of the owner of said
building.
(2) The name, address and telephone number of the person, firm or
corporation responsible for the management of the building.
(3) The name, address, apartment number and telephone number of
the resident superintendent of the building, if any. [Amended
9-8-1997 by L.L. No. 5-1997]
(4) Whether the building is heated by gas, oil or electricity and, if
heated by oil, the name, address and telephone number of the
supplier thereof.
B. A copy of the completed notice shall be filed in the office of the Building
Department of the City of Port Jervis.
§ 430-1 GARAGE AND YARD SALES § 430-3
305:387
§ 430-3. Exceptions.
In the event that a building is a one-family house, such notice need not be
posted. In the event that a building is a two-family house and the owner of
the building resides in the building, such notice need not be posted, but the
owner shall furnish, in writing, each tenant and the Building Department
with the information required in § 430-2 above.
§ 430-4. Nonresident landlord; resident agent; change of
ownership.
§ 430-5. Penalties for offenses.
Any person committing an offense against any provision of this article shall,
upon conviction thereof, be punishable by a fine of not less than $100 nor
more than $500.
A. If such owner or agent is a corporation or a nonresident of the City of
Port Jervis, he or such corporation shall file with the Building
Department the name, address and telephone number of an officer of
the corporation or other individual authorized to accept service of
notices and process on behalf of the corporation or such nonresident of
the City of Port Jervis. [Amended 9-8-1997 by L.L. No. 5-1997]
B. Either the managing agent or the person designated to accept service
on behalf of a corporation or a nonresident of the City of Port Jervis
shall reside in the City of Port Jervis.
C. Any change in ownership, managing agent or oil supplier shall
necessitate the posting, filing with the Building Department and
maintenance of a new identification sign within 10 days after such
change.
§ 430-3 PORT JERVIS CODE § 430-5
305:388
ARTICLE II
Eviction for Illegal Drug Use and Possession
[Adopted 4-9-2001 by L.L. No. 2-2001 (Ch. 82 of the 1981 Code)]
§ 430-6. Purpose and intent.
§ 430-7. Eviction.
A special proceeding to evict a tenant from leased premises may be
maintained upon the ground that the premises, or any part thereof, have
been used or occupied for the purpose of using or possessing illegal drugs.
For purposes of this section, the term "tenant," in addition to its ordinary
meaning, shall include an occupant of one or more rooms in a rooming
house or a resident, not including a transient occupant, of one or more
rooms in a hotel who has been in possession for 30 consecutive days or
longer.
§ 430-8. Procedures.
The procedures applicable to summary proceedings to recover possession
of real property under state law shall be applicable to any proceeding
brought under this article.
§ 430-9. Service of notice; commencement of eviction proceedings.
A. The Common Council of the City of Port Jervis is concerned about the
use of rental properties located within the City for the purposes of
illegal drug use, possession and sale.
B. These illegal acts have a deleterious effect upon the neighborhoods in
which the properties are located.
C. The remedies provided in § 715 of the New York State Real Property
Actions and Proceedings Law do not adequately address the problems
resulting from the aforementioned illegal acts; and the District Attorney
of Orange County is willing to proceed with evictions pursuant to the
attached ordinance for eviction for illegal drug use and possession.
A. The following persons, corporations or agencies may serve personally
upon the owner or landlord, or upon his agent, of demised real property
used or occupied in whole or in part for the use or possession of illegal
drugs, a written notice requiring the owner or landlord to make an
application for the removal of the person(s) so using or occupying the
premises:
(1) Any domestic corporation organized for the suppression of vice,
subject to or which submits to visitation by the State Department of
Social Services and possesses a certificate from such fact of
conformity with regulations of the Department.
§ 430-6 GARAGE AND YARD SALES § 430-9
305:389
§ 430-10. Multiple convictions to constitute presumptive evidence.
Two or more convictions of any person or persons, within a period of one
year, for any of the offenses defined in Articles 220 and 221 of the Penal
Law arising out of conduct engaged in at the same real property consisting
of a dwelling as that term is defined in Subdivision 4 of § 4 of the Multiple
Dwellings Law shall be presumptive evidence of conduct constituting use
and occupancy of the premises for the purpose of using and possessing
illegal drugs, and of the tenant's knowledge thereof.
§ 430-11. Civil penalties.
A court granting a petition pursuant to this section may, in addition to any
other order provided by law, make an order imposing and requiring the
payment by the respondent of a civil penalty not exceeding $5,000 to the
municipality in which the subject premises is located and the payment of
reasonable attorneys' fees and the costs of the proceeding to the petitioner.
In any such case, multiple respondents shall be jointly and severally liable
for any payment so ordered, and the amounts of such payments shall
constitute a lien upon the subject realty.
(2) Any duly authorized enforcement agency of the state or of a
subdivision thereof, under a duty to enforce the provisions of the
Penal Law or of any state or local law, ordinance, code, rule or
regulation relating to buildings.
B. If the owner or landlord or his agent does not make such application
within 15 days thereafter; or having made it, does not in good faith
diligently prosecute it, the person, corporation or enforcement agency
giving the notice may bring a proceeding under this article for such
removal as though the petitioner were the owner or landlord of the
premises, and shall have precedence over any similar proceeding
thereafter brought by such owner or landlord or to one theretofore
brought by him and not prosecuted diligently and in good faith.
C. Proof of the ill repute of the demised premises or of the occupants
thereof or of those resulting thereto shall constitute presumptive
evidence of the unlawful use of the demised premises required to be
stated in the petition for removal. Both the person(s) in possession of
the property and the owner or landlord shall be made respondents in
the proceedings.
§ 430-9 PORT JERVIS CODE § 430-11
305:390
Chapter 445
SEWER USE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Plumbing — See Ch. 410.
Streets, sidewalks and public property — See
Ch. 464.
Water — See Ch. 513.
Water rules and regulations — See Ch. A615.
§ 430-11 GARAGE AND YARD SALES § 430-11
305:391

ARTICLE I
Short Title; Purpose; Repealer
§ 445-1. Short title.
For brevity and ease of communication, this chapter may be cited as the
"City of Port Jervis Sewer Use Law."
§ 445-2. General purpose.
The general purpose of this chapter is the following: to provide for efficient,
economic, environmentally safe, and legal operation of the City of Port
Jervis POTW Collection System (POTWCS) and of the City of Port Jervis
POTW Treatment Plant (sometimes referred to herein collectively as "the
POTW").
§ 445-3. Specific purposes.
The specific purposes of this chapter are the following:
§ 445-4. Repealer.
The provisions in the existing City of Port Jervis Code entitled "Ordinance
Regulating Sewers and Sewage Disposal of 1968" are hereby repealed, and
said provisions are replaced by the herein set forth Articles I through XIV
inclusive.
A. To prevent the introduction of substances into the POTW that will:
(1) Interfere with the POTW in any way.
(2) Pass through the POTW to the state's waters and cause
contravention of standards for those waters or cause violation of
the POTW's SPDES permit.
(3) Increase the cost or otherwise hamper the disposal of POTW sludge
and/or residuals.
(4) Endanger municipal and/or POTW employees or contractors.
(5) Cause air pollution, or groundwater pollution, directly or indirectly.
(6) Cause, directly or indirectly, any public nuisance condition.
B. To prevent new sources of infiltration and inflow and, as much as
possible, eliminate existing sources of infiltration and inflow.
C. To assure that new sewers and connections are properly constructed.
§ 445-1 GARAGE AND YARD SALES § 445-4
305:393

ARTICLE II
Definitions
§ 445-5. Defined terms.
Unless otherwise stated in the section where the term is used in this
chapter, the meaning of terms used in this chapter shall be as stated below.
When not inconsistent with the context, the present tense shall include the
future, and words used in the plural shall include the singular and vice
versa. Furthermore, a masculine pronoun shall include the feminine. "Shall"
is mandatory; "may" is permissive.
ABNORMAL SEWAGE — Sewage whose concentration of one or more
characteristics of normal sewage exceeds the maximum concentrations of
the characteristics of normal sewage. See "normal sewage."
ACT or THE ACT — The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known
as the Clean Water Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq., as may be
amended.
ADMINISTRATOR — The Regional Administrator of the United States
Environmental Protection Agency (USEPA), Region 2.
AMMONIA — The result obtained, using an approved laboratory procedure,
to determine the quantity of ammonia in a sample, expressed as milligrams
of nitrogen per liter.
APPLICANT — That person who makes application for any permit. The
applicant may be an owner, new or old, or his agent.
APPROVAL AUTHORITY — The USEPA, or the New York State Department
of Environmental Conservation (NYSDEC), in the event the NYSDEC is
delegated approval authority responsibility by the USEPA.
APPROVED LABORATORY PROCEDURE — The procedures defined as
"standard methods" in this article, or other procedures approved by the
Director, for flow measurement or determination of the concentration of
pollutants or their surrogates in waters, wastewaters, and/or sludges.
ASTM (AMERICAN SOCIETY FOR TESTING AND MATERIALS) — The
latest edition of any ASTM specification, when stipulated in this chapter.
AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE OF THE INDUSTRIAL USER — An
authorized representative of the industrial user may be:
A principal executive officer of at least the level of vice president, if the
industrial user is a corporation;
A.
A general partner or proprietor, if the industrial user is a partnership or
proprietorship, respectively;
B.
A duly authorized representative of the individual designated above,
if such representative is responsible for the overall operation of the
facilities from which the indirect discharge originates.
C.
§ 445-5 GARAGE AND YARD SALES § 445-5
305:395
BOD (BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND) — The result obtained when
using an approved laboratory procedure to determine the quantity of
oxygen utilized in the aerobic biochemical oxidation of organic matter or in
a sample, expressed in milligrams per liter.
BUILDER — Any person who undertakes to construct a building or any part
of a building, either under contract or for resale.
BUILDING DRAIN — That part of the lowest horizontal piping of a building
drainage system that receives the discharge from soil, waste, and other
drainage pipes inside the building walls and conveys it to the building
lateral, which begins five feet outside the inner face of the building wall.
BUILDING OFFICIAL — That individual nominated by the City of Port
Jervis Mayor and confirmed by the City of Port Jervis Common Council as
the Building Official to administer the City's Building Department. Such
an individual has the knowledge and the authority to inspect and make
determinations for the City of Port Jervis regarding the construction of,
safety of, suitability for habitation or suitability for other uses of all types
of buildings and other structures that are located within the City of Port
Jervis. At certain times, as provided for in this chapter and in the City's
building codes, the Building Official's authority and opinion will be required
in relation to sewage connections or other structures or facilities which are
located at or in a building or structure. This definition shall also include the
Building Official's authorized deputy, agent, or representative.
CHLORINE DEMAND — The result obtained when using an approved
laboratory procedure to determine the difference between the amount of
chlorine added to a sample and the amount of chlorine remaining in the
sample at the end of a specified contact time at room temperature,
expressed in milligrams per liter.
CITY — The City of Port Jervis, incorporated in 1907.
COD (CHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND) — The result obtained when using an
approved laboratory procedure to measure the oxygen requirement of that
portion of matter, in a sample, that is susceptible to oxidation, by a specific
chemical oxidant, expressed in milligrams per liter.
COLOR — The optical density at the visual wavelength of maximum
absorption, relative to distilled water. One hundred percent transmittance
is equivalent to 0.0 optical density.
COMPOSITE SAMPLE — The sample resulting from the combination of
individual samples of wastewater taken at selected intervals, for a specified
time period. The individual samples may have equal volumes or the
individual volumes may be proportioned to the flow at the time of sampling.
CONNECTION — Attachment of one user to a sewer (see "extension").
CONNECTION CHARGE (TAP FEE) — The one-time application fee to offset
City of Port Jervis expenses to process an application for a connection of a
building/street lateral to the public sewer. The fee also covers plan review,
permit issuance, street repair cost, and inspection costs. The fee may be
§ 445-5 PORT JERVIS CODE § 445-5
305:396
scaled to the amount of work involved or to the size of the public sewer
involved.
CONTROL AUTHORITY — The term shall refer to "approval authority," or
to the Director of Public Works when City of Port Jervis has an approved
pretreatment program under the provisions of 40 CFR 403.11.
CONTROL MANHOLE — A manhole accessible to the control authority in or
upstream of the street lateral, such that samples collected from the manhole
represent the discharge to the POTW.
CONVENTIONAL POLLUTANT — A pollutant that the POTW treatment
plant was designed to treat, defined in accordance with the Act.
COOLING WATER — The water discharged from any system of
condensation, air conditioning, refrigeration, or other sources. It shall
contain no polluting substances that would produce COD or suspended
solids in excess of five milligrams per liter or toxic substances, as limited
elsewhere in this chapter.
COUNTY — Orange County, New York.
DEP — The New York City Department of Environmental Protection, which
owns and operates the POTW Treatment Plant pursuant to the 1954 U.S.
Supreme Court Decree, 347 U.S. 995 (1954).
DEVELOPER — Any person who subdivides land for the purpose of
constructing, or causing to be constructed, buildings for which wastewater
disposal facilities are required.
DIRECT DISCHARGE — The discharge of treated or untreated wastewater
directly to the waters of the State of New York. (For reference, see "indirect
discharge.")
DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC WORKS or DIRECTOR — That individual nominated
by the City of Port Jervis Mayor and confirmed by the City of Port Jervis
Common Council as the Director of Public Works of Water and Wastewater.
Such an individual shall be qualified to oversee wastewater collection,
treatment and distribution and POTW collection system operations. This
definition shall also include his authorized deputy, agents, or
representatives.
DOMESTIC WASTES — See "sewage, domestic."
DRY SEWER — The sanitary sewer installed in anticipation of future
connection to a POTW but which is not used, in the meantime, for transport
of storm or sanitary sewage.
EASEMENT — An acquired legal right for the specific use of land owned by
others.
END OF PIPE — For the purpose of determining compliance with limitations
prescribed by Article IX, the control manhole, provided that the samples
collected from the control manhole are representative of the discharge to
the POTW.
§ 445-5 GARAGE AND YARD SALES § 445-5
305:397
END OF PIPE CONCENTRATION — The concentration of a substance in a
sample of wastewater at end of pipe.
END OF PROCESS CONCENTRATION — See "National Categorical
Pretreatment Standard."
EPA, USEPA, or UNITED STATES ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION
AGENCY — The agency of the federal government charged with the
administration and enforcement of federal environmental laws, rules, and
regulations. Also may be used as a designation for the Administrator or
other duly authorized official of this agency.
EXTENSION — Attachment of a sewer line, with more than one user, to an
existing sewer line.
FACILITY — All buildings, other structures, grounds and contiguous
property at any locations related to or connected with a user at the user's
location.
FLOATABLE OIL — Oil, grease, or fat in a physical state such that it
will separate by gravity from wastewater by treatment in a wastewater
treatment facility.
FLOW RATE — The quantity of liquid or waste that flows in a certain period
of time.
GARBAGE — The solid wastes from the preparation, cooking, and
dispensing of food, from the handling, storage, and sale of produce, and
from the packaging and canning of food.
GRAB SAMPLE — A single sample of wastewater representing the physical,
chemical, and biological characteristics of the wastewater at one point and
time.
ICS FORM — The form used by the NYSDEC to survey industries to perform
and update the Industrial Chemical Survey.
INDIRECT DISCHARGE — The introduction of wastewater into a POTW
for treatment and ultimate discharge of the treated effluent to the state's
waters. (For reference, see "direct discharge.")
INDUSTRIAL — Meaning or pertaining to industry, manufacturing,
commerce, trade, business, or institution and is distinguished from
domestic or residential.
INDUSTRIAL CHEMICAL SURVEY (ICS) — The survey of industries in New
York State, initiated by the NYSDEC, to determine chemical usage and
storage by those industries.
INDUSTRIAL USER — See "user, industrial."
INDUSTRIAL WASTES — The liquid or liquid-carried solid, liquid and/or
gaseous wastes from industrial manufacturing processes, trade, service,
utility, or business, as distinct from sanitary sewage.
INFILTRATION — Water, other than wastewater, that enters a sewer system
(excluding building drains) from the ground through such means as
§ 445-5 PORT JERVIS CODE § 445-5
305:398
defective pipes, pipe joints, connections, or manholes. Infiltration does not
include, and is distinguished from, inflow. Infiltration is inadvertent, that is,
not purposely designed or built into the sewer or drain.
INFLOW — Water, other than wastewater, that enters a sewer system
(including building drains) from sources such as, but not limited to, roof
leaders, cellar drains, area drains, drains from springs and swampy areas,
manhole covers, cross-connections between storm sewers and sanitary
sewers, catch basins, cooling towers, stormwaters, foundation drains,
swimming pools, surface runoff, street wash waters, or drainage. Inflow
does not include, and is distinguished from, infiltration. Inflow is purposely
designed and/or built into the sewer or drain.
INTERFERENCE — A discharge which, alone or in conjunction with
discharges by other sources:
LATERAL, BUILDING — The sewer extension from the building drain to the
street lateral or other place of wastewater disposal.
LATERAL, STREET — The sewer extension from the public sewer to the
property line.
NATIONAL CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARD or
CATEGORICAL STANDARD — Any regulation containing pollutant
discharge limits promulgated by the EPA in accordance with Section 307(b)
Inhibits or disrupts the POTW, its treatment processes or operations, or
its sludge processes, use or disposal; and
A.
Therefore is a cause of a violation of any requirement of the POTW's
SPDES permit (including an increase in the magnitude or duration of
a violation) or of the prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal by
the POTW in accordance with the following statutory provisions and
regulations or permits issued thereunder (or more stringent state or
local regulations):
(1) Section 405 of the Clean Water Act;147
The Solid Waste Disposal Act (SWDA) (including Title II, more
commonly referred to as the Resource Conservation and Recovery
Act [RCRA]),148 and including state regulations contained in any
state sludge management plan prepared pursuant to Subtitle D of
the SWDA);
(2)
(3) Clean Air Act;149
(4) Toxic Substances Control Act;150 and
(5) Marine Protection, Research and Sanctuaries Act.
B.
147. Editor's Note: See 33 U.S.C. § 1345.
148. Editor's Note: See 42 U.S.C. § 6901 et seq.
149. Editor's Note: See 42 U.S.C. § 7401 et seq.
150. Editor's Note: See 15 U.S.C. § 2601 et seq.
§ 445-5 GARAGE AND YARD SALES § 445-5
305:399
and (c) of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1317(b) and (c), which applies to a specific
category of industrial users. These standards apply at the end of the
categorical process ("end of process").
NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (NPDES)
PERMIT — A permit issued pursuant to Section 402 of the Act (33 U.S.C.
§ 1342).
NATIONAL PROHIBITIVE DISCHARGE STANDARD or PROHIBITIVE
DISCHARGE STANDARD — Any regulation developed under the authority
of Section 307(b) of the Act and 40 CFR 403.5.
NATURAL OUTLET — Any outlet, including storm sewers and combined
sewer overflows, to state's waters.
NEW OWNER — That individual or entity who purchased property within
the service area of the City of Port Jervis after the effective date of this
chapter.
NEW SOURCE — Any source, the construction of which is commenced after
the publication of the proposed regulation prescribing a Section 307(c)
(33 U.S.C. § 1317(c)) categorical pretreatment standard which will be
applicable to such source, if such standard is thereafter promulgated.
NEW USER — A discharger to the POTW who commences discharge after
the effective date of this chapter.
NORMAL SEWAGE — See "sewage, normal."
NUISANCE — The use or lack of use of the POTW in such a manner so as to
endanger life or health, give offense to the senses, or obstruct or otherwise
interfere with the reasonable use or maintenance of the POTW.
OIL AND GREASE — The result obtained when using an approved
laboratory procedure to determine the quantity of fats, wax, grease, and oil
in a sample, expressed in milligrams per liter.
OLD OWNER — That individual or entity who owns or owned a property,
within the service area of the POTW, purchased prior to the effective date
of this chapter, or who inherited the property at any time and intends to sell
the property, or has sold the property to a new owner, also the agent of the
old owner.
OTHER WASTES — Garbage (shredded or unshredded), refuse, wood, egg
shells, coffee grounds, sawdust, shavings, bark, sand, lime, ashes, and all
other discarded matter not normally present in sewage or industrial wastes.
Also, the discarded matter not normally present in sewage or industrial
waste.
PASS-THROUGH — The discharge which exits the POTW into waters of the
state in quantities which, alone or in conjunction with discharges from other
sources, is a cause of a violation of any requirement of the POTW's SPDES
permit (including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation).
PERMIT — A temporary revocable written document allowing use of the
POTW for specified wastes over a limited period of time, containing
§ 445-5 PORT JERVIS CODE § 445-5
305:400
sampling locations and reporting frequencies, and requiring other actions
as authorized by this chapter.
PERSON — Any individual, public or private corporation, political
subdivision, federal, state, or local agency or entity, association, trust,
estate or any other legal entity whatsoever.
pH — The logarithm (base 10) of the reciprocal of the weight of hydrogen
ions, in gram moles per liter of solution. A pH value of 7.0, the pH scale
midpoint, represents neutrality. Values above 7.0 represent alkaline
conditions. Values below 7.0 represent acid conditions.
PHOSPHORUS, TOTAL — See "total phosphorus."
POLLUTANT — Any material placed into or onto the state's waters, lands
and/or airs, which interferes with the beneficial use of that water, land and/
or air by any living thing at any time.
POLLUTION — The man-made or man-induced alteration of the chemical,
physical, biological, and/or radiological integrity of the state's waters, lands
and/or airs resulting from the introduction of a pollutant into these media.
POTW COLLECTION SYSTEM or POTWCS — That portion of the City of Port
Jervis POTW that is owned and operated or maintained by the City of Port
Jervis which collects and conveys sewage to the POTW Treatment Plant.
POTW TREATMENT PLANT — That portion of the POTW that is owned by
the City of New York and operated by the New York City Department of
Environmental Protection that provides treatment to wastewater and treats
sludge and residuals derived from such treatment and the pump stations
partly treating and conveying that wastewater.
PRETREATMENT (TREATMENT) — The reduction of the amount of
pollutants, the elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of
pollutant properties in wastewater to a less harmful state prior to or in lieu
of discharging or otherwise introducing such pollutants into a POTW. The
reduction or alteration can be achieved by physical, chemical, or biological
process, by process changes, or by other means, except as prohibited by 40
CFR 403.6(d).
PRETREATMENT REQUIREMENTS — Any substantive or procedural
requirement related to pretreatment, other than a national pretreatment
standard imposed on an industrial user.
PRETREATMENT STANDARD or NATIONAL PRETREATMENT STANDARD
— Any categorical standard or prohibitive discharge standard.
PRIORITY POLLUTANTS — The most recently revised or updated list,
developed by the EPA, in accordance with the Act.
PROHIBITIVE DISCHARGE STANDARD — See "National Prohibitive
Discharge Standard."
PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE — The wastes from the preparation,
cooking, and dispensing of food that have been shredded to such a degree
that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally
§ 445-5 GARAGE AND YARD SALES § 445-5
305:401
prevailing in public sewers, and with no particle having a dimension greater
than 1/2 inch in any dimension.
PUBLICLY OWNED TREATMENT WORKS (POTW) — The treatment works,
as defined by Section 212 of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1292) that services the City
of Port Jervis. This definition includes any sewers and appurtenances that
transport wastewater to the POTW Treatment Plant but does not include
pipes, sewers, or other conveyances not connected directly or indirectly to
a facility providing treatment.
RECEIVING WATERS — A natural watercourse or body of water (usually
waters of the state) into which treated or untreated sewage is discharged.
RECORDS — Shall include, but not be limited to, any printed, typewritten,
handwritten or otherwise recorded matter of whatever character (including
paper or electronic media), including but not limited to letters, files,
memoranda, directives, notes and notebooks, correspondence, descriptions,
telephone call slips, photographs, permits, applications, reports,
compilations, films, graphs and inspection reports. For the purposes of this
chapter, "records" shall mean records of and relating to waste generation,
reuse and disposal and shall include records of usage of raw materials.
ROOF DRAIN — A drain installed to receive water collecting on the surface
of a roof for disposal.
SEPTAGE — All liquids and solids in and removed from septic tanks, holding
tanks, cesspools, or approved type of chemical toilets, including but not
limited to those serving private residences, commercial establishments,
institutions, and industries. Also, sludge from small sewage treatment
plants. Septage shall not have been contaminated with substances of
concern or priority pollutants.
SEPTIC TANK — A private domestic sewage treatment system consisting of
an underground tank (with suitable baffling), constructed and installed in
accordance with any and/or all local and state requirements.
SERVICE AREA OF THE POTW — The legally defined bounds of real
property from which wastewater may be discharged into the POTW. The
bounds shall be established, altered, changed, modified, reduced, enlarged,
combined, or consolidated by action of the City of Port Jervis Common
Council.
SEWAGE — A combination of the water-carried wastes from residences,
business buildings, institutions, and industrial establishments, and such
ground-, surface, and stormwater as may be inadvertently present. The
admixture of sewage, as defined above, with industrial wastes and other
wastes shall also be considered "sewage," within the meaning of this
definition.
SEWAGE TREATMENT PLANT (WATER POLLUTION CONTROL PLANT) —
See "POTW Treatment Plant."
SEWAGE, DOMESTIC (DOMESTIC WASTES) — Liquid wastes from the
noncommercial preparation, cooking, and handling of food, liquid wastes
containing human excrement and similar matter from the sanitary
§ 445-5 PORT JERVIS CODE § 445-5
305:402
conveniences in dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial buildings, and
institutions, or liquid wastes from clothes washing and/or floor/wall
washing. Therefore, domestic sewage includes both black water and gray
water. (See "sewage, sanitary.")
SEWAGE, NORMAL —
SEWAGE, SANITARY — Liquid wastes from the sanitary conveniences of
dwellings (including apartment houses and hotels), office buildings,
factories, or institutions, which is free from stormwater, surface water, and
industrial and other wastes. (See "domestic wastes.")
SEWAGE, UNUSUAL STRENGTH OR CHARACTER — Sewage which has
concentrations greater than those of normal sewage and/or which contains
substances of concern.
SEWER — A pipe or conduit for carrying or transporting sewage.
SEWER, COMBINED — A sewer designed to receive and transport both
surface runoff and sewage.
SEWER, PUBLIC — A sewer in which all abutting property owners have
equal rights and the use of which is controlled by the City of Port Jervis.
Sewage, industrial wastes, or other wastes, which show, by analysis, the
following characteristics:
BOD (five-day): 2,090 lbs. per million gallons (250 milligrams per
liter), or less.
(1)
Suspended solids: 2,500 lbs. per million gallons (300 milligrams
per liter), or less.
(2)
Phosphorus: 125 lbs. per million gallons (15 milligrams per liter),
or less.
(3)
Ammonia: 250 lbs. per million gallons (30 milligrams per liter), or
less.
(4)
Total Kjeldahl Nitrogen: 417 lbs. per million (50 milligrams per
liter), or less.
(5)
Chlorine demand: 209 lbs. per million gallons (25 milligrams per
liter), or less.
(6)
Chemical oxygen demand: 2,920 lbs. per million gallons (350
milligrams per liter), or less.
(7)
Oil and grease: 830 lbs. per million gallons (100 milligrams per
liter), or less.
(8)
A.
Despite satisfying one or more of these characteristics, if the sewage
also contains substances of concern, it may not be considered normal
sewage.
B.
§ 445-5 GARAGE AND YARD SALES § 445-5
305:403
SEWER, SANITARY — A sewer which carries sewage, and to which storm-,
surface, and groundwaters are not intentionally admitted.
SEWER, STORM (STORM DRAIN) — A sewer that carries storm and surface
waters and drainage but excludes sewage and industrial wastewaters, other
than cooling waters and other unpolluted waters.
SEWERAGE SURCHARGE — The demand payment for the use of a public
sewer and/or sewage treatment plant for the handling of any sewage,
industrial wastes, or other wastes accepted for admission thereto in which
the characteristics thereof exceed the maximum values of such
characteristics in normal sewage. (See "volume charge.")
SEWERAGE SYSTEM — All facilities that collect, regulate, pump, and
transport wastewater to and away from the POTW Treatment Plant.
SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER — See "user, significant industrial."
SIGNIFICANT NONCOMPLIANCE (SNC) — A user is in significant
noncompliance if its violation(s) meet(s) one or more of the following
criteria:
Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined here as
those, in 66% or more of all of the measurements taken during a sixmonth
period, which exceed (by any magnitude) the daily maximum
limit or average limit for the same pollutant parameter.
A.
Technical review criteria (TRC) violations, defined here as those, in 33%
or more of all of the measurements for each pollutant parameter taken
during a six-month period, which equal or exceed the product of the
daily maximum limits multiplied by the applicable TRC (TRC = 1.4 for
BOD, TSS, fats, oil and grease; TRC = 1.2 for all other pollutants).
B.
Any other violation of a pretreatment effluent limit (daily maximum
or long-term average) that the Director determines has caused, alone
or in combination with other discharges, interference or pass-through
(including endangering the health of POTW personnel or the general
public);
C.
Any discharge of a pollutant that has caused imminent endangerment
to human health, welfare or to the environment or has resulted in the
Director's exercise of its emergency authority under Article XI of this
chapter;
D.
Failure to meet, within 90 days after the schedule date, a compliance
schedule milestone contained in a local control mechanism or
enforcement order for starting construction, completing construction,
or attaining final compliance;
E.
Failure to provide, within 30 days after the due date, required reports
such as baseline monitoring reports, ninety-day compliance reports,
periodic self-monitoring reports, and reports on compliance with
compliance schedules;
F.
§ 445-5 PORT JERVIS CODE § 445-5
305:404
SLUG — A substantial deviation from normal rates of discharge or
constituent concentration (see "sewage, normal") sufficient to cause
interference. In any event, a discharge which, in concentration of any
constituent or in quantity of flow, exceeds, for any period of duration
longer than 15 minutes, more than five times the average twenty-four-hour
concentration or flow during normal user operations shall constitute a slug.
STANDARD INDUSTRIAL CLASSIFICATION (SIC) — A classification
pursuant to the Standard Industrial Classification Manual issued by the
Executive Office of the President, Office of Management and Budget, 1972,
and subsequent revisions.
STANDARD METHODS — Procedures contained in the latest edition of
"Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater,"
published by the American Public Health Association, procedures
established by the Administrator, pursuant to Section 304(g) of the Act and
contained in 40 CFR Part 136, and amendments thereto (If 40 CFR Part
136 does not include a sampling or analytical technique for the pollutant
in question, then procedures set forth in the EPA publication, "Sampling
and Analysis Procedures for Screening of Industrial Effluents for Priority
Pollutants", April 1977, and amendments thereto, shall be used.), any other
procedure approved by the Administrator, or any other procedure approved
by the Director, whichever is the most conservative.
STATE — State of New York.
STATE'S WATERS — See "waters of the state."
STORMWATER — Any flow occurring during or following any form of
natural precipitation; also the flow resulting therefrom.
SUBSTANCES OF CONCERN — Those compounds which the New York
State Department of Environmental Conservation has determined may be
harmful to humans or the environment.
SUMP PUMP — A mechanism used for removing water from a sump or wet
well.
SUSPENDED SOLIDS — The result obtained, using an approved laboratory
procedure, to determine the dry weight of solids, in a sample, that either
float on the surface of, or are in suspension, or are settleable, and can be
removed from the sample by filtration, expressed in milligrams per liter.
TOTAL KJELDAHL NITROGEN (TKN) — The result obtained, using an
approved laboratory procedure, to determine the quantity of ammonia in
a sample and released during the acid digestion of organic nitrogen
compounds, expressed as milligrams of nitrogen per liter.
TOTAL PHOSPHORUS — The result obtained, using an approved laboratory
procedure, to determine the total quantity of orthophosphate in a sample of
G. Failure to report accurately any noncompliance;
Any other violation that the Director determines will adversely affect
the implementation or operation of the local pretreatment program.
H.
§ 445-5 GARAGE AND YARD SALES § 445-5
305:405
wastewater, following the hydrolysis of phosphorus compounds, expressed
as milligrams of phosphorus per liter of sample.
TOXIC SUBSTANCES — Any substance, whether gaseous, liquid, or solid,
that when discharged to a public sewer in sufficient quantities may be
hazardous to POTW operation and maintenance personnel, tend to interfere
with any biological sewage treatment process, or to constitute a hazard
to recreation in the receiving waters, due to the effluent from a sewage
treatment plant or overflow point. Any pollutant or combination of
pollutants listed as toxic in regulations promulgated by the EPA under
provisions of Clean Water Act Section 307(a), or other acts.
USER — Any person who contributes, causes, or permits the contribution of
wastewater into the POTW.
USER CHARGE — See "volume charge."
USER, EXISTING — A discharger to the POTW who is discharging on or
before the effective date of this chapter.
USER, INDUSTRIAL — A discharger to the POTW who discharges
nondomestic wastewaters.
USER, NEW — A discharger to the POTW who initiates discharge after the
effective date of this chapter.
USER, SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL (SIU) — An industrial user of the City of
Port Jervis POTW who is:
VOLUME CHARGE (USER CHARGE) — The demand sewer use charge
which is based, in part or wholly, on the volume of normal sewage
discharged into the POTW (there may be surcharges, as provided for in
Article XII). The volume charge shall be based on a specific cost per 100
cubic feet or per 1,000 gallons. The specific charge set by resolution of
the City of Port Jervis Common Council pursuant to § 280-10 of the City
Code. The moneys so obtained shall be used for current operation and
maintenance, for retirement of bonded indebtedness, and for the funding
Subject to National Categorical Pretreatment Standards promulgated
by the EPA.
A.
Having substantial impact, either singly or in combination with other
industries, on the operation of the treatment works.
B.
Using, on an annual basis, more than 10,000 pounds or 1,000 gallons
of raw material containing priority pollutants and/or substances of
concern and discharging a measurable quantity of these pollutants to
the sewer system.
C.
Discharging more than 5% of the flow or load of conventional pollutants
received by the POTW treatment plant.
* Note: A user discharging a measurable quantity of a pollutant may
be classified as nonsignificant if, at the influent to the POTW treatment
plant, the pollutant is not detectable.
D.
§ 445-5 PORT JERVIS CODE § 445-5
305:406
of capital projects, of the POTW Collection System (POTWCS). The basis
of volume charge calculations shall be made available to the public, on
demand, as provided in Article XIII. The volume charge shall be
recalculated annually, as well as the surcharge rates.
WASTEWATER — The liquid and water-carried industrial or domestic
wastewaters from dwellings, commercial establishments, industrial
facilities, and institutions, together with any groundwater, surface water,
and stormwater that may be present, whether treated or untreated, which
is contributed into or permitted to enter the POTW.
WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT — A permit as set forth in Article X of
this chapter.
WASTEWATER, UNUSUAL STRENGTH OR CHARACTER — See "sewage,
unusual strength or character."
WATERS OF THE STATE (STATE'S WATERS) — All streams, lakes, ponds,
marshes, watercourses, waterways, wells, springs, reservoirs, aquifers,
irrigation systems, drainage systems, and all other bodies or accumulations
of water, surface or underground, natural or artificial, public or private,
which are contained within, flow through, or border upon the state or any
portion thereof.
§ 445-6. Abbreviations.
The following abbreviations shall have the designated meanings:
ANSI American National Standards Institute
ASTM American Society for Testing and Materials
AWWA American Water Works Association
BOD Biochemical Oxygen Demand
CFR Code of Federal Regulations
COD Chemical oxygen demand
CPLR Code of Public Law and Rules
DEP or NYCDEP New York City Department of Environmental Protection
DPW City of Port Jervis Department of Public Works
EPA Environmental Protection Agency
L Liter
Mg Milligram
Mg/l Milligrams per liter
NCPI National Clay Pipe Institute
NPDES National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System
NYSDEC New York State Department of Environmental
Conservation
NYSDOH New York State Department of Health
§ 445-5 GARAGE AND YARD SALES § 445-6
305:407
NYSDOT New York State Department of Transportation
P Total phosphorus
POTW Publicly owned treatment works
POTWCS Publicly owned treatment works collection system
PPM Parts per million, weight basis
PSI Pounds per square inch
SIC Standard Industrial Classification
SPDES State Pollutant Discharge Elimination System
SWDA Solid Waste Disposal Act, 42 U.S.C. § 6901 et seq.
U.S.C. United States Code of Laws
USEPA United States Environmental Protection Agency
TSS Total suspended solids
§ 445-7. Undefined terms.
Terms not defined in this article, or terms found to be ambiguous or
improperly defined in this article, shall be defined by the Act, or regulations,
pursuant thereto.
§ 445-6 PORT JERVIS CODE § 445-7
305:408
ARTICLE III
Use of Public Sewers Required
§ 445-8. Waste disposal unlawful.
It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit, or permit to be
deposited, in any unsanitary manner, on public or private property, within
the City of Port Jervis or in any area under the jurisdiction of the said
municipality, any human or animal excrement, garbage, or objectionable
waste. Also, no person shall discharge domestic sewage onto the surface of
the ground or discharge it in a way that permits it to come to the surface of
the ground.
§ 445-9. Connecting private sewage system to storm sewer
unlawful.
No person shall connect a private sewage system so that sewage flows into
a storm sewer or into a drain intended exclusively for stormwater.
§ 445-10. Discharge of sewage into well prohibited.
No person shall discharge sewage into a well.
§ 445-11. Wastewater discharge unlawful.
It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet, within the City of
Port Jervis, or in any area under the jurisdiction of the said municipality, any
wastewater or other polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has
been provided in accordance with subsequent provisions of this chapter.
§ 445-12. Building permit allowed only when approved wastewater
disposal available.
No property owner, builder, or developer shall be issued a building permit
for a new dwelling or structure requiring sanitary facilities unless a suitable
and approved method of wastewater disposal, conforming to this chapter,
is available. Except as provided in §§ 445-19 and 445-20, all housing
construction or building development which takes place after this chapter
is enacted shall provide for an approved system of sanitary sewers.
§ 445-13. Private wastewater disposal unlawful.
Except as hereinafter provided in § 445-19 and in Article IV, it shall be
unlawful to construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, cesspool, septic
tank, or other facility intended or used for disposal of wastewater.
§ 445-14. Connection to public sewer required.
The owner(s) of all houses, buildings, or properties used for human
occupancy, employment, recreation, or other purposes, situated within the
City of Port Jervis, and abutting on any street, alley, or right-of-way in which
§ 445-8 GARAGE AND YARD SALES § 445-14
305:409
there is now located or may, in the future, be located a public sewer, is(are)
hereby required, at the owner's expense to install suitable sanitary facilities
therein, and to connect such facilities directly with the proper public sewer,
in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, within 90 days after
official notice to do so, provided that said public sewer is within 100 feet
(30.5 meters) of the property line.
§ 445-15. Limitation on use of public sewers.
The use of the City of Port Jervis public sewers shall be strictly limited
and restricted, except as provided in § 445-14, to receive and accept the
discharge of sewage and other wastes, including industrial wastes
generated on or discharged from real property within the bounds of the
service area of the POTW.
§ 445-16. (Reserved)
§ 445-17. Moratorium.
Upon the recommendation of the Director, who determines that one or more
segments of the POTW are exceeding its hydraulic capacity at any time; any
specific purpose of this chapter is being violated; upon notification by the
DEP that the POTW Treatment Plant is exceeding its hydraulic capacity or
influent loading as defined in 6 NYCRR Part 750-2.9, the City Of Port Jervis
Common Council shall have the authority to limit or deny new connections
to the POTW until the conditions leading to the moratorium have been
corrected. Such correction may be by:
§ 445-18. Basis of sewer use requirement.
All requirements, directives, and orders calling for mandatory use of the
sewers, within the service area of the POTW, for the proper discharge of
sewage and other wastes, including industrial wastes, shall be established
and given by the City of Port Jervis Common Council, NYSDEC, USEPA, and/
or by the Director and/or other such state or federal agencies which have
enforcement powers.
§ 445-19. Exceptions to connection to public sewer.
Under certain circumstances, an exception to § 445-14 may be permitted
for construction and maintenance of certain private septic systems, privy
vaults, septic tanks, cesspools, seepage pits or other types of wastewater
disposal systems or facilities, which are of a design which has been
approved by the Director and the City Planning Board and which meet the
A. Construction of new facilities.
B. Enlarging existing facilities.
C. Correction of inflow and infiltration.
D. Cleaning and repairing of existing facilities.
§ 445-14 PORT JERVIS CODE § 445-19
305:410
standards and requirements of the building and sanitary codes of the City of
Port Jervis, as well as the requirements for an exception to connection to the
public sewer under this chapter. This § 445-19 provision may apply in those
circumstances when the public sewer system is not within 100 feet (30.5
meters) of the property line or in other special circumstances when hookup
to the public sewer system may not be feasible but construction of another
type of wastewater system will meet the City's building and sanitary codes.
§ 445-19 GARAGE AND YARD SALES § 445-19
305:411

ARTICLE IV
Private Wastewater Disposal
§ 445-20. Public sewer unavailable: private wastewater disposal
required.
Where a public sewer is not available, under the provisions of § 445-11,
the building lateral shall be connected to a private wastewater disposal
system complying with the provisions of the Rules and Regulations of the
NYSDOH, to be enforced by the Director and/or the Orange County Health
Department.
§ 445-21. Connection of two buildings to same septic tank
prohibited.
No two separate permanent buildings, where the intended use for either is
for a distinct and separate business or a dwelling place for a private family
or families, shall be connected to the same individual septic tank and tile
absorption field.
§ 445-22. Construction permit application.
A completed application form, in compliance with the requirements of
the City's Building Code, the City's Sewers and Sewage Disposal Code
and this Sewer Use Law, as well as the appropriate application fees and
escrow deposits (if any), shall be submitted to the City Clerk-Treasurer, 20
Hammond Street. At a minimum, to meet the requirements of this chapter,
the application shall contain the results of percolation tests, computations,
and a plot plan, including the design and cross section of the wastewater
disposal system, in relation to lot lines, adjacent and on-site well or water
supply, and buildings. Any fee, established by Article XII, shall accompany
the application. The wastewater disposal system shall be designed by a
professional engineer and shall be in accordance with the NYSDOH
"Standards for Waste Treatment Works," Orange County Department of
Health Design Policy and Standards, or 2014 New York State Department
of Environmental Conservation "Design Standards for Intermediate-Sized
Wastewater Treatment Systems," as appropriate.
§ 445-23. Construction permit.
A written construction permit shall be obtained from the Director before
construction commencement. The Director and Building Official, or his
designated representative, shall be permitted to inspect the construction
work at any stage, without prior notice. The professional engineer shall
inspect the installation of the wastewater disposal system and prepare a
letter certifying to the City of Port Jervis that the system has been installed
in accordance with the design plans.
§ 445-20 GARAGE AND YARD SALES § 445-24
305:413
§ 445-24. Preventing nuisances: rehabilitation required.
When the liquid or liquid-borne effluent from a private wastewater disposal
system enters any watercourse, ditch, storm sewer, or water supply system,
located in the City of Port Jervis, in such a manner, volume, and
concentration so as to create a hazardous, offensive, or objectionable
condition, in the opinion of the Director, the Orange County Health
Department, or the NYSDOH, the owner of the premises upon which such
wastewater disposal system is located, upon receiving written notice from
the Director to do so, shall, within 90 days, after receipt of such notice,
repair, rebuild, or relocate such wastewater disposal system for the purpose
of eliminating such hazardous, offensive, or objectionable conditions. The
repair, rebuilding, or relocation of the system shall be accomplished in
accordance with the rules and regulations of the NYSDOH and the Orange
County Health Department, at the owner's expense.
§ 445-25. Sanitary operation required.
The owner shall operate and maintain the private wastewater disposal
system in a satisfactory manner at all times, at the owner's expense.
§ 445-26. Septage removal.
Where a private wastewater disposal system utilizes a seepage pit, cesspool
or a septic tank, septage shall be removed from the seepage pit, cesspool or
septic tank, by a licensed hauler of trucked and hauled wastes, at three-year
intervals or more frequently.
§ 445-27. Direct connection to new public sewers required.
At such time that a public sewer becomes available to a property, a direct
connection shall be made to the public sewer, in compliance with this
chapter, and any cesspool, septic tank, and similar wastewater disposal
facilities shall be cleaned of septage, by a licensed septage hauler, and
finally either filled with clean sand, bank-run gravel, or dirt or removed and
properly disposed. When the connection is made to the public sewer, the
connection to the private wastewater disposal facility shall be broken, and
both ends of the break shall be plugged, as appropriate. If at any time, in the
opinion of the Director, and upon the Director's notice to the owner(s), that
a private septic tank, cesspool or other alternative waste disposal system
has failed and when the public sewer line is within 100 feet (30.5 meters) of
the property so affected, the owner(s) of said property shall be required to
connect to the public sewer system in compliance with § 445-14.
§ 445-28. Additional requirements.
No statement in this article shall be construed to prevent, or interfere with,
any additional requirements that may be deemed necessary by the Director
to protect public health and public welfare.
§ 445-24 PORT JERVIS CODE § 445-28
305:414
ARTICLE V
New Sewers or Sewer Extensions
§ 445-29. Proper design.
§ 445-30. New sewers subject to approval, fees, inspection, testing
and reporting.
When a property owner, builder, or developer proposes to construct sanitary
sewers or extensions to sanitary sewers in an area proposed for subdivision,
the plans, specifications, and method of installation shall be subject to
the approval of the Director, and the Orange County Health Department,
in accordance with § 445-29. Said property owner, builder, or developer
shall pay for the entire installation, including a proportionate share of the
intercepting or trunk sewers, and all other City of Port Jervis expenses
incidental thereto. The owner, builder or developer shall prepare an
engineering study as prepared by a New York State-licensed engineer
delineating that downstream facilities are adequate for the increased
tributary flows. Each street lateral shall be installed and inspected pursuant
to Article VI. The applicant shall pay the inspection fees prior to initiating
construction. Design and installation of sewers shall be as specified in
§§ 445-32 through 445-35 and in conformance with Paragraphs 3 through 6
of ASTM Specification C-12. The installation of the sewer shall be subject
to periodic inspection by the Director, without prior notice, at the expense
of the property owner. The Director shall determine whether the work
is proceeding in accordance with the approved plans and specifications
A. New sanitary sewers and all extensions to sanitary sewers owned and
operated by the City of Port Jervis shall be designed by a professional
licensed to practice sewer design in the state in accordance with the
Recommended Standards for Sewage Works, as adopted by the Great
Lakes - Upper Mississippi River Board of State Sanitary Engineers
("Ten State Standards"), and in strict conformance with all
requirements of the NYSDEC, and the current New York State Building
Code. Plans and specifications shall be submitted to and written
approval shall be obtained from the Director, the Orange County Health
Department, and the NYSDEC before initiating any construction. The
design shall anticipate and allow for flows from all possible future
extensions or developments within the immediate drainage area.
B. If, however, there is inadequate capacity in any sewer that would
convey the wastewater or if there is insufficient capacity in the POTW
treatment plant to treat the wastewater properly, the application shall
be denied. Sewer line current use shall be defined as the present use
and the unutilized use which has been committed, by resolution, to
other users by the City of Port Jervis Common Council. POTW current
use shall be defined as the present use and unutilized use which has
been committed, by resolution, to other users by the City of Port Jervis
Common Council and that is in compliance with the current SPDES
permitted flow.
§ 445-29 GARAGE AND YARD SALES § 445-30
305:415
and whether the completed work will conform to the approved plans and
specifications. The sewer, as constructed, between the house connection
and cleanout must pass the lower pressure air test required in §§ 445-37
through 445-41 before any building lateral is connected thereto. Sections
that cannot be tested must be visually observed by the Director. The
Director shall be notified 30 days in advance of the start of any construction
actions so that such inspection frequencies and procedures as may be
necessary or required may be established. No new sanitary sewers will be
accepted by the City of Port Jervis Common Council until such construction
inspections have been made so as to assure the City of Port Jervis Common
Council of compliance with this chapter and any amendments or additions
thereto. The Director has the authority to require such excavation as
necessary to inspect any installed facilities if the facilities were covered or
otherwise backfilled before they were inspected so as to permit inspection
of the construction. The Director shall report all findings of inspections and
tests to the City of Port Jervis Common Council.
§ 445-31. Plans, specification, and pipe test results required.
Plans, specifications, and methods of installation shall conform to the
requirements of this article. Components and materials of wastewater
facilities not covered in this chapter, such as pumping stations, lift stations,
or force mains shall be designed in accordance with Section 501, and shall
be clearly shown and detailed on the plans and specifications submitted for
approval. Force main details are covered in Section 506. When requested,
the applicant shall submit, to the Director and to the County Health
Department, all design calculations and other pertinent data to supplement
review of the plans and specifications. Results of manufacturer's tests on
each lot of pipe delivered to the job site shall also be furnished, upon
request.
§ 445-32. Gravity sewer pipe.
Sewer pipe material shall be:
A. Cast-iron pipe: extra heavy.
(1) Pipe, fittings, and specials shall conform to the requirements of
ASTM Specification A-74 or ANSI A-21.11.
(2) Gaskets shall conform to ASTM Specification C-564.
B. Polyvinyl chloride (PVC) pipe: SDR 35.
(1) Pipe shall be made from Class 12454-B materials or better in
accordance with ANSI/ASTM Specification D-1784.
(2) Pipe and accessories shall conform to the requirements of the
following, with a minimum pipe stiffness of 46.
(3) Pounds per square inch (psi) at a maximum deflection of 5%.
§ 445-30 PORT JERVIS CODE § 445-32
305:416
§ 445-33. Safety and load factors.
(4) ANSI/ASTM D 3034 (four inches to 15 inches).
(5) ASTM F 679 Type I (18 inches to 27 inches).
C. Ductile iron pipe.
(1) Pipe, fittings, and specials shall be manufactured in accordance
with ASTM Specification A-746.
(2) Pipe shall have a minimum thickness of Class 51.
(3) Fittings shall conform to ANSI Specification A-21.11 and have a
minimum pressure class rating of 150 psi.
(4) All pipe and fittings shall be cement mortar lined in accordance
with ANSI Specification A-21.4 at twice the specified thickness and
have an internal and external bituminous seal coating.
(5) Closure pieces shall be jointed by means of a mechanical coupling
of the cast sleeve type.
D. Other pipe materials. Other pipe materials require prior written
approval of the Director before being installed.
(1) The minimum internal pipe diameter shall be eight inches for
gravity sewers and three inches for low-pressure sewers.
(2) Joints for the selected pipe shall be designed and manufactured
such that O-ring gaskets of the "snap-on" type are used.
(3) Gaskets shall be continuous, solid, natural or synthetic rubber and
shall provide a positive compression seal in the assembled joint,
such that the requirements of §§ 445-37 through 445-41 are met.
(4) Joint preparation and assembly shall be in accordance with the
manufacturer's recommendations.
(5) Wye branch fittings or saddle connections, as approved by the
Director, shall be installed, for connection of street laterals, in
accordance with §§ 445-55 through 445-57.
A. Selection of pipe class shall be predicated on the following criteria:
(1) Safety factor: 1.5.
(2) Load factor: 1.7.
(3) Weight of soil: 120 lbs/cu. ft.
(4) Wheel loading: 16,000 lbs.
B. Utilizing the foregoing information, design shall be made as outlined in
Chapter IX of the Water Pollution Control Federation Manual of Practice
§ 445-32 GARAGE AND YARD SALES § 445-33
305:417
§ 445-34. Sewer pipe installation.
No. 9, latest edition, "Design and Construction of Sanitary and Storm
Sewers," and the pipe shall have sufficient structural strength to
support all loads to be placed on the pipe, with a safety factor as
specified above.
C. PVC pipe shall not be encased in concrete due to their different
coefficients of linear thermal expansion.
A. Local utilities shall be contacted to verify construction plans and to
make arrangements to disconnect all utility services, where required to
undertake the construction work. The utility services shall later be
reconnected. The work shall be scheduled so that there is minimum
inconvenience to local residents. Residents shall be provided 48 hours'
notice regarding disconnection of utilities.
B. The construction right-of-way shall be cleared only to the extent needed
for construction. Clearing consists of removal of trees which interfere
with construction; removal of underbrush, logs, and stumps, and other
organic matter; removal of refuse, garbage, and trash; removal of ice
and snow; and removal of telephone and power poles, and posts. Any
tree that will not hinder construction shall not be removed and shall be
protected from damage by any construction equipment. Debris shall not
be burned but hauled for disposal in an approved manner.
C. The public shall be protected from personal and property damage as a
result of the construction work.
D. Traffic shall be maintained at all times in accordance with applicable
highway permits. Where no highway permits are required, at least 1/2
of a street shall be kept open for traffic flow.
E. Erosion control shall be performed throughout the project to minimize
the erosion of soils onto lands or into waters adjacent to or affected by
the work. Erosion control can be effected by limiting the amount of
clearing and grubbing prior to trenching, proper scheduling of the pipe
installation work, minimizing time of open trench, prompt grading and
seeding, and filtration of drainage.
F. The trench shall be excavated only wide enough for proper installation
of the sewer pipe, manhole, and appurtenances. Allowances may be
made for sheeting, dewatering, and other similar actions to complete
the work. Roads, sidewalks, and curbs shall be cut, by sawing or by
other methods as approved by the Director, before trench excavation is
initiated.
G. Under ordinary conditions, excavation shall be by open cut from the
ground surface. However, tunneling or boring under structures other
than buildings may be permitted. Such structures include crosswalks,
curbs, gutters, pavements, trees, driveways, and railroad tracks.
§ 445-33 PORT JERVIS CODE § 445-34
305:418
H. Open trenches shall be protected at all times of the day with barricades,
as required.
I. Trenches shall not be open for more than 30 feet in advance of pipe
installation nor left unfilled for more than 30 feet in the rear of the
installed pipe, when the work is in progress, without permission of the
Director. When work is not in progress, including overnight, weekends,
and holidays, the trench shall be backfilled to ground surface.
J. The trench shall be excavated approximately six inches deeper than the
final pipe grade. When unsuitable soils are encountered, these shall be
excavated to a maximum depth of 2 1/2 feet below the final pipe invert
grade and replaced with select materials.
K. Ledge rock, boulders, and large stones shall be removed from the
trench sides and bottom. The trench shall be overexcavated at least 12
inches for five feet, at the transition from rock bottom to earth bottom,
centered on the transition.
L. Maintenance of grade, elevation, and alignment shall be done by some
suitable method or combination of methods.
M. No structure shall be undercut unless specifically approved by the
Director.
N. Proper devices shall be provided, and maintained operational at all
times, to remove all water from the trench. At no time shall the sewer
line be used for removal of water from the trench.
O. To protect workers and to prevent caving, shoring and sheeting shall be
used, as needed. Caving shall not be used to backfill the trench.
Sheeting shall not be removed but cut off no lower than one foot above
the pipe crown and no higher than one foot below final grade, and left in
the trench, during backfill operations.
P. The pipe barrel shall be supported, along its entire length, on a
minimum of six inches of crusher run, max. 1/2-inch stone free of
organic material. This foundation shall be firmly tamped in the
excavation.
Q. Bell holes shall be hand excavated, as appropriate.
R. Pipe shall be laid from low elevation to high elevation. The pipe bell
shall be up-gradient; the pipe spigot shall be down-gradient.
S. Joint preparation and assembly shall be in accordance with the
manufacturer's written instructions.
T. The grade and alignment shall be checked and made correct. The pipe
shall be in straight alignment. Any negotiation of curves shall be at
manholes.
§ 445-34 GARAGE AND YARD SALES § 445-34
305:419
§ 445-35. Cleanout installation.
§ 445-36. Manholes and manhole installation.
U. When a smaller sewer joins a larger one, the invert of the larger sewer
shall be lowered sufficiently to maintain the same hydraulic gradient.
An approximate method which may be used for securing this result is to
place the 0.8 depth of both sewers at the same elevation.
V. Crushed stone shall be placed over the laid pipe to a depth of at least six
inches. The embedment of thermoplastic pipe shall be in accordance
with ASTM D2321 using class 1A or 1B backfill materials. Care shall be
exercised so that stone is packed under the pipe haunches. Care shall
be exercised so that the pipe is not moved during placement of the
crushed stone.
W. The migration of fines from surrounding backfill or native soils shall be
restricted by gradation of embedment materials or by use of suitable
filter fabric.
X. The remaining portion of the trench above the pipe embedment shall be
backfilled in twelve-inch lifts which shall be firmly compacted.
Compaction near/under roadways, driveways, sidewalks, and other
structures shall be with NYSDOT Type IV subbase and to 95% of the
maximum moisture-density relationship, as determined by ASTM
Specification D 698, Method D. Ice, snow, or frozen material shall not
be used for backfill.
A. Cleanouts for low-pressure sewers shall be placed at intervals of
approximately 400 feet to 500 feet, at major changes of direction,
where one collection main joins another main and at the upstream end
of each main branch.
B. The design of the cleanouts shall be as approved by the Director.
A. Design of all manholes shall be submitted to the Director and shall
receive approval prior to placement.
B. Manholes shall be placed where there is a change in slope or alignment
and at intervals not exceeding 400 linear feet, except as authorized by
the Director.
C. Manhole bases shall be constructed or placed on a minimum of six
inches of crushed stone max. 1/2-inch stone free of organic materials.
D. Manhole bases shall be constructed of 4,000 psi (twenty-eight-day)
concrete eight inches thick or shall be precast bases properly bedded in
the excavation. Field-constructed bases shall be monolithic, properly
reinforced, and extend at least six inches beyond the outside walls of
lower manhole sections. Precast manhole bases shall extend at least six
inches beyond the outside walls of lower manhole sections. Manholes
shall be installed level.
§ 445-34 PORT JERVIS CODE § 445-36
305:420
E. Manholes shall be constructed using precast minimum four-foot
diameter concrete manhole barrel sections, and an eccentric top
section, conforming to ASTM Specification C-478, with the following
exceptions on wall thickness:
Manhole Diameter
(feet)
Wall Thickness
(inches)
4 5
5 6
6 7
6 1/2 7 1/2
7 8
8 9
(1) All sections shall be cast solid, without lifting holes.
(2) Flat top slabs shall be a minimum of eight inches thick and shall be
capable of supporting a H-20 loading.
F. All joints between sections shall be sealed with an O-ring rubber
gasket, meeting the same specifications as pipe joint gaskets, or butyl
joint sealant completely filling the joint.
G. All joints shall be sealed against infiltration. All metal parts shall be
thickly coated with bitumastic or elastomeric compound to prevent
corrosion.
H. No steps or ladder rungs shall be installed inside or outside manhole
walls at any time.
I. No holes shall be cut into the manhole sections closer than six inches
from joint surfaces.
J. Manholes that extend above grade shall not have an eccentric top
section. The top plate shall be large enough to accommodate the cover
lifting device and the cover.
K. The elevation of the top section shall be such that the cover frame top
elevation is 0.5 foot above the one-hundred-year flood elevation (in a
field), 0.5 foot above a lawn elevation, or at finished road or sidewalk
grade.
L. When located in a traveled area (road or sidewalk), the manhole frame
and cover shall be heavy-duty cast iron. When located in a lawn or in a
field, the manhole frame and cover may be light-duty cast iron. The
cover shall be 24 inches, minimum, in diameter. The mating surfaces
shall be machined, and painted with tar pitch varnish. The cover shall
not rock in the frame. Infiltration between the cover and frame shall be
prevented by proper design and painting. Covers shall have "Sanitary
Sewer" cast into them. Covers shall have lifting holes suitable for any
§ 445-36 GARAGE AND YARD SALES § 445-36
305:421
§ 445-37. Low-pressure air testing.
lifting/jacking device. The lifting holes shall be designed so that
infiltration is prevented.
M. A drop of at least 0.1 foot shall be provided between incoming and
outgoing sewers on all junction manholes and on manholes with bends
greater than 45°.
N. Inverts and shelves/benches shall be placed after testing the manholes
and sewers.
O. Benches shall be level and slope to the flow channel at about one inch
per foot.
P. The minimum depth of the flow channel shall be the nominal diameter
of the smaller pipe. The channel shall have a steel trowel finish. The
flow channel shall have a smooth curvature from inlet to outlet.
Q. Manhole frames, installed at grade, shall be set in a full bed of mortar
with no less than two nor more than four courses of brick underneath to
allow for later elevation adjustment. In lieu of brick, grade rings may be
used for elevation adjustment. Grade rings shall not exceed six inches
in depth. The total number of grade rings shall not exceed 12 inches in
height, however, in no event shall more than three grade rings be used.
R. Manholes which extend above grade shall have the frames cast into the
manhole top plate. The top plate shall be securely anchored to the
manhole barrel, by a minimum of six 1/2-inch corrosion-resistant
anchor bolts, to prevent overturning when the cover is removed. The
anchor bolts shall be electrically isolated from the manhole frame and
cover.
S. Internal drop pipes and fittings shall be PVC plastic sewer pipe in
compliance with ASTM D2241. Corrosion-resistant anchors shall be
used to attach the drop pipe to the inside surface of the manhole barrel.
Internal drops shall not be permitted in manholes less than five feet in
diameter.
T. Outside drop manholes may be permitted with approval from the
Director.
U. Where a new connection must be installed, it shall be machine rotary
cored and shall not be hammered, chiseled or made by linear cutting or
impact tools.
V. All connections shall be by Elastomeric Boot, specifically designed and
supplied for such connections.
A. Low-pressure air tests shall conform to ASTM Specification F1417-11a
(Standard Practice for Installation Acceptance of Plastic Non-Pressure
Sewer Lines Using Low-Pressure Air) or latest revision. All sections to
be tested shall be cleaned and flushed, and shall have been backfilled,
§ 445-36 PORT JERVIS CODE § 445-37
305:422
§ 445-38. Test section.
The test section shall be from manhole structure to manhole structure. All
connections and service laterals are to be plugged and braced adequately
to withstand the test pressure before starting the test.
§ 445-39. Pipe lamping.
When approved by the Director, pipe lamping may be substituted for
deflection testing as provided in § 445-40. Prior to testing, the section shall
be lamped. Any length of pipe out of straight alignment shall be realigned.
§ 445-40. Deflection testing.
Also prior to testing, all plastic pipe, in the test section, shall be tested
for deflection. Deflection testing shall involve the pulling of a rigid ball or
mandrel, whose diameter is 95% of the pipe inside diameter, through the
pipe. Any length of pipe with a deflection greater than 5% shall be replaced.
The test section shall be flushed just prior to deflection testing. The test
shall not be performed with a mechanical pulling device.
§ 445-41. Vacuum testing.
prior to testing. Air shall be added until the internal pressure of the test
section is raised to approximately 4.0 psig. The air pressure test shall
be based on the time, measured in seconds, for the air pressure to drop
from 3.5 psig to 2.5 psig.
B. Acceptance is based on limits tabulated in the "Specification Time
Required for a 1.0 psig Pressure Drop" in the Uni-Bell PVC Pipe
Association "Recommended Practice For Low-Pressure Air Testing of
Installed Sewer Pipe."
C. Before pressure is applied to the line, all connections shall be firmly
plugged. Before the test period starts, the air shall be given sufficient
time to cool to ambient temperature in the test section.
D. If the test section is below groundwater, the test pressure shall be
increased by an amount sufficient to compensate for groundwater
hydrostatic pressure; however, the test pressure shall not exceed 9 psi,
or a lower pressure as required by the Director.
E. The pressure test gauge shall have been recently calibrated, and a copy
of the calibration results shall be made available to the Director prior to
testing.
A. Vacuum testing shall be employed for testing of all manholes and shall
conform to ASTM C1244-11 (Standard Test Method for Concrete Sewer
Manholes by the Negative Air Pressure [Vacuum] Test Prior to Backfill)
or latest revision. All manholes to be tested shall be cleaned and
flushed, and shall have been backfilled, prior to testing. The vacuum
test shall be based on the time, measured in seconds, for the vacuum to
§ 445-37 GARAGE AND YARD SALES § 445-41
305:423
§ 445-42. Force mains.
Force mains serving sewage lifting devices, such as grinder pumps and
pump stations, shall be designed in accordance with § 445-29. Additional
design requirements are:
decrease from 10 inches of mercury to nine inches of mercury for
manholes.
B. Acceptance of manholes is based on the following:
Manhole Depth
(feet)
Manhole Diameter
(feet)
Time to Drop 1 inch Hg
(10 inches to 9 inches)
(seconds)
10 or less 4 120
10 to 15 4 150
15 to 25 4 180
C. For five-foot-diameter manholes, add 30 seconds to the times above.
D. For six-foot-diameter manholes, add 60 seconds to the times above.
E. See tables in ASTM C1244-11 for additional diameters, depths and test
times.
F. Manholes shall be tested from castings.
G. If the test on the manhole fails (the time is less than that tabulated
above), necessary repairs shall be made and the vacuum test repeated,
until the manhole passes the test.
H. The vacuum test gauge shall have been recently calibrated, and a copy
of the calibration results shall be made available to the Director prior to
testing.
A. Force main pipe material shall be:
(1) Ductile iron pipe.
(a) Pipe shall conform to ANSI A21.51 and ASTM 746-03. The
minimum wall thickness shall be Class 52 (ANSI A21.50). The
pipe shall be clearly marked with either "D" or "DUCTILE."
Fittings shall conform to ANSI A21.10.
(b) Pipe and fittings shall be furnished with push-on joints
conforming to ANSI A21.11.
(c) Pipe and fittings shall be cement mortar lined and have an
internal and external bituminous seal coating.
(2) Polyvinyl chloride (PVC) plastic pipe. Pipe shall conform to ASTM
D2241. Materials used in the manufacture of PVC pipe shall meet
§ 445-41 PORT JERVIS CODE § 445-42
305:424
§ 445-43. Force main testing.
All force mains shall be subjected to hydrostatic pressure of 150% of the
normal operating pressure. The duration of the test, at pressure, shall be
at least two hours. Before conducting the test, the pipe shall be filled with
water, and all air shall be expelled. During the test, water shall be added, as
needed, to maintain the test pressure. The amount of water added shall be
recorded so as to calculate leakage. Leakage shall not exceed 25 gallons per
day per mile per inch nominal pipe diameter. During the test, the owner and
the Director shall walk the route of the force main and examine the exposed
pipe and the ground covering any backfilled pipe to discover leaks. Leakage
in excess of that specified above shall be corrected with new material at
the owner's expense and the test repeated. Any observered leaks shall
ASTM C1784. The minimum wall thickness shall be SDR-21.
Fittings shall conform to ASTM D2241. Joints and gaskets shall
conform to ASTM D2241, D1869, and F477.
(3) Other pipe materials. Other pipe materials require prior written
approval of the Director before being installed.
B. Trenching, bedding, and backfilling shall be in accordance with
§ 445-34.
C. Joint preparation and assembly shall be in accordance with the
manufacturer's written instructions.
D. Anchorages, concrete blocking, and/or mechanical restraint shall be
provided when there is a change of direction of 7 1/2° or greater. All
restraints shall be as designed by a professional engineer registered in
New York State.
E. Drain valves shall be placed at low points.
F. Automatic air relief valves shall be placed at high points.
G. Air relief and drain valves shall be suitably protected from freezing.
H. When the daily average design detention time, in the force main,
exceeds 20 minutes, the manhole and sewer line receiving the force
main discharge or the sewage shall be treated so that corrosion of the
manhole and the exiting line are prevented. The corrosion is caused by
sulfuric acid biochemically produced from hydrogen sulfide
anaerobically produced in the force main.
I. The force main shall terminate, in the receiving manhole, at a PVC
plastic sewer pipe T. The vertical arms of the T shall be twice the
diameter of the force main. The upper arm shall be at least four feet
long; the lower arm shall terminate in a PVC plastic sewer pipe ninetydegree
elbow in a flow channel directed to the manhole exit pipe. The T
and its arms shall be securely fastened to the inside surface of the
manhole wall using corrosion-resistant anchors.
§ 445-42 GARAGE AND YARD SALES § 445-43
305:425
be repaired at the owner's expense. Each test section length shall be as
approved by the Director, but in no event longer than 1,000 feet.
§ 445-44. Final acceptance and warranty/surety.
All sanitary sewers and extensions to sanitary sewers constructed at the
applicant's expense, after final approval and acceptance by the Director,
and concurrence by the City of Port Jervis Common Council, shall become
the property of the City of Port Jervis and shall thereafter be operated and
maintained by the City of Port Jervis. No sanitary sewer shall be accepted
by the City of Port Jervis until four copies of as-built drawings have been
so filed with the Director and the Director has approved the submitted
drawings. Said sewers, after their acceptance by the City of Port Jervis,
shall be guaranteed against defects in materials or workmanship for one
year, by the applicant. The guarantee shall be in such form and contain such
provision as deemed necessary by the City of Port Jervis Common Council,
secured by a surety bond or such other security as the City of Port Jervis
Common Council may approve.
§ 445-45. Liability insurance coverage during construction period.
A. All contractors engaged in connecting house laterals with sanitary
sewers, who perform any work within the right-of-way of any highway,
shall file a financial security in a form acceptable to the Director in the
amount of the improvements to be constructed with the City of Port
Jervis Clerk to indemnify the City of Port Jervis against loss, cost,
damage or expense sustained or recovered on account of any
negligence, omission or act of the applicant for such a permit, or any of
his, or their, agents arising or resulting directly or indirectly by reason
of such permit or consent, or of any act, construction or excavation
done, made or permitted under authority of such permit or consent. All
financial security shall contain a clause that permits given by the City of
Port Jervis Common Council may be revoked at any time for just cause.
B. Before commencing work, the above contractor shall file insurance
certificates with the City of Port Jervis Clerk for the following:
(1) Workers' compensation and employer's liability insurance as
required by the laws of the state covering the contractor;
(2) Personal injury liability having limits of not less than $500,000 each
occurrence and $500,000 aggregate (completed operations/
products, personal injury);
(3) Property damage liability having limits of not less than $500,000
for all damages arising during the life of the contract, and shall
include, but not be limited to, the following designated hazards:
(a) Premises and operations;
(b) Independent contractors;
§ 445-43 PORT JERVIS CODE § 445-45
305:426
(c) Completed operations and products;
(d) Property damage; and
(e) Explosions, collapse and underground.
(4) Comprehensive automobile liability (including nonowned and hired
automobiles) having limits of not less than:
(a) Bodily injury:
[1] Each person, $300,000.
[2] Each occurrence, $500,000.
(b) Property damage: each occurrence, $500,000.
(5) Business excess liability insurance in the amount of $2,000,000.
(6) All insurance policies must provide for five business days' notice to
the City of Port Jervis before cancellation and must cover all
liabilities of the City of Port Jervis and be in a form approved by the
City of Port Jervis Common Council and be in a satisfactory form
approved by the Council.
(7) The minimum insurance limits shall be established and amended by
resolution of the City of Port Jervis Common Council.
C. Where it is necessary to enter upon or excavate any highway or cut any
pavement, sidewalk or curbing, permission must be obtained from the
Director of Public Works if a City of Port Jervis street is involved, from
the County Department of Public Works if a County Highway is involved
and/or the New York State Department of Transportation if a state
highway is involved.
D. The minimum insurance limits stated above shall be as established by
the City of Port Jervis Common Council and shall be subject to periodic
review and adjustment, as appropriate, by resolution of the City of Port
Jervis Common Council.
§ 445-45 GARAGE AND YARD SALES § 445-45
305:427

ARTICLE VI
Building Laterals, Street Laterals Connections and Fees
§ 445-46. Permit required for sewer connections.
No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connection with or
opening into, use, alter, or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof
without first obtaining a written permit from the Director.
§ 445-47. Inflow/infiltration prohibited.
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any stormwater,
groundwater, cooling water or unpolluted industrial waters to any sanitary
sewer. Swimming pool drains shall not be connected to any sanitary sewer.
§ 445-48. Sewer lateral permits.
§ 445-49. New building laterals.
A. There shall be two classes of sewer lateral permits:
(1) For residential, commercial, and institutional service.
(2) For service to establishments producing industrial wastes.
B. In either case, a permit application shall be submitted to the Director.
The permit application shall be supplemented by any plans,
specifications, or other information considered pertinent, in the
judgment of the Director. A fee, for residential, commercial,
institutional and industrial users, as established by the City of Port
Jervis Common Council, shall accompany the application.
C. Connections to existing manholes shall be made as directed by the
Director.
A. A separate and independent building lateral shall be provided for every
building requiring sanitary facilities.
B. New street laterals and/or building laterals shall not go under building
basements. In like fashion, a building shall not be constructed over an
existing lateral; the lateral shall be relocated after the Director has
approved plans showing the relocation. If relocation is not physically
possible, then the lateral shall be:
(1) Exposed and totally encapsulated in not less than three inches of
concrete; or
(2) Exposed and walled and the building rooms above positively
ventilated outdoors.
C. All existing manholes in or under the basement shall be sealed airtight
in a manner acceptable to the Director. No new manholes shall be
constructed on the portion of the lateral under the building.
§ 445-46 GARAGE AND YARD SALES § 445-50
305:429
§ 445-50. Laterals serving several buildings.
When building laterals are to serve multiple dwelling structures, the
building lateral shall be sized in accordance with the metered water use and
with sound professional engineering judgment.
§ 445-51. Laterals serving complexes.
Where a lateral sewer is to serve a complex of industrial, commercial,
institutional, or dwelling structures, special design of the building lateral
system shall be required. Such lateral sewer shall be connected to the
public sewer through a manhole. The Director shall determine if and where
this connection to the public sewer is required. If required, a new manhole
shall be installed in the public sewer pursuant to §§ 445-86 and 445-108 and
the lateral connection made and tested as directed by the Director. Plans
and specifications shall be prepared and submitted for approval pursuant to
this chapter.
§ 445-52. Dry sewers.
Dry sewers shall be designed and installed in accordance with this chapter.
§ 445-53. Using existing building laterals.
Existing building laterals may be used in connection with new buildings
only when, on examination by the Director, they are found to meet all
requirements of this chapter.
§ 445-54. Lateral pipe materials.
A. Building and street lateral pipe materials shall be one of the following:
(1) Tar-coated, service grade, cast-iron soil pipe conforming to ASTM
Specification A-74, "Cast Iron Pipe and Fittings." All dimensions,
weight and markings of the pipe shall conform to the requirements
of ANSI, Designation A112.5.1, except spigot ends shall be "plain
end," if gasket joints are used.
(2) Polyvinyl chloride (PVC) pipe and fittings conforming to ASTM
Specification D-3034-73, "SDR-35 Polyvinyl Chloride (PVC) Sewer
Pipe and Fittings." All pipe shall be suitable for gravity sewer
service. Provisions shall be made for contraction and expansion at
each joint with a rubber ring. The bell shall consist of an integral
wall section stiffened with two PVC retainer rings that securely
lock the solid cross-section ring into position. Minimum "pipe
stiffness" (F/Y) at five-percent deflection shall be 46 psi when
tested in accordance with ASTM Specification D-2412.
B. Any part of the building or street lateral that is located within five feet
of a water main or water service shall be constructed of cast-iron soil
pipe. Cast-iron soil pipe may be required by the Director where the
building or street lateral is likely to be damaged by tree roots. If
§ 445-50 PORT JERVIS CODE § 445-54
305:430
§ 445-55. Street lateral to public sewer connection.
§ 445-56. Future connection locations; as-built drawings.
The street lateral, including the wye and eighth bend fittings, shall be
connected to the main sewer at the time of constructing the main sewer,
for each proposed lot for either immediate or future development. Laterals
installed for future development shall be fitted with a standard plug
approved for use by the Director. All sewer connections shall be via a
properly installed saddle on the main sewer pipe. No portion of the lateral
pipe shall protrude into the main sewer pipe. The location of all lateral
connections shall be field marked with a sanitary wye and cleanout. The
marker cleanout shall extend from the depth of the lateral to a minimum
of two feet above grade. The location of all lateral connections shall be
indicated on a drawing with a minimum of three tie lines indicated. Four
copies of this drawing, showing the as-built location of these connections,
shall be furnished to the Director. A refundable deposit shall be placed with
City of Port Jervis to assure receipt of these as-builts. The deposit shall be
placed when application is made; the amount of the deposit shall be $250
per sheet of plans showing locations of lateral connections. No sanitary
sewer shall be accepted by City of Port Jervis until four copies of this record
drawing have been so filed with the Director and the Director has approved
the submitted drawings. Deposit fees may be revised from time to time by
resolution of the Port Jervis Common Council pursuant to City of Port Jervis
Municipal Code § 280-10.
installed on fill or unstable ground, the building or street lateral shall be
of cast-iron soil pipe, although other pipe material may be permitted if
such pipe is uniformly supported on a poured concrete cradle approved
by the Director. The distance between consecutive joints, as measured
along the center line of the installed pipe, shall not be less than 10 feet,
except under abnormal circumstances, in which case this dimension
may be diminished, if approved by the Director. The size and slope of
building and street laterals shall be subject to approval by the Director,
but in no event shall the internal pipe diameter be less than four inches,
nor shall the pipe slope be less than 1/4 inch per foot.
A. At the point of connection of a street lateral to a main sewer, a standard
wye fitting and sufficient one-eighth (forty-five-degree) bend fittings
shall be used. The wye fittings shall be installed so that flow in the
"arm" shall transition smoothly into the flow in the public sewer. No
lateral connection shall be made to the public sewer that permits the
flow into the public sewer from the lateral to enter at right angles.
B. The inside diameter of the fittings shall be same diameter as the street
lateral inside diameter.
§ 445-54 GARAGE AND YARD SALES § 445-57
305:431
§ 445-57. Special manhole requirements.
When any street lateral is to serve a school, hospital, or similar institution,
or public housing, or is to serve a complex of industrial or commercial
buildings, or which, in the opinion of the Director, will receive wastewater
or industrial wastes of such volume or character that frequent maintenance
of said building or street lateral is anticipated, then such street lateral
shall be connected to the public sewer through a manhole. The Director
shall determine if and where this type of connection to the public sewer is
required. Connections to existing manholes shall be made as directed by the
Director. If required, a new manhole shall be installed in the public sewer
pursuant to §§ 445-36 and 445-108 and the lateral connection made thereto
as directed by the Director.
§ 445-58. Laterals at and near buildings.
§ 445-59. Sewage lifting.
In all buildings in which any building drain is too low to permit gravity
flow to the public sewer, wastewater carried by such drain shall be lifted by
mechanical means and discharged to the building lateral, on approval of the
Director.
§ 445-60. Lateral pipe installation.
All excavations required for the installation of a building or street lateral
shall be open trench work unless otherwise approved by the Director. Pipe
laying and backfilling, regardless of pipe material used, shall be performed
in general accordance with Paragraphs 3 through 6 of ASTM Specification
C-12, except that trench width, measured at the top of the installed pipe,
shall not exceed the outside pipe diameter plus 14 inches, and except that
no backfill shall be placed until the work has been inspected. The depth of
cover over the pipe shall be sufficient to afford protection from frost, but
A. Building laterals laid parallel to a bearing wall shall not be installed
closer than six feet to such wall. The building lateral shall enter the
basement through the basement wall no less than 12 inches above the
basement floor. In no event shall any building lateral be placed below
the basement floor, except with the expressed written approval of the
Director.
B. The building lateral shall be laid at uniform grade and in straight
alignment. Changes in direction shall be made only with properly
curved pipe and fittings. All changes in grade or alignment shall be
made with a cleanout that extends to grade, terminating in a terminal
box set in concrete. In building laterals, said cleanouts shall be
provided such that the maximum distance between cleanouts is 50 feet
unless the Director determines that a greater distance is necessary. The
ends of all building or street laterals, which are not connected to the
interior plumbing of the building, for any reason, shall be sealed against
infiltration by a suitable stopper or plug or by other approved means.
§ 445-57 PORT JERVIS CODE § 445-60
305:432
not in any case shall such depth be less than four feet. Where it is physically
impossible to provide cover of four feet, the depth may be reduced to a
minimum of two feet and the pipe shall be insulated, as approved by the
Director.
§ 445-61. Watertight joints.
All joints and connections shall be made watertight.
§ 445-62. Cast-iron push joints.
Premolded gaskets may be used for hub and plain end cast-iron pipe joints
and joints with fittings, if approved by the Director. The gasket shall be
a neoprene compression-type unit which provides a positive seal in the
assembled joint. The gasket shall be premolded, one-piece unit, designed
for joining the cast-iron hub and plain end soil pipe and fittings. The
assembled joint shall be sealed by compression of the gasket between the
exterior surface of the spigot and the interior surface of the hub. The
joint shall be assembled following the manufacturer's recommendations
using acceptable lubricant and special pipe-coupling tools designed for that
purpose. The plain spigot end shall be forced into the hub end of the pipe
for the full depth of the hub itself. Lubricant shall be a bland, flax-base,
nontoxic material and shall not chemically attack the gasket material.
§ 445-63. PVC push joints.
Joints for PVC sewer pipe shall follow the manufacturer's recommendations,
using properly designed couplings and rubber gaskets pursuant to the
published information relating thereto and conforming to the applicable
ASTM specification identified in § 445-54.
§ 445-64. Building lateral/street lateral connection.
A. The connection of the building lateral to an existing street lateral shall
be made at the property line. Except as provided under §§ 445-30
through 445-31, if a street lateral has not previously been provided, the
street lateral will be constructed from the existing public sewer to the
property line, by the DPW, unless otherwise directed by the Director, at
the owner's expense. The street lateral shall be installed with a properly
sealed and covered cleanout to grade located at the property line. The
cleanout shall terminate in a metal box imbedded in concrete.
B. The cost of constructing the street lateral from the existing public
sewer to the property line shall be at the property owner's expense; all
subsequent costs and expense incidental to the installation and
connection of the building lateral shall also be borne by the owner.
C. The permit application shall require that the property owner shall
indemnify the City of Port Jervis from any loss or damage that may
directly or indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the building
lateral.
§ 445-60 GARAGE AND YARD SALES § 445-64
305:433
§ 445-65. Cleanout repair/replacement.
If, in the judgment of the Director, it is determined that a building lateral,
without a property line cleanout, needs repair or replacement, the City
of Port Jervis may install a cleanout at the property line, at the property
owner's expense, such that the street lateral can be maintained
independently of the building lateral.
§ 445-66. Street lateral replacement; ownership.
When, upon examination, the Director determines that an existing street
lateral needs to be replaced, it shall be replaced with a new street lateral
with a property line cleanout. The replacement street lateral shall be
constructed by the DPW, unless otherwise directed by the Director. The cost
of constructing the replacement street lateral and cleanout shall be at the
property owner's expense. Once the replacement street lateral and cleanout
have been constructed and approved by the Director, the new street lateral
shall become the property of the property owner.
§ 445-67. Testing.
The street lateral, building lateral, or the combined lateral shall be tested
for infiltration/exfiltration by:
§ 445-68. Connection inspection.
In circumstances, as approved by the Director, when laterals are not
installed by the DPW, the following shall apply:
D. It shall be the responsibility of the property owner to maintain, repair,
or replace the building/street lateral (from building to public sewer), as
needed.
E. The method of connection of the building lateral to the street lateral will
be dependent upon the type of sewer pipe material and, in all cases,
shall be approved by the Director. After the installation of the street
lateral has been approved by the Director, the building/street lateral
shall remain the property of the building owner.
A. Any full pipe method described in §§ 445-37 through 445-41; or
B. By a suitable joint method, with the prior written approval of the
Director.
A. The applicant for the building lateral permit shall notify the Director
when the building lateral is ready for inspection and connection is to be
made to the street lateral. The connection shall be made under the
supervision of the Director.
B. The applicant for the street lateral permit shall notify the Director when
the street lateral is ready for inspection and connection is to be made to
§ 445-64 PORT JERVIS CODE § 445-68
305:434
§ 445-69. Trench inspections.
In circumstances, as approved by the Director, when laterals are not
installed by the DPW, the following shall apply:
§ 445-70. Public safety provisions required; restoration of disturbed
areas.
All excavations for constructing building laterals shall be adequately
protected with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard.
Streets, sidewalks, parkways, and other public property disturbed, in the
course of the work, shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the
Director. When installation requires disturbance of paved public roads and
shoulders, restoration shall involve backfilling to road grade. Shortly
thereafter the City of Port Jervis Department of Public Works (DPW) shall
complete road and shoulder restoration to the City of Port Jervis standards.
The cost for such final road and shoulder restoration by the DPW shall be
included with the fees paid with the application for the permit required in
§ 445-48.
§ 445-71. Interior cleanout.
§ 445-72. Costs borne by owner.
All costs associated with the provisions of this article shall be borne by the
property owner unless specifically stated or agreed to be a cost borne by
the City of Port Jervis. The permit application shall require that the property
owner shall indemnify the City of Port Jervis from any loss or damage
that may be directly or indirectly occasioned by the installation of the
building and street laterals and connections and appurtenances. Insurance
the main sewer. The connection shall be made under the supervision of
the Director.
A. When trenches are excavated for the laying of building lateral pipes or
for the laying of street lateral pipes, such trenches shall be inspected by
the Director, and/or Building Official, as applicable.
B. Before the trenches are backfilled, the person performing such work
shall notify the Director and Building Official when the laying of the
building lateral is completed, and no backfilling of trenches shall begin
until approval is obtained from the Director or Building Official.
A. An interior cleanout fitting shall be provided for each building lateral at
a readily accessible location, preferably just inside the basement wall.
The fitting shall contain a forty-five-degree branch with removable plug
or test tee, and so positioned that sewer cleaning equipment can be
inserted therein to clean the building lateral.
B. The cleanout diameter shall be no less than the building lateral
diameter.
§ 445-68 GARAGE AND YARD SALES § 445-72
305:435
requirements and other forms of security to cover the work to be permitted
may be revised from time to time by resolution of the Port Jervis Common
Council pursuant to City of Port Jervis Municipal Code § 280-10.
§ 445-72 PORT JERVIS CODE § 445-72
305:436
ARTICLE VII
Inflow
§ 445-73. New inflow sources prohibited.
No connections shall be made to a sanitary sewer, which connections are
intended to discharge inflow. Such prohibited connections include, but are
not limited to, footing drains, roof leaders, roof drains, cellar drains, sump
pumps, catch basins, uncontaminated cooling water discharges, or other
sources of inflow.
§ 445-74. Existing inflow sources disconnected.
For properties where separate storm sewers are available within 100 feet
of the property line or where, in the judgment of the Director, sufficient
natural drainage is available, those connections which contribute inflow to
the sanitary sewers must be disconnected in a fashion approved by the
Director, prior to the sale of the property.
§ 445-75. Existing inflow sources disconnected when property sold.
Upon notice from the Tax Assessor, the Building Official shall inspect any
newly sold property for the purpose of determining if storm sewers or
natural drainage is available and, if so, if all connections which contribute
inflow have been disconnected.
§ 445-76. No reconnection of inflow source allowed.
It shall be a willful violation of this chapter for any person to reconnect any
inflow source that has been disconnected pursuant to this article.
§ 445-77. Charges for inflow.
The Director may take whatever action is necessary to determine the
amount of inflow from a property, including he may require the installation
of a control manhole. The property from which the inflow originated shall
be billed for inflow according to Article XII, however the City of Port Jervis
Council may approve the imposition of a surcharge at a rate not to exceed
five times that for normal sewage volume charge.
§ 445-73 GARAGE AND YARD SALES § 445-77
305:437

ARTICLE VIII
Trucked Or Hauled Waste
§ 445-78. Licenses and application.
§ 445-79. Concurrent requirements.
The applicant for a license to truck or haul wastes shall be the owner of the
vehicle or vehicles to be used for such discharge. Any false or misleading
statement, in any license application, shall be a basis for invalidating the
license. All licenses, issued by the Director, for this purpose, shall be for
one year, but at the discretion of the Director, a license may be issued
for a period of days or weeks. The Director shall supply the DEP operator
with a copy of any license issued prior to the commencement of discharge
into the sewer system. In an emergency, the Director shall give the DEP
operator notice of the circumstances and of the need to commence trucked
or hauled activities to alleviate the crisis immediately. A copy of the license
paperwork will be supplied to DEP as soon as practicable thereafter. The
licensee shall also be duly permitted by the NYSDEC under 6 NYCRR Part
364 ("364 permit"). If, for any reason, the 364 permit is revoked, the 364
permit lapses or becomes invalid, then the license issued under this article
shall become invalid immediately. All acts performed in connection with the
license shall be subject to the inspection and regulations, as established
by the Director, the terms and conditions of the license and all local and
general laws, ordinances, and regulations which are now or may come into
effect, and such license may be suspended or revoked, at any time, by the
Director for willful, continued, or persistent violation thereof.
§ 445-80. Dumping location and timing.
At the discretion of the Director, the Director may limit and permit
discharging on an emergency basis only, as determined by the Director, and
A. The discharge of trucked or hauled septage into the City of Port Jervis
sewer system and public sewers tributary thereto will be permitted only
with the written approval (license) of the Director. Only trucked or
hauled septage that is generated within the boundaries of the City of
Port Jervis shall be permitted to be discharged into the sewer system.
Applicants for such license shall apply on a form provided by the
Director. These forms may require information such as vehicle
specifications, vehicle license number, vehicle color, NYSDEC permits
issued under 6 NYCRR Part 364, approximate daily or monthly septage
volume expected, service area, and any other information that the
Director may require, to determine whether the trucked or hauled
septage could adversely impact the POTW. The application shall be
accompanied by a fee prescribed by the Director, not to exceed $1,000.
B. The licensee of trucked or hauled septage will also be charged a fee for
each dumping, in accordance with Article XII. The dumping fee shall be
paid prior to dumping.
§ 445-78 GARAGE AND YARD SALES § 445-80
305:439
the Director may require discharging only at certain locations within the
POTW, and only at certain times, and only on certain days of the week,
or seasons of the year as shall be stated on said license or as may be
relocated by the Director, after appropriate notice. The time and conditions
for permissible discharge shall be as set forth on the license, or as may be
revised by the Director, after appropriate notice. The Director will consult
with the DEP operator regarding the timing and location of the discharges
and regarding the character of the septage to be discharged.
§ 445-81. Notification of dumping.
Each discharge of trucked or hauled septage shall be made only with the
approval of the Director. The Director may require inspection, sampling,
and analysis of each load prior to the discharge of a load. Any extra costs
associated with such inspection, sampling, and analysis shall be paid by the
licensee.
§ 445-80 PORT JERVIS CODE § 445-81
305:440
ARTICLE IX
Discharge Restrictions
§ 445-82. Pretreatment standards.
All users of the City of Port Jervis POTW will comply with all standards
and requirements of the Act and standards and requirements promulgated
pursuant to the Act, including but not limited to 40 CFR Parts 406 through
471.
§ 445-83. General prohibitions.
A. No user shall contribute or cause to be contributed, in any manner or
fashion, directly or indirectly, any pollutant or wastewater which will
interfere with the operation or performance of the POTW. These general
prohibitions apply to all such users of a POTW whether or not the user
is subject to National Categorical Pretreatment Standards or any other
federal, state, or local pretreatment standards or requirements.
B. Without limiting the generality of the foregoing, a user may not
contribute the following substances to the POTW:
(1) Any solids, liquids, or gases which, by reason of their nature or
quantity, are or may be sufficient, either alone or by interaction
with other substances, to cause a fire or an explosion or be
injurious, in any way, to the POTW, or to the operation of the POTW.
At no time shall both of two successive readings on a flame-type
explosion hazard meter, at the point of discharge into the system
(or at any other point in the system) be more than 25% nor any
single reading be more than 40% of the lower explosive limit (LEL)
of the meter. Unless explicitly allowable by a written permit,
prohibited materials include, but are not limited to, gasoline,
kerosene, naphtha, benzene, toluene, xylene, ethers, alcohols,
carbides, hydrides, and sulfides and any other substance which the
City of New York, the City of Port Jervis, the state, or the EPA has
determined to be a fire hazard or hazard to the POTW.
(2) Solid or viscous substances which may cause obstruction to the
flow in a sewer or otherwise interfere with the operation of the
wastewater treatment facilities. Unless explicitly allowable by a
written permit, such substances include, but are not limited to,
grease, garbage with particles greater than 1/2 inch in any
dimension, animal guts or tissues, paunch manure, bones, hair,
hides or fleshings, entrails, whole blood, feathers, ashes, cinders,
sand, spent lime, stone or marble dust, metal, glass, straw,
shavings, grass clippings, rags, spent grains, spent hops, waste
paper, wood, plastics, gas, tar asphalt residues, residues from
refining or processing fuel or lubricating oil, mud, or glass or stone
grinding or polishing wastes.
(3) Any wastewater having a pH less than 5.0 or greater than 10.0.
§ 445-82 GARAGE AND YARD SALES § 445-83
305:441
(4) Any wastewater containing toxic pollutants in sufficient quantity,
either singly or by interaction with other pollutants (including
heat), to injure or interfere with any wastewater treatment process,
constitute a hazard to humans or animals, create a toxic effect in
the receiving waters of the POTW, or to exceed the limitation set
forth in a categorical pretreatment standard. A "toxic pollutant"
shall include, but not be limited to, any pollutant identified
pursuant to Section 307(A) of the Act.151
(5) Any noxious or malodorous solids, liquids, or gases which either
singly or by interaction with other wastes are sufficient to create a
public nuisance or a hazard to life or are sufficient to prevent entry
into the sewers for their maintenance or repair.
(6) Oils and grease. Any commercial, institutional, or industrial wastes
containing fats, waxes, grease, or oils which become visible solids
when the wastes are cooled to 10° C. (50° F.); any petroleum oil,
nonbiodegradable cutting oil, or products of mineral oil origin, in
excess of 100 mg/l or in amounts that will cause interference or
pass-through.
(7) Any wastewater that will cause interference or pass-through.
(8) Any wastewater with objectionable color that is not removed in the
treatment process, such as, but not limited to, dye wastes, and
vegetable tanning solutions.
(9) Any solid, liquid, vapor, or gas having a temperature higher than
65° C. (150° F.); however, such materials shall not cause the POTW
treatment plant influent temperature to be greater than 40° C.
(104° F.). The Director reserves the right, in certain instances, to
prohibit or limit the discharge of wastes whose maximum
temperatures are lower than 65° C.
(10) Unusual flow rate or concentration of wastes, constituting slugs,
except by industrial wastewater permit.
(11) Any wastewater containing any radioactive wastes except as
approved by the Director, and in compliance with applicable state
and federal regulations.
(12) Any wastewater that causes a hazard to human life or that creates
a public nuisance, either by itself or in combination, in any way,
with other wastes.
(13) Any wastewater with a closed cup flashpoint of less than 140° F. or
60° C. using the test methods specified in 40 CFR 261.21.
151. Editor's Note: See 33 U.S.C. § 1317(a).
§ 445-83 PORT JERVIS CODE § 445-83
305:442
§ 445-84. Concentration-based limitations.
(14) Any pollutants that result in the presence of toxic gases, vapors or
fumes within the POTW in a quantity that may cause acute worker
health and safety problems.
A. No user shall discharge, directly or indirectly, to the POTW, wastewater
containing any of the following substances in concentrations exceeding
those specified below, except by permit or as provided for in § 445-85.
Concentration limits are applicable to wastewater effluents at the point
just prior to discharge into the sanitary sewer system ("end of pipe"
concentrations).
Effluent Concentration Limits
Parameter (1)
Maximum Concentration (2)
(mg/l)
Acetone 20.7
Aluminum 1.7026
Ammonia 39
Arsenic 1.4930
Barium 0.2091
BOD(3) 500
Cadmium 0.0068
Chromium hexavalent 0.1089
Chromium 0.0340
Copper 0.0610
Cyanide (complex) 0.2990
Cyanide (free) 0.0408
Ethyl acetate 20.70
Iron 1.8283
Isopropyl acetate 20.70
Lead 0.1160
Manganese 0.6853
Methyl ethyl ketone 60
Methylene chloride 3.00
Molybdenum 12.05
n-amyl acetate 20.70
Nickel 0.0878
Oil/grease, polar 100
Phenols (total) 0.0176
§ 445-83 GARAGE AND YARD SALES § 445-84
305:443
Effluent Concentration Limits
Parameter (1)
Maximum Concentration (2)
(mg/l)
Phenols (chlorinated) 0.0141
Silver 0.2631
Sulfate 1,540
Toluene 100.00
Total toxic organics 2.13
UOD (3) 5,600
Xylene 0.0788
Zinc 0.1750
NOTES:
(1) All concentrations listed for metallic substances shall be as "total
metal," which shall be defined as the value measured in a sample
acidified to a pH value of 2 or less, without prior filtration.
(2) As determined on a composite sample taken from the user's daily
discharge over a typical operational and/or production day, except
for cyanide, total phenols, pH, oil and grease, which shall be
determined using grab samples.
(3) As determined by an average of composite samples within a onemonth
period.
B. The limits for pollutants other than those listed in this section and
higher than the minimum detection limits as established by 40 CFR Part
136 and/or the current edition of Standard Methods shall be set in
accordance with the "Guidance Manual on the Development and
Implementation of Local Discharge Limitations Under the Pretreatment
Program USEPA November 1987" or the latest edition of the guidance
document. Other substances which may be limited are:
Aliphatic and aromatic alcohols and acids
Aliphatic and aromatic aldehydes and ketones
Aliphatic and aromatic esters
Aliphatic and aromatic halogenated compounds
Aliphatic and aromatic nitro, cyano and amino compounds
Alkanes, alkenes and alkynes
Antibiotics
Benzene derivatives
§ 445-84 PORT JERVIS CODE § 445-84
305:444
§ 445-85. Mass discharge-based limitations.
§ 445-86. Modification of limitations.
Chemical compounds which, upon acidification, alkalinization,
oxidation or reduction, in the discharge or after admixture with
wastewater and its components in the POTW, produce toxic,
flammable, or explosive compounds
Pesticides, including algicides, fungicides, herbicides, insecticides,
rodenticides
Phthalates
Polyaromatic and polynuclear hydrocarbons
Total toxic organics, TTO, as defined in 40 CFR 433.11
Toxic organic compounds regulated by federal pretreatment
standards
Unsaturated aliphatics, including those with an aldehyde, ketone or
nitrile functional group
Viable pathogenic organisms from industrial processes or hospital
procedures
A. The Director, in consultation with DEP, may impose mass dischargebased
limits on individual users for specific pollutants. Mass dischargebased
limits may be imposed for pollutants that may have negative
impact on the employees, the POTW or the receiving water. The
Director shall issue permits to significant industrial users and may issue
permits to other industrial commercial users limiting the discharge of
these substances. Each permit shall restrict the discharge from each
significant industrial user to a portion of the total allowable influent
loading to the POTW treatment plant. These mass discharge-based
limits shall be developed in accordance with the "Guidance Manual on
the Development and Implementation of Local Discharge Limitations
Under the Pretreatment Program USEPA November 1987" or the latest
edition of the guidance document.
B. Permits issued in accordance with this section may allow for discharges
in excess of concentration limitations set forth in this chapter, if the
concentrations and mass discharges do not interfere with the operation
and performance of the POTW as recommended by the DEP and
determined by the Director, and is protective of the water quality of the
receiving water.
A. Limitations on wastewater strength or mass discharge contained in this
chapter may be supplemented with more stringent limitations when, in
the opinion of the Director and upon recommendation from DEP:
(1) The limitations in this chapter are not sufficient to protect the
POTW;
§ 445-84 GARAGE AND YARD SALES § 445-86
305:445
§ 445-87. Access to user's records.
The Director and DEP shall have the authority to copy any record related to
wastewater discharges to the POTW.
§ 445-88. Dilution.
§ 445-89. Grease, oil, and sand interceptors.
Grease, oil, and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion
of the Director and at the recommendation of DEP, they are necessary for
the proper handling of wastewater containing excessive amounts of grease,
flammable substances, sand, or other harmful substances, except that such
interceptors shall not be required for private living quarters or living units.
All interceptors shall be of type and capacity approved by the Director and
shall be so located to be easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. Such
interceptors shall be inspected, cleaned, and repaired regularly, as needed,
by the owner, at his expense.
(2) The limitations in this chapter are not sufficient to enable the
POTW treatment plant to comply with applicable water quality
standards or the effluent limitations specified in the POTW's
SPDES permit;
(3) The POTW sludge will be rendered unacceptable for disposal or
reuse as the DEP or the City of Port Jervis desires, as a result of
discharge of wastewaters at the above-prescribed concentration
limitations;
(4) Municipal employees or the public will be endangered; or
(5) Air pollution and/or groundwater pollution will be caused.
B. The limitations on wastewater strength or mass discharge shall be
recalculated by the Director not less frequently than once every five
years. The Director shall solicit the recommendations of the DEP in
making these recalculations. The results of these calculations shall be
reported to the City of Port Jervis Common Council and to DEP for
review and recommendations. The Director shall make a calculation for
submission to the Common Council. This chapter shall then be amended
appropriately by the Common Council. Any issued industrial
wastewater discharge permits which have limitations based directly on
any limitations that were changed shall be revised and amended, as
appropriate.
A. Except where expressly authorized to do so by an applicable
pretreatment standard, no user shall ever increase the use of process
water or, in any other way, attempt to dilute a discharge as a partial or
complete substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with
a pretreatment standard.
B. Dilution flow shall be considered to be inflow.
§ 445-86 PORT JERVIS CODE § 445-90
305:446
§ 445-90. Solid waste grinders.
Solid waste grinders at or serving commercial establishments, institutions
or industries shall not discharge into the POTW if there is a combined
sewer overflow (CSO) on the sewer lines conveying the wastes to the POTW
treatment plant.
§ 445-91. Rejection of wastewater.
The City of Port Jervis Common Council shall reject a user's wastewater,
on recommendation of the Director or the DEP, and when it is has been
determined by the Common Council that the wastewater contains
substances or possesses characteristics that have a deleterious effect on the
POTW and its processes or on the receiving water, or which constitute a
public nuisance or hazard. See § 445-119.
§ 445-90 GARAGE AND YARD SALES § 445-91
305:447

ARTICLE X
Discharge Permits and Pretreatment Requirements
§ 445-92. Wastewater discharge reports.
As a means of determining compliance with this chapter, with applicable
SPDES permit conditions, and with applicable state and federal law, each
industrial user shall be required to notify the Director and DEP of any new
or existing discharges to the POTW by submitting a completed Industrial
Chemical Survey (ICS) form and a completed Industrial Wastewater Survey
(IWS) form to the Director and to DEP. The Director and/or DEP may
require any user discharging wastewater into the POTW to file wastewater
discharge reports and to supplement such reports as the Director and/or
DEP deems necessary. All information shall be furnished by the user to the
Director and the DEP.
§ 445-93. Notification to industrial users.
The Director shall, from time to time, notify each industrial user of
applicable pretreatment standards and of other applicable requirements
under Sections 204(b) and 405 of the Clean Water Act152 and Subtitles C
and D of RCRA.
§ 445-94. Wastewater discharges.
No significant industrial user shall discharge wastewater to the POTW
without having a valid wastewater discharge permit, issued by the Director.
Significant industrial users shall comply fully with the terms and conditions
of their permits in addition to the provisions of this chapter. Violation of a
permit term or condition is deemed a violation of this chapter.
§ 445-95. Wastewater discharge permits required for significant
industrial users.
All significant industrial users proposing to connect to or to discharge to
the POTW shall obtain a wastewater discharge permit before connecting
to or discharging to the POTW. Existing significant industrial users shall
make application for a wastewater discharge permit within 30 days after
the effective date of this chapter and shall obtain such a permit within 90
days after making application.
§ 445-96. Other industrial users.
The Director may issue, in consultation with DEP, wastewater discharge
permits to other industrial users of the POTW.
152. Editor's Note: See 33 U.S.C. §§ 1284(b) and 1345, respectively.
§ 445-92 GARAGE AND YARD SALES § 445-97
305:449
§ 445-97. Discharge permits to storm sewers not authorized.
The City of Port Jervis does not have the authority to issue permits for the
discharge of any wastewater to a storm sewer. This authority rests with the
NYSDEC.
§ 445-98. Application for wastewater discharge permits.
A. All industrial users required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit
shall complete and file with the Director an application in the form
prescribed by the City of Port Jervis; the application shall be
accompanied by a fee, as set forth in § 445-144. In support of any
application, the industrial user shall submit, in units and terms
appropriate for evaluation, the following information:
(1) Name, address, and location (if different from the address).
(2) SIC code of both the industry and any categorical processes.
(3) Wastewater constituents and characteristics, including but not
limited to those mentioned in Article X of this chapter and which
are limited in the appropriate categorical standard, as determined
by a reliable analytical laboratory approved by the NYSDOH.
Sampling and analysis shall be performed in accordance with
standard methods.
(4) Time and duration of the discharge.
(5) Average daily peak wastewater flow rates, including daily, monthly,
and seasonal variations, if any.
(6) Site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans, and details
to show all sewers, sewer connections, and appurtenances.
(7) Description of activities, facilities, and plant processes on the
premises, including all materials which are or could be discharged
to the POTW.
(8) Each product produced by type, amount, process or processes, and
rate of production.
(9) Type and amount of raw materials processed (average and
maximum per day).
(10) Number and type of employees, and hours of operation, and
proposed or actual hours of operation of the pretreatment system.
(11) The nature and concentration of any pollutants in the discharge
which are limited by any county, state, or federal standards, and a
statement whether or not the standards are being met on a
consistent basis and if not whether additional operation and
maintenance (O&M) and/or additional pretreatment is required for
the user to meet all applicable standards.
§ 445-97 PORT JERVIS CODE § 445-98
305:450
§ 445-99. Permit modifications.
(12) If additional pretreatment and/or O&M will be required to meet the
standards, then the industrial user shall provide the shortest
schedule to accomplish such additional treatment and/or O&M. The
completion date in this schedule shall not be longer than the
compliance date established for the applicable pretreatment
standard. The following conditions shall apply to this schedule:
(a) The schedule shall contain progress increments in the form of
dates for the commencement and completion of major events
leading to the construction and operation of additional
pretreatment required for the user to meet the applicable
pretreatment standards (such events include hiring an
engineer, completing preliminary plans, completing final plans,
executing contracts for major components, commencing
construction, completing construction, beginning operation,
and beginning routine operation).
(b) No increment referred to in Subsection A(12)(a) above shall
exceed nine months, nor shall the total compliance period
exceed 18 months.
(c) No later than 14 calendar days following each date in the
schedule and the final date for compliance, the user shall
submit a progress report to the Director, including, as a
minimum, whether or not it complied with the increment of
progress to be met on such date and, if not, the date on which it
expects to comply with this increment of progress, the reason
for delay, and the steps being taken by the user to return to the
established schedule. In no event shall more than nine months
elapse between such progress reports to the Director.
(13) Any other information as the Director or DEP may deem necessary
to evaluate the permit application.
B. The Director shall provide a copy of the complete application as well as
any supplemental information to DEP for review. Both DEP and the
Director will evaluate the data furnished by the industrial user and may
require additional information. DEP shall forward comments and
recommendations and, when appropriate, may submit a draft
wastewater discharge permit to the Director within 30 days of receipt
of the full application. After evaluation and acceptance of the data
furnished, the City of Port Jervis may issue a wastewater discharge
permit to the industrial user, subject to terms and conditions provided
herein.
C. Under circumstances where the Director refers the application for
engineering review, all costs associated with the review shall be borne
by the permittee by establishment of an escrow account.
§ 445-98 GARAGE AND YARD SALES § 445-99
305:451
§ 445-100. Permit conditions.
Wastewater discharge permits shall be expressly subject to all the
provisions of this chapter and all other applicable regulations, user charges
and fees established by the City of Port Jervis. Permits may contain the
following:
A. Wastewater discharge permits may be modified by the Director, upon
30 days' notice to the permittee, for just cause. Just cause shall include,
but not be limited to:
(1) Promulgation of an applicable National Categorical Pretreatment
Standard;
(2) Revision of or a grant of a variance from such categorical standards
pursuant to 40 CFR 403.13;
(3) Changes in general discharge prohibitions and local limits as per
§ 445-84 of this chapter;
(4) Changes in processes used by the permittee, or changes in
discharge volume or character;
(5) Changes in design or capability of any part of the POTW;
(6) Discovery that the permitted discharge causes or contributes to
pass-through or interference; and
(7) Changes in the nature and character of the sewage in the POTW as
a result of other permitted discharges.
(8) Upon notification from DEP that any of the above have occurred.
B. Any changes or new conditions in the permit shall include a reasonable
time schedule for compliance as set forth in § 445-98A(12)(a).
C. The Director and DEP will evaluate the data furnished by the industrial
user and may require additional information. The Director shall provide
a copy of the complete data and application to DEP for review. DEP
shall forward comments and recommendations to the Director within
30 days of receipt of the data and application. After evaluation and
acceptance of the data furnished, the City of Port Jervis may issue a
modified wastewater discharge permit to the industrial users, subject
to terms and conditions provided herein.
D. Under circumstances where the Director refers the application for
engineering review, all costs associated with the review shall be borne
by the permittee by establishment of an escrow account.
A. Limits on the average and maximum rate and time of discharge, or
requirements for flow regulation and equalization.
B. Limits on the average and maximum wastewater constituents and
characteristics, including concentration or mass discharge limits.
§ 445-99 PORT JERVIS CODE § 445-100
305:452
§ 445-101. Permit duration.
Permits shall be issued for a specified time period, not to exceed five years.
A permit may be issued for a period less than five years.
§ 445-102. Permit reissuance.
The user shall apply for permit reissuance a minimum of 180 days prior
to the expiration of the user's existing permit. The terms and conditions of
the permit may be subject to modification by the Director, in consultation
with DEP, during the term of the permit, as limitations or requirements, as
identified in § 445-99, or other just cause exists. The user shall be informed
of any proposed changes in its permit at least 30 days prior to the effective
date of the change. Any changes or new conditions in the reissued permit
shall include a reasonable time schedule for compliance as established in
§ 445-98A(12)(a).
C. The unit charge or schedule of user charges and fees for the
management of the wastewater discharged to the POTW.
D. Requirements for installation and maintenance (in safe condition) of
inspection and sampling facilities.
E. Specifications for monitoring programs which may include sampling
locations, frequency of sampling, number, types, and standards for
tests, and reporting schedules.
F. Compliance schedules.
G. Requirements for submission of technical reports or discharge reports.
H. Requirements for maintaining and retaining plant records relating to
wastewater discharge, as specified by the City of Port Jervis, and
affording the Director and DEP access thereto.
I. Requirements for notification of the City of Port Jervis Director and DEP
of any new introduction of wastewater constituents or of any
substantial change in the volume or character of the wastewater
constituents being introduced into the POTW.
J. Requirements for the notification of the Director and DEP of any change
in the manufacturing and/or pretreatment process used by the
permittee.
K. Requirements for timely notification of excessive, accidental, or slug
discharges.
L. Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the City of Port Jervis to
ensure compliance with this chapter, and state and federal laws, rules,
and regulations.
§ 445-100 GARAGE AND YARD SALES § 445-103
305:453
§ 445-103. Permit transfer.
Wastewater discharge permits are issued to a specific user for a specific
operation or discharge at a specific location. A wastewater discharge permit
shall not be reassigned, transferred, or sold to a new owner, new user,
different premises, or a new or changed operation.
§ 445-104. Permit revocation.
Wastewater discharge permits may be revoked by the Director for the
following reasons: falsifying self-monitoring reports, tampering with
monitoring equipment, refusing to allow the Director or DEP timely access
to the industrial premises, upon recommendation by DEP, failure to meet
effluent limitations, failure to pay fines, failure to pay user charges, and
failure to meet compliance schedules.
§ 445-105. (Reserved)
§ 445-106. Reporting requirements for permittee.
The reports or documents that are required to be submitted or maintained
under this section shall be subject to 1) the provisions of 18 U.S.C. § 1001
relating to fraud and false statements; 2) the provisions of Section 309(c)(4)
of the Act,153 as amended, governing false statements, representation or
certification; and 3) the provisions of Section 309(c)(6) of the Act,154 as
amended, regarding corporate officers.
A. Baseline monitoring report.
(1) All permittees shall submit all reports required by this section to
the Director and to the DEP.
(2) Within 180 days after promulgation of an applicable federal
categorical pretreatment standard, a user subject to that standard
shall submit, to the Director, the information required by
§ 445-98A(8) and (9).
B. Ninety-day compliance report. Within 90 days following the date for
final compliance with applicable pretreatment standards or, in the case
of a new source, following commencement of the introduction of
wastewater into the POTW, any user subject to pretreatment standards
and requirements shall submit, to the Director and the DEP, a report
indicating the nature and concentration of all pollutants in the
discharge, from the regulated process, which are limited by
pretreatment standards and requirements, and the average and
maximum daily flow for these process units in the user's facility which
are limited by such pretreatment standards and requirements. The
report shall state whether the applicable pretreatment standards and
153. Editor's Note: See 33 U.S.C. § 1319(c)(4).
154. Editor's Note: See 33 U.S.C. § 1319(c)(6).
§ 445-103 PORT JERVIS CODE § 445-106
305:454
requirements are being met on a consistent basis and, if not, what
additional O&M and/or pretreatment is necessary to bring the user
into compliance with the applicable pretreatment standards or
requirements. This statement shall be signed by an authorized
representative of the industrial user and certified to by a qualified
professional.
C. Periodic compliance reports.
(1) Any user subject to a pretreatment standard, after the compliance
date of such pretreatment standard, or, in the case of a new source,
after commencement of the discharge into the POTW, shall submit
to the Director and DEP, during the months of June and December,
unless required more frequently in the pretreatment standard or by
the Director and DEP, a report indicating the nature and
concentration of pollutants in the effluent which are limited by such
pretreatment standards. In addition, this report shall include a
record of all daily flows which, during the reporting period,
exceeded the average daily flow reported in § 445-98. At the
discretion of the Director and concurrence of DEP, and in
consideration of such factors as local high or low flow rates,
holidays, budget cycles, etc., the Director may agree to alter the
months during which the above reports are to be submitted;
however, no fewer than two reports shall be submitted per year.
(2) The Director with the concurrence of DEP may impose mass
limitations on users, which are using dilution to meet applicable
pretreatment standards or requirements, or in other cases where
the imposition of mass limitations are appropriate. In such cases,
the report required by § 445-106C(1) shall indicate the mass of
pollutants regulated by pretreatment standards in the effluent of
the user. These reports shall contain the results of discharge
sampling and analysis, including the flow, and the nature and
concentration, or production and mass, where requested by the
Director and DEP, of pollutants contained therein, which are
limited by the applicable pretreatment standard. All analyses shall
be performed in accordance with standard methods, by a
laboratory certified by NYSDOH to perform the analyses.
D. Violation report. If sampling performed by the user indicates a violation
of this chapter and/or the user's discharge permit, the user shall notify
the Director and DEP within 24 hours of becoming aware of the
violation. The user shall also repeat the sampling and analysis and
submit the results of the repeat analysis to the Director and DEP within
30 days after becoming aware of the violation. The user is not required
to resample if the POTW performs monitoring of the user's discharge at
least once a month for the parameter that was violated, or if the POTW
performs sampling, for the parameter which was violated, between the
user's initial sampling and when the user receives the results of this
sampling.
§ 445-106 GARAGE AND YARD SALES § 445-106
305:455
§ 445-107. Flow equalization.
No person shall cause the discharge of slugs to the POTW. Each person
discharging into the POTW greater than 100,000 gallons per day or greater
than 5% of the average daily flow in the POTW, whichever is lesser, shall
install and maintain, on his property and at his expense, a suitable storage
and flow-control facility to insure equalization of flow over a twenty-fourhour
period. The storage and flow-control facility shall have a capacity for at
least 50% of the daily discharge volume and shall be equipped with alarms
and a rate of discharge controller, the regulation of which shall be directed
by the Director. A wastewater discharge permit may be issued solely for
flow equalization upon the same terms set forth elsewhere in this chapter.
§ 445-108. Monitoring stations (control manholes).
§ 445-109. Proper design and maintenance of facilities and
monitoring stations.
Preliminary treatment, and flow equalization facilities, or monitoring
stations, if provided for any wastewater, shall be constructed and
maintained continuously clean, safe, and continuously operational by the
owner at his expense. Where an industrial user has such treatment,
equalization, or monitoring facilities at the time this chapter is enacted,
the Director may approve or disapprove the adequacy of such facilities.
Where the Director disapproves of such facilities and construction of new or
upgraded facilities for treatment, equalization, or monitoring are required,
plans and specifications for such facilities shall be prepared by a licensed
professional engineer and submitted to the Director. Construction of new
or upgraded facilities shall not commence until written approval of the
Director has been obtained.
E. Other reports. The Director may impose reporting requirements
equivalent to the requirements imposed by § 445-106C for users not
subject to pretreatment standards.
A. All significant industrial users, and other industrial users whose
industrial waste discharge has caused or may cause interference or
pass-through, shall install and maintain a suitable monitoring station,
on their premises at their expense, to facilitate the observation,
sampling, and measurement of their industrial wastewater discharge.
B. If there is more than one street lateral serving an industrial user, the
Director may require the installation of a control manhole on each
lateral.
C. The Director may require that such monitoring station(s) include
equipment for the continuous measurement and recording of
wastewater flow rate and for the sampling of the wastewater. Such
station(s) shall be accessibly and safely located, and the industrial user
shall allow immediate access, without prior notice, to the station by the
Director and/or DEP, or either of their designated representatives.
§ 445-106 PORT JERVIS CODE § 445-110
305:456
§ 445-110. Vandalism; tampering with measuring devices.
No unauthorized person shall negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover,
deface, tamper with, prevent access, or render inaccurate, or cause or
permit the negligent breaking, damaging, destroying, uncovering, defacing,
tampering with, preventing access, or rendering inaccurate to:
§ 445-111. Sampling and analysis.
§ 445-112. Accidental discharges; SPCC plan.
A. Any structure, appurtenance, or equipment which is a part of the City of
Port Jervis POTW; or
B. Any measuring, sampling, and/or testing device or mechanism installed
pursuant to any requirement under this chapter, except as approved by
the Director.
A. Sampling shall be performed so that a representative portion of the
wastewater is obtained for analysis.
B. All measurements, tests, and analyses of the characteristics of waters
and wastes required in any section of this chapter shall be carried out in
accordance with standard methods, by a laboratory certified by
NYSDOH to perform the analyses. Such samples shall be taken at the
approved monitoring stations described in § 445-108, if such a station
exists. If an approved monitoring station is not required, then samples
shall be taken from another location on the industrial sewer lateral
before discharge to the public sewer. Unless specifically requested
otherwise, or unless specifically not allowed in federal regulation,
samples shall be gathered as flow-proportioned (where feasible)
composite samples made up of individual samples taken not less than
once per hour for the period of time equal to the duration of industrial
wastewater discharge during daily operations (including any cleanup
shift).
A. Each user shall provide for protection from accidental or slug
discharges of prohibited materials or discharges of materials in volume
or concentration exceeding limitations of this chapter or of an industrial
wastewater discharge permit. Users shall immediately notify the
Director and DEP of the discharge of wastes in violation of this chapter
or any permit. Such discharges may result from:
(1) Breakdown of pretreatment equipment.
(2) Accidents caused by mechanical failure, or negligence.
(3) Other causes.
B. Where possible, such immediate notification shall allow the Director
and DEP to initiate appropriate countermeasure action at the POTW.
The user shall prepare a detailed written statement following any
§ 445-110 GARAGE AND YARD SALES § 445-112
305:457
§ 445-113. Posting notices.
To ensure that the industrial user's employees are informed of the City of
Port Jervis and DEP requirements, a notice shall be posted permanently on
appropriate bulletin boards within the user's facility that advise employees
of the City's and DEP's requirements and whom to call in the event of an
accidental discharge in violation of this chapter.
§ 445-114. Sample splitting.
When so requested in advance by an industrial user, and when taking
a sample of industrial wastewater, the City of Port Jervis and/or DEP
representative(s) shall gather sufficient volume of sample so that the sample
can be split into two nearly equal volumes, each of size adequate for
the anticipated analytical protocols including any quality control (QC)
procedures. One of the portions shall be given to the representative of the
accidental or slug discharge; which describes the causes of the
discharge and the measures being taken to prevent future occurrences,
within five days of the occurrence, and the Director and DEP shall
receive a copy of such report no later than the fifth calendar day
following the occurrence. Analytical results and their interpretation
may be appended to the report at a date not exceeding 45 calendar days
after the occurrence.
C. When required by the Director or DEP, detailed plans and procedures to
prevent accidental or slug discharges shall be submitted to the Director
and DEP, and upon review the Director may approve the plan. These
plans and procedures shall be called a Spill Prevention, Control, and
Countermeasure (SPCC) Plan. The plan shall address, at a minimum,
the following:
(1) Description of discharge practices, including nonroutine batch
discharges.
(2) Description of stored chemicals.
(3) Procedures for immediately notifying the City of Port Jervis and
DEP of any accidental or slug discharge. Such notification must
also be given for any discharge that would violate any provision of
the permit and any National Prohibitive Discharge Standard.
(4) Procedures to prevent adverse impact from any accidental or slug
discharge. Such procedures include, but are not limited to,
inspection and maintenance of storage areas, handling and transfer
of materials, loading and unloading operations, control of plant site
runoff, worker training, the building of containment structures or
equipment, measures for containing toxic organic pollutants
(including solvents), and/or measures and equipment for
emergency response.
§ 445-112 PORT JERVIS CODE § 445-114
305:458
industrial user whose wastewater was sampled, and the other portion shall
be retained by the City of Port Jervis and/or DEP for its own analysis.
§ 445-115. Public access to information maintained by Director.
§ 445-116. Access to property and records.
The Director and other authorized representatives of the City of Port Jervis,
representatives of EPA, NYSDEC, NYSDOH, and/or the Orange County
Health Department and DEP, bearing proper credentials and identification,
shall be permitted to enter upon all nonresidential properties at all times
for the purpose of inspection, observation, sampling, flow measurement,
and testing to ascertain a user's compliance with applicable provisions of
federal and state law governing use of the City of Port Jervis POTW and
with the provisions of this chapter. Inspections of residential properties
shall be performed in proper observance of the resident's civil rights. Such
representative(s) shall have the right to set up, on the user's property
or property rented/leased by the user, such devices as are necessary to
conduct sampling or flow measurement. Guard dogs shall be under proper
control of the user while the representatives are on the user's property
or property rented/leased by the user. Such representative(s) shall,
additionally, have access to and may copy any records the user is required
to maintain under this chapter. Where a user has security measures in
force that would require proper identification and clearance before entry
into the premises, the user shall make necessary arrangements so that,
upon presentation of suitable identification, inspecting personnel will be
permitted to enter, without delay, for the purpose of performing their
specific responsibilities.
A. When requested, the Director shall make available, to the public, for
inspection and/or copying, information and data on industrial users that
has been obtained from reports, questionnaires, permit applications,
permit and monitoring programs, and inspections, unless the industrial
user specifically requests, and is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction
of the Director, that such information, if made public, would divulge
processes or methods of production entitled to protection as trade
secrets of the user. Wastewater constituents and characteristics and
reports of accidental discharges shall not be recognized as confidential.
B. Confidential information shall not be made available for inspection and/
or copying by the public but shall be disclosed, upon written request, to
governmental agencies, for uses related to this chapter, or the SPDES
permit, providing that the governmental agency making the request
agrees to hold the information confidential, in accordance with state or
federal laws, rules and regulations. The Director shall provide written
notice to the industrial user of any disclosure of confidential
information to another governmental agency.
§ 445-114 GARAGE AND YARD SALES § 445-117
305:459
§ 445-117. Access to easements.
The Director, bearing proper credentials and identification, shall be
permitted to enter all private premises through which the City of Port
Jervis holds an easement for the purpose of inspection, observation,
measurement, sampling, repair, replacement and maintenance of any
portion of the City of Port Jervis public sewerage system lying within the
easement. All entry and subsequent work on the easement shall be done
in accordance with the terms of the easement pertaining to the private
premises involved.
§ 445-118. Liability of property owner.
During the performance, on private premises, of inspections, sampling,
or other similar operations referred to in §§ 445-116 and 445-117, the
inspectors shall observe all applicable safety rules established by the owner
or occupant of the premises. The owner and/or occupant shall be held
harmless for personal injury or death of the inspector and the loss of or
damage to the inspector's supplies and/or equipment, and the inspector
shall indemnify the owner and/or occupant against loss or damage to
property of the owner or occupant by the inspector and against liability
claims asserted against the owner or occupant for personal injury or death
of the inspector or for loss of or damage to the inspector's supplies or
equipment arising from inspection and sampling operations, except as such
may be caused by negligence or failure of the owner or occupant to
maintain safe conditions.
§ 445-119. Special agreements.
A. Nothing in this article shall be construed as preventing any special
agreement or arrangement among the City of Port Jervis, DEP and any
user of the POTW whereby wastewater of unusual strength or character
is accepted into the POTW and specially treated, subject to any
payments or user charges, as may be applicable. In entering into such a
special agreement, the City of Port Jervis Common Council shall, in
consultation with DEP, consider whether the wastewater will:
(1) Pass through or cause interference.
(2) Endanger the public municipal employees.
(3) Cause violation of the SPDES permit.
(4) Interfere with any purpose stated in § 455-2.
(5) Prevent the equitable compensation to the City of Port Jervis and/or
DEP for wastewater conveyance and treatment and sludge
management and disposal.
B. No discharge which violates the federal pretreatment standards will be
allowed under the terms of such special agreements.
§ 445-117 PORT JERVIS CODE § 445-119
305:460
C. No agreement shall be entered into without the user having been issued
and presently having a permit to discharge wastes into the POTW for
treatment and disposal. Additionally the user shall be in compliance
with all conditions in the permit and shall not be in arrears in any
charges due to the City of Port Jervis before the agreement is entered
into. The City of Port Jervis Common Council may condition the
agreement.
§ 445-119 GARAGE AND YARD SALES § 445-119
305:461

ARTICLE XI
Enforcement; Penalties for Offenses
§ 445-120. Enforcement Response Plan.
A. The Director shall prepare an Enforcement Response Plan. The
Enforcement Response Plan, in a step-by-step fashion, shall outline the
procedures to be followed to identify, document, and respond to
violations by users of the POTW. Such procedures shall be equivalent to
procedures described in the document entitled Pretreatment
Compliance Monitoring and Enforcement Guidance, USEPA, September
1986. All violations by users of the POTW shall be met with some type of
enforcement response. The response shall be comprehensive and
effective.
B. The Enforcement Response Plan shall:
(1) Describe how the Director will investigate instances of
noncompliance.
(2) Describe the types of escalated enforcement actions that the
Director will take in response to all anticipated types of user
violations and the time periods within which to initiate and follow
up these actions.
(3) Adequately reflect the City of Port Jervis Common Council's
responsibility to enforce all applicable standards and requirements.
C. The Enforcement Response Plan shall contain:
(1) Criteria for scheduling periodic inspection and/or sampling visits to
POTW users.
(2) Forms and guidelines for documenting compliance data in a
manner which will enable the information to be used as evidence.
(3) Systems to track due dates, compliance schedule milestones, and
pending enforcement actions.
(4) Criteria, responsible personnel, and procedures to select and
initiate an enforcement action.
D. The range of appropriate enforcement actions shall be based on the
nature and severity of the violation and other relevant factors, such as:
(1) Magnitude of the violation;
(2) Duration of the violation;
(3) Effect of the violation on the receiving water;
(4) Effect of the violation on the POTW;
§ 445-120 GARAGE AND YARD SALES § 445-120
305:463
§ 445-121. Administrative remedies: notification of violation.
Whenever the Director finds that any user has violated or is violating this
chapter, or any wastewater discharge permit, order, prohibition, limitation,
or requirement permitted by this chapter, the Director may serve upon such
person a written Notice of Violation stating the nature of the violation.
Within 10 calendar days of the date that the Director serves the Notice
of Violation, the user shall submit to the Director an explanation of the
violation and a plan for the satisfactory correction and future prevention
thereof. The correction and prevention plan shall include specific actions.
Submission of this plan in no way relieves the user of liability for any
violations caused by the user before or after receipt of the Notice of
Violation. The Director shall notify DEP of all such violations within 48 hours
of issuance of the Notice of Violation.
§ 445-122. Administrative remedies: consent orders.
The Director is hereby empowered to enter into Consent Orders, assurances
of voluntary compliance, or other similar documents establishing an
agreement with the user responsible for the noncompliance. Such orders
shall include specific action to be taken by the user to correct the
noncompliance within a time period also specified by the order. Consent
Orders shall have the same force and effect as an administrative order. The
Director may consult with the DEP as to the remedial action being ordered
prior to the issuance of the Consent Order.
§ 445-123. Administrative remedies: administrative or compliance
orders.
(5) Effect of the violation on the health and safety of the POTW
employees;
(6) Compliance history of the user;
(7) Good faith of the user; and
(8) Shall promote consistent and timely use of enforcement remedies.
E. The City of Port Jervis Common Council shall approve the Enforcement
Response Plan. The Enforcement Response Plan shall be reviewed at
least every five years.
A. When the Director finds that a user has violated or continues to violate
this chapter or a permit or administrative order issued thereunder, he
may issue an Administrative Order to the user responsible for the
discharge or violation and directing that, following a specified time
period, sewer service shall be discontinued, severed and abated unless
the violation is corrected and that there is no reoccurrence of the
violation. Administrative Orders may also contain such other
requirements as might be reasonably necessary and appropriate to
§ 445-120 PORT JERVIS CODE § 445-123
305:464
§ 445-124. Administrative remedies: administrative fines.
§ 445-125. Administrative remedies: cease-and-desist orders.
address the noncompliance, including the installation of pretreatment
technology, additional self-monitoring, and management practices.
B. The user may, within 15 calendar days of the date that the Director
serves the Order, petition the Director to modify or suspend the Order.
Such petition shall be in written form and shall be transmitted to the
Director in accordance with § 445-130. The Director shall then:
(1) Reject any frivolous petitions;
(2) Modify or suspend the order; or
(3) Order the petitioner to show cause in accordance with § 445-128
and may as part of the show cause notice request the user to supply
additional information. The user is not relieved of any liability,
criminal or civil, for unauthorized discharges or other violations
that occur before or after the issuance of the administrative or
compliance order or during the petition process.
A. Notwithstanding any other section of this chapter, any user who is
found to have violated any provision of this chapter, or a wastewater
discharge permit or administrative order issued hereunder, shall be
fined in an amount not to exceed $20,000 per violation. Each day on
which noncompliance shall occur or continue shall be deemed a
separate and distinct violation.
B. The user may, within 15 calendar days of the date that the Director
serves the Order instituting a fine, petition the Director to modify or
suspend the Order. Such petition shall be in written form and shall be
transmitted to the Director in accordance with § 445-130. The Director
shall then:
(1) Reject any frivolous petitions;
(2) Modify or suspend the fine; or
(3) Order the petitioner to show cause in accordance with § 445-128
and may as part of the show cause notice request the user to supply
additional information.
A. When the Director finds that a user has violated or continues to violate
this chapter or any permit or administrative order issued hereunder,
the Director may issue an administrative order to cease and desist all
such violations and direct those persons in noncompliance to:
(1) Comply forthwith.
§ 445-123 GARAGE AND YARD SALES § 445-125
305:465
§ 445-126. Administrative remedies: termination of permit.
§ 445-127. Administrative remedies: water supply severance.
(2) Take such appropriate remedial or preventive action as may be
needed to properly address a continuing or threatened violation,
including halting operations or terminating the discharge.
B. The user may, within 15 calendar days of the date that the Director
serves the order, petition the Director to modify or suspend the order.
Such petition shall be in written form and shall be transmitted to the
Director in accordance with § 445-130. The Director shall then:
(1) Reject any frivolous petitions;
(2) Modify or suspend the order;
(3) Order the petitioner to show cause in accordance with § 445-128
and may as part of the show cause notice request the user to supply
additional information.
A. Any user who violates the following conditions of this chapter or a
wastewater discharge permit or an administrative order, or any
applicable state and/or federal law, is subject to permit termination:
(1) Violation of permit conditions or conditions of an administrative
order;
(2) Failure to accurately report the wastewater constituents and
characteristics of its discharge;
(3) Failure to report significant changes in operations or wastewater
constituents and characteristics;
(4) Refusal of reasonable access to the user's premises for the purpose
of inspection, monitoring, or sampling; or
(5) Failure to pay administrative fines, fees or user charges.
B. Noncompliant, industrial users shall be notified, by certified or
registered mail, of the proposed termination of their wastewater permit
in accordance with § 445-130. The user may, within 15 calendar days of
the date that the Director mails such notification, petition the Director
to permit continued use of the POTW by the user. Such petition shall be
in written form and shall be transmitted to the Director in accordance
with § 445-130.
C. The Director shall then:
(1) Reject any frivolous petitions.
(2) Order the petitioner to show cause in accordance with § 445-128
and may as part of the show cause notice request the user to supply
additional information.
§ 445-125 PORT JERVIS CODE § 445-127
305:466
§ 445-128. Administrative remedies: show cause hearing.
A. Whenever a user has violated or continues to violate the provisions of
this chapter or an order or permit issued hereunder, water service to
the user may be severed and service will only recommence, at the
user's expense, after it has satisfactorily demonstrated its ability to
comply.
B. The Director will notify the noncompliant user of the termination of
water service in accordance with Section 1111; however, water service
can be terminated immediately as an appropriate remedial or
preventative action to address a continuing or threatened violation. The
user may, within 15 calendar days of severance, petition the Director to
reconnect water supply service. Such petition shall be in written form
and shall be transmitted to the Director in accordance with Section
1111. The Director shall then:
(1) Reject any frivolous petitions;
(2) Reconnect the water supply; or
(3) Order the petitioner to show cause in accordance with Section
1109 and may as part of the show cause notice request the user to
supply additional information.
A. The Director may order any user who appeals administrative remedies
for violations of this chapter to show cause, before the City of Port
Jervis Common Council, why an enforcement action, initiated by the
Director, should not be taken. A notice shall be served on the user
specifying the time and place of a hearing to be held by the City of Port
Jervis Common Council regarding the violation, the reasons why the
action is to be taken, the proposed enforcement action, and directing
the user to show cause before the City of Port Jervis Common Council
why the proposed enforcement action should not be taken.
B. The notice of the hearing shall be served at least 10 calendar days
before the hearing in accordance with Section 1111 of this article.
Service shall be made on any principal or executive officer of a user's
establishment or to any partner in a user's establishment. The City of
Port Jervis Common Council itself may conduct the hearing, or it may
designate any of its members or any officer, employee or hearing officer
of the City of Port Jervis to conduct the hearing, which may include:
(1) Issuance, in the name of the City of Port Jervis, of notices of
hearings, requesting the attendance and testimony of witnesses,
and the production of evidence relevant to any matter involved in
such hearings;
(2) The taking of evidence;
(3) Taking sworn testimony;
§ 445-127 GARAGE AND YARD SALES § 445-128
305:467
§ 445-129. Administrative remedies: failure of user to petition
Director.
In the event the Director issues any administrative order, terminates the
user's permit, or makes any fine as set forth in this article, and the user
fails, within the designated period of time set forth, to petition the Director,
as provided in appropriate sections of this article, the user shall be deemed
in default, and its rights to contest the administrative order or fine shall be
deemed waived.
§ 445-130. Administrative remedies: notice.
(4) Preparing a report of the evidence and hearing, including
transcripts and other evidence, together with recommendations, to
the City of Port Jervis Common Council for action thereon.
C. After the City of Port Jervis Common Council has reviewed the evidence
and testimony, it may order the user to comply with the Director's order
or fine, modify the Director's order or fine, or vacate the Director's
order or fine.
D. Whether or not a duly notified user appears as noticed, immediate
enforcement action may be pursued.
A. The notices, orders, petitions, or other notification that the Director or
other City official shall give pursuant to any sections of this chapter
shall be in writing and shall be served personally or sent by certified
mail or registered mail, return receipt requested, postage prepaid. The
notice, order, petition, or other communication shall be deemed given
upon its personal service or upon mailing as provided herein. Any
notice, administrative order, or communication mailed to the user
pursuant to this chapter shall be mailed to the service address. The
Director will use an alternate billing address for mailing to the user,
only if the user has provided the alternate address in writing to the
Assessor and/or billing office, prior to the date of the Director's mailing.
B. Any notice, petition, or other communication to the Director or other
City official shall be in writing and shall be sent by certified or
registered mail, return receipt requested, postage prepared, or shall be
served personally. Notices, petitions and other communications to the
Director or to other City official or to the DEP shall be deemed given
upon actual personal service or upon service of representative(s) so
designated to receive service. Otherwise, notices, orders, petitions, or
other communication shall be deemed given upon mailing as provided
herein.
(1) To the Director:
Director of Public Works
City Hall, 20 Hammond Street
§ 445-128 PORT JERVIS CODE § 445-130
305:468
§ 445-131. Administrative remedies: right to choose multiple
remedies.
The Director shall have the right, within the Director's sole discretion, to
utilize any one or more appropriate administrative remedies set forth in
this article. The Director may utilize more than one administrative remedy
established pursuant to this article, and the Director may hold one show
cause hearing that combines more than one enforcement action.
§ 445-132. Judicial remedies: civil actions for penalties.
P.O. Box 1002
Port Jervis, New York 12771
(2) To the Building Official:
Building Official
Building Department
City Hall, 20 Hammond Street
P.O. Box 1002
Port Jervis, New York 12771
(3) To the Common Council of the City of Port Jervis:
City Hall, 20 Hammond Street
P.O. Box 1002
Port Jervis, New York 12771
(4) To the DEP:
DEP - Port Jervis Wastewater Treatment Plant
46 North Maple Avenue
Port Jervis, New York 12771
Attention: Chief Operator
C. The addresses listed in this chapter, for the purpose of giving notice to
City of Port Jervis officials and to NYCDEP officials, may be amended by
resolution of the Common Council, if necessary.
A. Any person who violates any of the provisions of or who fails to perform
any duty imposed by this chapter, or any administrative order or
determination of the Director promulgated under this chapter, or the
terms of any permit issued hereunder, shall be liable to the City of Port
Jervis for a civil penalty not to exceed $20,000 for each such violation,
to be assessed after a hearing (unless the user waives the right to a
§ 445-130 GARAGE AND YARD SALES § 445-132
305:469
§ 445-133. Judicial remedies: court orders.
hearing) held in conformance with the procedures set forth in this
article. Each violation shall be a separate and distinct violation, and in
the case of continuing violation, each day's continuance thereof shall
be deemed a separate and distinct violation. Such penalty may be
recovered in an action brought by the City of Port Jervis attorney, or
his designated attorney, at the request of the Director in the name of
the City of Port Jervis, in any court of competent jurisdiction giving
preference to courts local to the City of Port Jervis. In addition to
the above-described penalty, the Director may recover all damages
incurred by the City of Port Jervis from any persons or users who
violate any provisions of this chapter or who fail to perform any duties
imposed by this chapter or any administrative order or determination
of the Director promulgated under this chapter, or the terms of any
permit issued hereunder. In addition to the above-described damages,
the Director may recover all reasonable attorney's fees incurred by the
City of Port Jervis in enforcing the provisions of this article, including
reasonable attorney's fees incurred in any action to recover penalties
and damages, and the Director may also recover court costs, and
other expenses associated with the enforcement activities, including
sampling and monitoring expenses.
B. In determining the amount of civil penalty, the court shall take into
account all relative circumstances, including, but not limited to, the
extent of harm caused by the violation, the magnitude and duration, any
economic benefit gained through the user's violation, corrective actions
by the user, the compliance history of the user, and any other relative
factors as justice may require.
C. Such civil penalty may be released or compromised by the Director
before the matter has been referred to the City of Port Jervis attorney,
and where such matter has been referred to the City of Port Jervis
attorney, any such penalty may be released or compromised and any
action commenced to recover the same may be settled and discontinued
by the City of Port Jervis attorney, with the consent of the Director.
A. In addition to the power to assess penalties as set forth in this article,
the Director shall have the power, following the hearing held in
conformance with the procedures set forth in this article, to seek an
order:
(1) Suspending, revoking, or modifying the violator's wastewater
discharge permit; or
(2) Enjoining the violator from continuing the violation.
B. Any such court order shall be sought in an action brought by the City of
Port Jervis attorney, at the request of the Director, in the name of the
City of Port Jervis, in any court of competent jurisdiction giving
preference to courts local to the City of Port Jervis.
§ 445-132 PORT JERVIS CODE § 445-133
305:470
§ 445-134. Judicial remedies: criminal penalties.
§ 445-135. Judicial remedies: additional injunctive relief.
Whenever a user has violated or continues to violate the provisions of
this chapter or permit or order issued hereunder, the Director, through
counsel, may petition the Court, in the name of the City of Port Jervis, for
the issuance of a preliminary or permanent injunction or both (as may be
appropriate) which restrains the violation of or compels the compliance
with any order or determination thereunder by the Director.
§ 445-136. Judicial remedies: summary abatement.
C. The City of Port Jervis attorney, at the request of the Director shall
petition the Court to impose, assess, and recover such sums imposed
according to this article. In determining the amount of liability, the
Court shall take into account all relevant circumstances, including, but
not limited to, the extent of harm caused by the violation, the
magnitude and duration, any economic benefit gained through the
user's violation, corrective actions by the user, the compliance history
of the user, and any other factor as justice requires.
A. Any person who willfully violates any provision of this chapter or any
final determination or administrative order of the Director made in
accordance with this article shall be guilty of a Class A misdemeanor
and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not less than
$500 nor more than $1,000 or imprisonment not to exceed one year, or
both. Each offense shall be a separate and distinct offense, and in the
case of a continuing offense, each day's continuance thereof shall be
deemed a separate and distinct offense.
B. Any user who knowingly makes any false statements, representations,
or certifications in any application, record, report, plan or other
document filed or required to be maintained pursuant to this chapter, or
wastewater permit, or who falsifies, tampers with, or knowingly
renders inaccurate any monitoring device or method required under
this chapter shall be guilty of a Class A misdemeanor and, upon
conviction, shall be punished by a fine of not more than $1,000 per
violation per day or imprisonment for not more than one year, or both.
C. No prosecution, under this section, shall be instituted until after final
disposition of a show cause hearing, if any, was instituted.
A. Notwithstanding any inconsistent provisions of this chapter, whenever
the Director finds, after investigation, that any user is causing,
engaging in, or maintaining a condition or activity which, in the
judgment of the Director, presents an imminent danger to the public
health, safety, or welfare, or to the environment, or is likely to result in
severe damage to the POTW or the environment, and it therefore
appears to be prejudicial to the public interest to allow the condition or
activity to go unabated until notice and an opportunity for a hearing can
§ 445-133 GARAGE AND YARD SALES § 445-136
305:471
§ 445-137. Miscellaneous: delinquent payments.
be provided, the Director may, without prior hearing, order such user
by notice, in writing wherever practicable or in such other form as
practices are intended to be prescribed, to discontinue, abate, or
alleviate such condition or activity, and thereupon such person shall
immediately discontinue, abate, or alleviate such condition or activity,
or where the giving of notice is impracticable, or in the event of a user's
failure to comply voluntarily with an emergency order, the Director may
take all appropriate action to abate the violating condition. As promptly
as possible thereafter, not to exceed 15 calendar days, the Director
shall provide the user an opportunity to be heard, in accordance with
the provisions of this article.
B. The Director, acting upon the belief that an emergency exists, shall be
indemnified against any personal liability that may arise in the
performance of his duties to protect the public health, safety, or welfare
or to preserve the POTW or the environment.
A. If there shall be any payments which are due to the City of Port Jervis,
or any Department thereof, pursuant to any article or section of this
chapter, which shall remain due and unpaid, in whole or in part, for a
period of 30 calendar days from the date of billing by the City of Port
Jervis, the same shall constitute a default, and there shall be added to
the entire amount of the original bill, a penalty equal to 5% of the
original bill.
B. In the event that there are any sewer fees, assessments, or other
service charges which shall have been delinquent for a period of at least
60 calendar days as of December 15 of any year, the City Clerk-
Treasurer shall report the names of the defaulting persons to the City of
Port Jervis Mayor, the Director and the Assessor, on or before December
15 of the same year. The City of Port Jervis Clerk-Treasurer is hereby
directed to add the entire amount of the sewer fee, assessment, or other
service charge which shall be in default, plus penalty and interest, as
provided for in this chapter, to the real property taxes due and owing to
City of Port Jervis in the next succeeding year, and the City of Port Jervis
Clerk is directed to collect the same in the same manner as real
property taxes due and owing to the City of Port Jervis are collected.
C. Where charges are delinquent and the violator is not a resident of the
City of Port Jervis, or is located outside the geographical boundaries of
the City of Port Jervis, then the City of Port Jervis attorney is authorized
to seek recovery of charges, including punitive damages, in a court of
competent jurisdiction or make arrangements with the appropriate
county where the user is located to add the amount of the sewer
assessment or other charges which shall be in default, plus penalty and
interest, as provided for in the Law, to the real property taxes due to the
county in the next ensuing year.
§ 445-136 PORT JERVIS CODE § 445-138
305:472
§ 445-138. Miscellaneous: performance bonds.
The Director may decline to reissue a permit to any user which has failed to
comply with the provisions of this chapter or any order or previous permit
issued hereunder unless such user first files with it a satisfactory bond,
payable to the City of Port Jervis, in a sum not to exceed a value determined
by the Director to be necessary to achieve consistent compliance.
§ 445-139. Miscellaneous: liability insurance.
The Director may decline to reissue a permit to any user which has failed to
comply with the provisions of this chapter or any order or previous permit
issued hereunder, unless the user first submits proof that it has obtained
financial assurances sufficient to restore or repair POTW damage caused by
its discharge.
§ 445-140. Miscellaneous: informant rewards.
The Director is authorized to pay up to $500 for information leading to the
discovery of noncompliance by a user. In the event that the information
provided results in an administrative fine or civil penalty levied against the
user, the Director is authorized to disperse up to 10% of the collected fine or
penalty to the informant. However, a single reward payment may not exceed
$10,000, including the discovery reward.
§ 445-141. Miscellaneous: public notification.
The Director shall provide public notification, in the daily newspaper with
the largest circulation in the City, of users who were in significant
noncompliance with local or federal pretreatment standards or
requirements since the last such notice. The frequency of such notices shall
be at least once per year.
§ 445-138 GARAGE AND YARD SALES § 445-141
305:473

ARTICLE XII
Charges
§ 445-142. Normal sewage service charges.
§ 445-143. Surcharge for abnormal sewage.
All persons discharging or depositing wastes with concentrations in excess
of the pollutant concentrations in normal sewage shall pay a surcharge, as
may be prescribed in the City Fee Schedule.
§ 445-144. Total sewer service charge.
The total sewer service charge (which shall be called the "user charge"),
is comprised of the normal sewage service charge and any surcharges
for abnormal sewage, surcharges for pretreatment costs and any other
surcharges or fees which may be authorized by resolution of the Common
Council.
§ 445-145. Segmenting the POTWCS.
The service area of the POTWCS may be segmented to assist in a fair
distribution of user charges, especially if there is a pump station serving a
segment.
§ 445-146. Measurement of flow.
The volume of flow to be used in computing volume sewer service charges
and volume abnormal sewage surcharges shall be based upon metered
water consumption as shown on the records of meter readings maintained
by the City of Port Jervis Water Department. In the event that a person
discharging wastes into the POTWCS produces evidence, to the Director,
demonstrating that a substantial portion of the total amount of metered
water does not reach the POTWCS, then the Director shall either establish
A. All persons discharging or depositing wastes into the public sewers
shall pay a sewer service charge as a flat fee or proportional to the
liquid volume of waste so deposited, which charge shall be collected as
a sewer rent, as prescribed in the City Fee Schedule and that may be
revised from time to time by resolution of the Port Jervis Common
Council pursuant to City of Port Jervis Municipal Code § 280-10. The
Common Council may adopt the same or different schedules of rates,
fees, charges and surcharges for sewer usage by domestic,
nondomestic, commercial and/or industrial users.
B. Local Law No. 12 of the Year 2014, "Creating a Sewer Use Fee for
Individuals and Entities to the City of Port Jervis and Amending Article
V of Chapter 445 of the Port Jervis City Code," is hereby referenced and
incorporated into the provisions of this chapter, and Local Law No. 12 of
the Year 2014 remains in force and effect upon the adoption of this
chapter.
§ 445-142 GARAGE AND YARD SALES § 445-146
305:475
a percentage of the total metered water to be used as a basis for such
computations or direct the installation of appropriate flow measuring (and
totalizing) devices to measure and record the actual amount of flow into the
POTWCS. In the event that a person discharging wastes into the POTWCS
procures all or part of his water supply from unmetered sources, the
Director shall either direct the installation of water meters on the other
sources of water supply, or direct the installation of appropriate flow
measuring devices to measure and record the actual amount of flow into
the POTWCS. Any water meters and/or flow measuring devices installed
pursuant to this section shall be of a type and design acceptable to the
Director and shall be installed, maintained, and periodically tested as
required by the Director, at the owner's expense. All such meters and/or
flow measuring devices shall be subject to periodic inspection, testing, and
reading by the Director. Any person discharging wastes into the POTWCS
may install a flow-measuring device at his option, of the type, design,
installation, and maintenance standards of the Director, at the owner's
expense.
§ 445-147. Billing period.
The billing period shall be quarterly for industrial and for nonindustrial
users.
§ 445-148. Pretreatment program costs.
The additional charges and fees associated with the operation of the
pretreatment program shall be assessed to the user and include:
§ 445-149. Charges for trucked and hauled wastes.
The charge for treatment and disposal of the trucked or hauled waste that
is introduced into the POTW shall be established by resolution of the City
A. Reimbursement of costs of setting up and operating the pretreatment
program.
B. Issuing permits.
C. Monitoring, inspections, and surveillance procedures.
D. Costs of equipment and supplies.
E. Reviewing accidental discharge procedures.
F. Construction inspections.
G. Filing appeals.
H. Application for consistent removal status as outlined in 40 CFR Part
403.
I. Other reasonable expenses to carry out the program to satisfy the
requirements of this chapter, the NYSDEC, and the federal government.
§ 445-146 PORT JERVIS CODE § 445-149
305:476
of Port Jervis Common Council. The manner of determining the volume
dumped shall be at the discretion of the Director.
§ 445-150. Capital recovery.
The City of Port Jervis may institute an equitable procedure for recovering
the costs of any capital improvements of those parts of the POTWCS which
collect, pump, and convey wastewaters from those persons discharging
such wastewaters into the POTWCS.
§ 445-151. Collection of charges.
Provisions of Article XI of this chapter relating to the collection of penalties
shall apply to the collection of sewer service charges and abnormal sewage
service surcharges, unless where otherwise provided by application of the
Sewer Use Fee Law of the City of Port Jervis.
§ 445-152. Fiscal year for system.
The POTWCS shall be operated on the basis of a fiscal year commencing on
the first day of January and ending on the 31st day of December.
§ 445-153. Impact fees.
The City Of Port Jervis Common Council shall have the authority to impose
impact fees on new development, which development may:
§ 445-154. Use of revenues.
Revenues derived from user charges and associated penalties and impact
fees shall be credited to a special fund. Monies in this fund shall be used
exclusively for the following functions:
§ 445-155. Records and accounts.
A. Cause enlargement of the service area of the POTW and/or the
POTWCS.
B. Cause an increase of hydraulic and/or treatment demands on the POTW
and/or the POTWCS.
A. For the payment of the operation and maintenance, including repair
and replacement costs, of the POTWCS.
B. For the discovery and correction of inflow and infiltration.
C. For the payment of interest on and the amortization of or payment of
indebtedness which has been or shall be incurred for the construction
or extension of the POTWCS.
D. For the extension, enlargement, replacement of, and/or additions to the
POTWCS, including any necessary appurtenances.
§ 445-149 GARAGE AND YARD SALES § 445-155
305:477
A. The City of Port Jervis shall maintain and keep proper books of records
and accounts for the POTWCS, separate from all other records and
accounts, in which shall be made full and correct entries of all
transactions relating to the POTWCS. The City of Port Jervis will cause
an annual audit of such books of record and account for the preceding
fiscal year to be made by a recognized independent certified public
accountant, and will supply such audit report to authorized officials,
and the public, on request.
B. In conjunction with the audit, there shall be an annual review of the
sewer charge system to determine if it is adequate to meet
expenditures for all programs for the coming year.
C. Classification of old and new industrial users should also be reviewed
annually. The City of Port Jervis shall maintain and carry insurance on
all physical properties of the POTWCS, of the kinds and in the amounts
normally carried by public utility companies and municipalities
engaged in the operation of sewage disposal systems. All moneys
received for losses under any such insurance policies shall be applied
solely to the replacement and restoration of the property damaged or
destroyed.
§ 445-155 PORT JERVIS CODE § 445-155
305:478
ARTICLE XIII
Public Disclosure of POTWCS Operations
§ 445-156. POTWCS operations open to the public.
It shall be the policy of the City of Port Jervis Common Council to conduct
all business with full disclosure to the public.
§ 445-157. Procedural requirements available.
The nature and requirements of all formal procedures for applying for a
permit and for requesting a permit under this chapter and for requesting a
hearing shall be formulated by the City of Port Jervis and be made available
to any resident of the City of Port Jervis upon request.
§ 445-158. Validity through public inspection.
The City of Port Jervis shall formulate procedures to make available to the
public for inspection such orders, statements of policy, and interpretations
used by the City of Port Jervis in administration of this chapter. No rule,
regulation, or civil order shall be valid until it has been available for public
inspection.
§ 445-156 GARAGE AND YARD SALES § 445-158
305:479

ARTICLE XIV
General Provisions
§ 445-159. Conflicts.
The provisions of any City of Port Jervis law in conflict with any provision of
this chapter are hereby repealed.
§ 445-160. Severability.
Each provision of this chapter is severable from the others, so that if any
provision is held to be illegal or invalid for any reason whatsoever, such
illegal or invalid provision shall be severed from this chapter that shall
nonetheless remain in full force and effect.
§ 445-161. When effective.
This chapter shall take effect immediately upon its filing in the Office of the
Secretary of State.
§ 445-162. Applicability.
Articles I, II, IV, VIII, XI, XII, XIII and XIV shall apply in all incorporated
areas of the City of Port Jervis. Articles III, V, VI, VII, IX and X shall apply
only in incorporated areas of the City of Port Jervis that are also within the
service area of the POTW.
§ 445-159 GARAGE AND YARD SALES § 445-162
305:481
Chapter 447
SEX OFFENDERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Peace and good order — See Ch. 398.
§ 445-162 PORT JERVIS CODE § 445-162
305:482
ARTICLE I
Child Safety Zones
[Adopted 5-12-2008 by L.L. No. 3-2008]
§ 447-1. Findings; legislation intent and purpose.
§ 447-2. Definitions.
When used in this article, the following definitions apply:
CHILD, CHILDREN or MINOR — Individuals whose chronological age is
under 18 years.
CHILD SAFETY ZONE — On or within 300 feet of the property line of a
"specified location" as defined in this section.
DAY-CARE CENTER or CHILD-CARE FACILITY — Any child-care
arrangement which is either required to be licensed by, or which is exempt
from licensing in accordance with, state or local law, including, but not
A. The Common Council of the City of Port Jervis finds that due to the
recidivism rate among convicted sex offenders following their release
from confinement, there exists a heightened potential for reoccurrence
of their crimes where children are likely to regularly congregate, such
as public or nonpublic elementary, middle and high schools, residential
and group homes for children, child-care facilities, parks, playgrounds,
public or private youth centers, public swimming pools and other
recreational areas, campgrounds and any other areas or facilities
designated by the Common Council after the adoption of this article.
B. The Common Council finds that it is essential for the City to make every
effort to protect children from sex offenders who have committed
sexual offenses against minors.
C. The Common Council determines that it is in the best interest of the
safety, health and welfare of the citizens of the City of Port Jervis, and
particularly its children to:
(1) Establish child safety zones within the City of Port Jervis around
schools, child-care facilities, licensed child-care centers, parks and
playgrounds, recreational areas and other areas in which children
congregate;
(2) Prohibit a person who has been convicted of a crime that requires
the person to register pursuant to the New York State Sex Offender
Registration Act155 from loitering within 300 feet of such facilities;
and
(3) Provide that such offense shall be deemed a Class B misdemeanor
and, upon conviction, such person shall be subject to a fine of up to
$500 and/or imprisonment of up to 90 days.
155. Editor's Note: See Correctional Law § 168 et seq.
§ 447-1 GARAGE AND YARD SALES § 447-2
305:483
limited to, any family child-care home, child-care facility, school-age child
care center, specialized child-care facility, after-school programs and childcare
facilities of a church or parochial school.
PARK — Includes all public and private property specifically designated by
state, county or local government as being utilized for active or passive park
and recreational purposes.
RECREATIONAL FACILITY — Includes, but is not limited to, a playground,
forest preserve, conservation area, jogging trail or running track, hiking
trail, beach, water park, wading pool, athletic field, basketball court or
hockey rink, golf courses, mini-golf business, video arcade, laser tag,
paintball facilities, Boys and Girls Club(s), skate park, dance or gymnastic
studio, movie theater, martial arts school or family-oriented pool hall,
whether publicly or privately owned, to which the public has a right of
access as an invitee and which is located within the City of Port Jervis.
RESIDENTIAL AND GROUP HOMES FOR CHILDREN — Any New-York-
State-licensed facility which provides residential care for children under the
age of 18 years.
SCHOOL — Any public or private educational facility that provides
educational instruction to children in grades Pre-K through 12.
SEX OFFENDER REGISTRATION ACT — Article 6-C, Chapter 43 of the
Consolidated Laws of the State of New York.
SPECIFIED LOCATION — Any location, area or facility defined in the
definitions of "day-care center or child-care facility," "park," "recreational
facility," "school," and "residential and group homes for children."
§ 447-3. Loitering in child safety zones.
A person is guilty of loitering in a child safety zone if the person has been
previously convicted of committing a crime in New York State or in any
jurisdiction in which the victim is a child under the age of 18, who is
required to register under the New York State Sex Offender Registration
Act156 and is loitering or remains in a child safety zone as defined in § 447-2
of this article, and the person was previously clearly informed by a law
enforcement officer that (s)he is in a child safety zone and refused to leave
the child safety zone after being requested to do so.
§ 447-4. Enforcement.
The provisions of this article shall be uniformly enforced throughout the
City of Port Jervis by state, county and local enforcement agencies.
§ 447-5. Penalties for offenses.
Upon conviction, any person who is found to have violated this article shall
be convicted of a Class B misdemeanor and subject to a fine of up to $500
156. Editor's Note: See Correctional Law § 168 et seq.
§ 447-2 PORT JERVIS CODE § 447-5
305:484
and/or imprisonment of up to 90 days. The sentencing court shall provide
notification to the offender's probation officer or parole officer and the New
York State Board of Examiners that such individual has violated this article.
§ 447-5 GARAGE AND YARD SALES § 447-5
305:485
Chapter 451
SHOPPING CARTS
§ 451-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms have the meanings indicated:
PARKING LOT — Any area or areas of private property near or contiguous
to and generally provided for or used in connection with premises having
one or more stores or business establishments and used by the public as a
means of access to and egress from such stores or business establishments
and for the parking of motor vehicles of customers or patrons of such stores
and business establishments.
SHOPPING CART — Any nonmotorized device, including those with wheels,
commonly used to transport or carry food and/or other merchandise.
§ 451-2. Requirements pertaining to shopping carts.
Any and all firms, corporations or other types of business establishments
which own and/or provide shopping carts for the use of customers or
patrons shall comply with the following requirements:
§ 451-3. Prohibitions.
A. Post signs, with dimensions of at least 24 inches in both height and
width, at each of the public entrances and exits from its business
establishment, which signs shall read "No person shall remove any
shopping cart from the parking lot under penalty of law," which
lettering shall be in black block letters at least one inch in height.
B. Affix to each shopping cart owned or used by that business
establishment a metal plate which shall indicate the name of said owner
or business establishment, the address of said owner or business
establishment and a serial number or other identification number.
C. Furnish a master list of all shopping carts utilized by said business
establishment, which list shall contain a listing of all such shopping
carts utilized in the operation of said business or under the care,
custody or control of said business, to the Director of Public Works, 1
Franklin Street, Port Jervis, New York 12771.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, company, corporation or
otherwise to allow shopping carts to be or remain unattended on any
street, sidewalk or public place or property.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, company, corporation or
otherwise to remove a shopping cart from any parking lot without the
express written permission of the owner of said shopping cart or the
firm, company, corporation or business establishment having care,
custody or control of said shopping cart.
§ 447-5 PORT JERVIS CODE § 451-4
451:486
§ 451-4. Disposition; penalties; storage and fees.
Chapter 457
SOLID WASTE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Brush, grass and weeds — See Ch. 417, Art. I. Sewers and sewage disposal — See Ch. 445.
§ 457-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meaning
indicated below:
ASHES — The residue from coal, wood or other fuel.
COMMERCIAL ESTABLISHMENT — Any business or other undertaking for
profit.[Added 7-23-1990 by L.L. No. 8-1990]
DUMPSTER — Any large receptacle used or maintained by any person or
commercial establishment for the collection of garbage, refuse, rubbish
or waste. This includes commercial, industrial, or construction
receptacles.[Added 10-28-2013 by L.L. No. 8-2013]
A. Unattended shopping carts on streets, sidewalks, public places or
public property outside of the business establishment owning, utilizing
and/or furnishing such shopping carts or outside of a parking lot as
defined in this chapter are subject to confiscation, removal and storage
by the City of Port Jervis at a place designated by the Department of
Public Works of the City of Port Jervis. Any such shopping cart must be
stored for a period of at least 30 days to allow the owner of said cart to
redeem his property. If any said shopping cart is not claimed within 30
days, the City of Port Jervis may dispose of said shopping cart as it
chooses.
B. In the event that any stored shopping cart is claimed by its rightful
owner during the period of time said cart is in storage by the City, the
City shall return said cart to the rightful owner upon satisfactory
verification of ownership, care, custody or control after the payment of
a recovery fee as provided in Chapter 280, Fees, to cover handling and
storage expenses.157
C. Violation of any provision of § 451-3 above shall be punishable by a fine
of $25 per each individual violation.
D. Failure to post signage as set forth in § 451-2 above shall be punishable
by a fine of $25 per day for each day a required sign is not so posted.
157. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 451-4 SHOPPING CARTS § 457-1
451:487
GARBAGE — Organic waste of meat, bones, fish, fruit, vegetables or any
animal or vegetable matter, including cans or containers and packaging
that have contained food materials, and also any materials or containers
designated by local, county or state authorities as recyclable.158[Amended
9-9-1996 by L.L. No. 15-1996]
PERSON — Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company or organization of any kind.
REFUSE — Inorganic waste such as bottles, glass, tires, crockery, metals
or other noncombustible matter, including grass clippings and
leaves.[Amended 2-8-1993 by L.L. No. 1-1993]
RESIDENTIAL STRUCTURE — A structure or part of a structure containing
one, two or three residential units. Only residential structures as herein
defined shall have their garbage and recycling picked up by the City of Port
Jervis. Any structure containing a commercial establishment and residential
units (no matter how many residential units) shall not have its garbage
and recycling picked up by the City of Port Jervis. Mixed-use structures
containing commercial and one or more residential units shall not be
considered residential structures as this term is used in this chapter.[Added
8-15-1990 by L.L. No. 12-1990; amended 11-22-2004 by L.L. No.
3-2004; 6-27-2005 by L.L. No. 2-2005]
RUBBISH — Paper, leather, cloth, plastic or other combustible matter.
§ 457-2. Dumping prohibited; penalties for offenses.
§ 457-3. Use of municipal transfer station site restricted. [Amended
2-24-1997 by L.L. No. 2-1997; 2-26-2007 by L.L. No. 2-2007]
Use of the municipal transfer station site on Upper Canal Road, in the Town
of Deerpark, is restricted to the City Department of Public Works and those
residents of the City of Port Jervis holding valid permits issued by the City
of Port Jervis. Application for said permits shall be made to the City Clerk-
Treasurer, the fee for the same set by resolution of the Common Council of
the City of Port Jervis. Permit fees shall be as set forth in § 457-12.
A. The dumping, depositing or permitting of the same of any garbage,
rubbish, refuse or toxic substance upon any public or private property
within the City of Port Jervis is hereby prohibited and declared
unlawful, except as hereinafter provided.
B. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained herein, violation of
§ 457-2A shall be punishable by a fine of not less than $500 and not
more than $5,000 or imprisonment for up to 30 days, or both. In
addition, the City shall recover of any violator the actual costs incurred
for removal, disposal and cleanup of any prohibited dumping.
[Amended 2-8-1993 by L.L. No. 1-1993]
158. Editor's Note: The definition of "permissible burning items" which immediately followed
this definition was deleted 2-26-2007 by L.L. No. 2-2007.
§ 457-1 PORT JERVIS CODE § 457-4
451:488
§ 457-4. Use of municipal burning pit; penalties for offenses.
[Amended 2-26-2007 by L.L. No. 2-2007]
§ 457-5. Placement of refuse for collection; penalties for offenses.
§ 457-6. Dumping of fill material; penalties for offenses.
A. The municipal burning pit shall be open to any resident of the City of
Port Jervis, free of charge. Said site is restricted to the dumping of
wood, tree branches or clippings.
B. Any person using the municipal burning pit must, on demand, furnish
proof of residence in the City of Port Jervis.
C. Violation of the provisions of Subsection A above shall be punishable by
a fine not to exceed $50 for the first offense, $100 for the second
offense, and $200 for the third and subsequent offenses. In addition to
the fine above, a second or subsequent offense shall subject the
offender to being barred from using the facility at the discretion of the
Director of Public Works.
A. Garbage and other refuse shall be placed as near as practicable to the
curbside for collection.
B. Such placement of garbage and refuse shall be done no earlier than
5:00 p.m. on the day preceding a scheduled collection day. Violation of
this provision shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed $10.
C. Tampering with, scavenging from, knocking over, spilling or any other
unauthorized touching of waste receptacles or the contents thereof is
prohibited, and violation of this subsection shall be punishable by a fine
of not less than $100 nor more than $300. [Amended 2-8-1993 by L.L.
No. 1-1993; 9-9-1996 by L.L. No. 15-1996]
A. The dumping of dirt, sand, gravel, ashes, stone, slate, blacktop or other
similar materials on property owned or operated by the City of Port
Jervis, including the municipal transfer station, is hereby permitted
subject to the prior approval of said dumping by the Director of Public
Works or his authorized deputy. Said dumping shall only be permitted at
the location designated by the Director of Public Works or his deputy.159
B. Dumping of dirt, sand, gravel, ashes, stone, slate, blacktop or other
similar materials on private property is hereby permitted with the prior
permission of the owner of the property and subject to the approval of
the Building Official. Any such private dumping shall be leveled within
seven days of the date of dumping and is only permitted in areas
approved by the Building Official.
159. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 457-4 SHOPPING CARTS § 457-6
451:489
§ 457-7. Transfer station regulations.
§ 457-8. Exterior property areas to be maintained.
Exterior property areas, as defined in § 319-2 of the City Code, shall be
maintained in accordance with the requirements of Chapter 319 of the City
Code, and violation shall be punishable by the penalties provided therein.
§ 457-9. Accumulation of refuse prohibited.
The accumulation of garbage or refuse so as to cause an unsafe or
unsanitary condition, as defined under Chapter 319 of the City Code or
under the State Sanitary Code, is hereby prohibited. Violation shall be
punished by the penalties provided therein.
§ 457-10. Receptacle specifications.
C. Violation of Subsection A of this section shall be punishable by a fine not
of less than $250 nor more than $5,000. In addition, the City shall
recover of any violator the actual cost of removing or moving any
material dumped in violation of Subsection A. [Amended 2-8-1993 by
L.L. No. 1-1993]
D. Violation of Subsection B of this section shall be punishable by a fine
not of less than $250 nor more than $5,000. Imposition of a penalty
pursuant to this subsection shall not prohibit any injured person or
property owner from pursuing a civil remedy against the violator.
[Amended 2-8-1993 by L.L. No. 1-1993]
A. Disposal hours. [Amended 2-27-1991 by L.L. No. 2-1991]
(1) Disposal hours shall be Monday through Friday (except holidays for
municipal employees) from 7:30 a.m. to 3:00 p.m. the first full week
of the month.160
(2) Saturday hours, for burning pit only, shall be from 8:00 a.m. to 2:00
p.m.
B. No dumping shall be permitted unless under the direction and
supervision of the transfer station attendant.161
A. All refuse and garbage shall be stored and placed in watertight metal or
plastic receptacles having handles and covers. Receptacles shall have a
capacity of not less than 10 gallons nor more than 35 gallons.
B. The City shall not be liable for any damage caused to a plastic
receptacle by cold weather.
160. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
161. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 457-6 PORT JERVIS CODE § 457-10
451:490
§ 457-11. Bulky refuse.
Bulky refuse such as cardboard or other similar material shall be flattened,
bundled and securely fastened into bundles not to exceed 24 inches in width
and 36 inches in length and shall not weigh more than 75 pounds.
§ 457-12. Collection regulations; fees. [Amended 5-14-1990 by L.L.
No. 7-1990; 7-23-1990 by L.L. No. 8-1990]
§ 457-13. Residential cleanup programs.
C. Any liner used in a receptacle must be biodegradable.
D. Paper bags or boxes are not acceptable and will not be collected.
[Amended 7-23-1990 by L.L. No. 8-1990]
E. The property owner is responsible for providing acceptable receptacles
for each living unit on his or her property.
A. Residential structures shall be provided with one collection per week.
Only containers specified in § 457-10A shall be allowed and shall be
limited to four containers.
B. The collection day shall be determined by the Director of Public Works,
in his sole discretion.
C. All garbage and refuse must be properly packaged in approved
receptacles or properly bundled to be collected.
D. Collection services shall not be provided to commercial or industrial
establishments.162
E. Only solid wastes generated within the City of Port Jervis are eligible for
collection, either weekly or in special cleanups.
F. Collection of leaves during the designated dates and times as
determined by the Director of Public Works and the Common Council of
the City of Port Jervis shall be restricted to only bagged leaves
contained in biodegradable and/or compostable bags of appropriate
strength, loose leaf pickup, and leaves kept in appropriate garbage
receptacles. [Added 1-9-2017 by L.L. No. 2-2017]
A. The City shall provide cleanup programs for all residential units as from
time to time may be determined by resolution of the Common Council.
[Amended 2-27-1991 by L.L. No. 2-1991]
B. The dates for each cleanup program shall be set by the Common
Council or the Director of Public Works, if so authorized by the Common
Council.
162. Editor's Note: Original § 94-12E and F, which immediately followed this subsection, were
deleted 2-26-2007 by L.L. No. 2-2007.
§ 457-10 SHOPPING CARTS § 457-13
451:491
§ 457-14. Storage of refuse.
§ 457-15. Nonmunicipal collectors.
C. The cleanup program will be limited to inert and nonorganic materials,
and the specific items to be collected shall be determined by the
Director of Public Works, in his discretion.
D. The schedule for the cleanup program shall be published once in the
official newspaper at least one week prior to the cleanup program.
E. All materials set out for cleanup or pickup, including recyclables (which
shall be placed in a separate container clearly marked as recyclables),
must be placed as near the curbline as is practicable. [Amended
9-9-1996 by L.L. No. 15-1996163]
A. No garbage, refuse or other waste shall be kept or stored within 25 feet
of the curbline of any public street, except when placed out for
collection, nor shall any garbage, refuse or other waste be kept or
stored within 10 feet of any property line.
B. Clippings, trimmings, branches and leaves shall not be collected and
must be disposed of by the property owner at the burning pit.
A. Any nonmunicipal garbage, refuse or rubbish collector, any and all
contractors, subcontractors or any agent thereof, either commercial or
residential, may collect within the City, provided that the annual permit
is obtained from the City Clerk-Treasurer. All permits shall expire on
December 31 of each year. [Amended 2-26-1996 by L.L. No. 1-1996]
B. The annual permit fee shall be as provided in Chapter 280, Fees. The
amount of the annual permit may be changed by the Common Council
by resolution alone. [Amended 4-27-1992; 2-26-2007 by L.L. No.
2-2007]
C. List of locations; dumpsters. [Amended 11-25-1996 by L.L. No.
19-1996]
(1) All nonmunicipal collectors shall provide the Director of Public
Works with a list of all locations they are serving within the City
and the day or days on which collections are made. Residential
customers must be provided with a minimum of one pickup per
week.
(2) All trash receptacles commonly known as "dumpsters" of any size,
left on site by a collector must be clearly labeled in lettering at least
four inches in height to show the name of the collector and phone
number of the collector.
163. Editor's Note: This local law also repealed former Subsection F, which immediately
followed this subsection and dealt with scavenging.
§ 457-13 PORT JERVIS CODE § 457-15
451:492
§ 457-16. Recycling. [Added 10-23-1989 by L.L. No. 21-1989 (Ch.
123 of the 1981 Code)]
(3) All debris, garbage, refuse or rubbish must be stored within the
confines of the dumpster at all times, and the dumpster must have a
permanently affixed cover which must be closed at all times.
[Added 2-23-2015 by L.L. No. 2-2015]
D. No collection may be done between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 6:30 a.m.
E. No permit may be revoked without a hearing held before the Common
Council and upon no less than one week's written notice to the permit
holder, setting forth the basis for the revocation.
A. Purpose; findings.
(1) A resource recovery system for the mandatory separation of
recyclables for garbage and refuse within the City of Port Jervis is
necessary to reduce the amount of solid waste generated and
assure that solid waste is disposed of in the most economical and
environmentally acceptable manner.
(2) The Common Council of the City of Port Jervis hereby finds that the
mandatory recycling of certain waste materials is imperative to
further the general health, safety and welfare of the City and its
residents. The Council finds that the most effective means of
regulating the recycling process is by adoption of regulations by
resolution of the Common Council.
B. Authority; general provisions.
(1) The Common Council is empowered to promulgate and establish by
resolution rules and regulations implementing the mandatory
separation of recyclables established by this section.
(2) The recycling of certain materials, which materials shall be
specified by resolution of the Council, is hereby required.
(3) Recyclables shall be separated from all other garbage or solid
waste.
(4) Paper recyclables shall be tied in bundles not to exceed 40 pounds
prior to the collection, removal or disposal of the same. Newspaper
shall be bundled separately.
(5) Glass and metal recyclables shall be cleaned, and all contents shall
be removed therefrom prior to the collection, removal or disposal
of the same. Caps and rings shall be removed from glass
recyclables prior to collection, removal or disposal.
(6) All recyclables shall be placed in waste receptacles for collection,
removal and disposal. Recyclables shall not be placed in plastic or
paper bags for collection, removal or disposal.
§ 457-15 SHOPPING CARTS § 457-16
451:493
(7) Recyclables shall not be placed in the same waste receptacle or
garbage can or otherwise mixed or combined with other forms of
solid waste for collection, removal or disposal.
(8) The Common Council is empowered to designate the schedule for
collection, removal and disposal of recyclables. Recyclables shall
not be collected, removed or disposed of other than in conformance
with the schedule established by the Common Council.
(9) No person having custody or control of premises within the City
shall permit or cause any garbage, rubbish or other refuse,
including recyclables, within his control to become a hazard or
potential hazard to public travel, health or safety or to become a
nuisance of any sort.
C. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meaning indicated:
NEWSPAPERS — A product printed on newsprint, including all
newspapers, newspaper advertisements and comics. Not included in
this definition are magazines, telephone books or other advertising
material printed on glossy or slick papers, whether or not enclosed with
or distributed with newspapers.
RECYCLABLES — Discarded material which may be reclaimed,
comprising solid waste consisting of newspapers, clear glass bottles
and jars and other such materials as designated by Orange County.
D. Receptacles. Waste receptacles for recycled materials may when
available be furnished to each property owner by the City. Said
receptacles are and shall remain the property of the City and shall be
used exclusively for recyclable materials and be maintained in good
condition by the property owner. If recyclable containers are not
available from the City, the property owner is to furnish an appropriate
container and mark "Recyclable" on said container. If a waste
receptacle is damaged to such a degree that, in the opinion of the City
Department of Public Works, it is no longer usable, the property owner
shall replace the waste receptacle with a receptacle conforming to City
specifications at his own cost and expense. In the event that the
property owner fails to replace the receptacle within one week of
notification from the City to do so, the City shall replace the receptacle.
The City shall bill the property owner for the cost thereof, and such
cost, if unpaid, shall become a lien on the property and may be collected
in the same manner as other real property taxes. [Amended
2-26-2007 by L.L. No. 2-2007]
E. Enforcement; penalties for offenses. [Amended 6-11-2007 by L.L.
No. 4-2007]
(1) The provisions of this chapter shall be administered and enforced
by the Director of Public Works, the Code Enforcement Officer and
the Police Department.
§ 457-16 PORT JERVIS CODE § 457-16
451:494
§ 457-17. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 2-26-1996 by L.L. No.
1-1996]
Violation of any provision of this chapter shall be punishable by a fine of
not less than $500 nor more than $1,000 for each offense unless a different
penalty has been specified in this chapter.
Chapter 464
STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND PUBLIC PROPERTY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Shade Tree Commission — See Ch. 153.
Alcoholic beverages — See Ch. 210.
Parks and recreation — See Ch. 389.
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 403.
Brush, grass and weeds — See Ch. 417, Art. I.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 505.
(2) Any person convicted of violating a provision of this section shall,
upon conviction thereof, be guilty of a violation which is punishable
as follows:
(a) For a first conviction, by a fine of not less than $75 nor more
than $100.
(b) For a second conviction within one year, by a fine of not less
than $100 nor more than $125.
(c) For a third conviction within one year, by a fine of not less than
$125 nor more than $250.
(d) For a fourth conviction within one year, by a fine of not less
than $500 nor more than $1,000.
§ 457-16 SHOPPING CARTS § 457-17
451:495

ARTICLE I
General Regulations
[Adopted 7-27-1964 as part of Ch. 24, Art. I of the 1964 Code of
Ordinances (Ch. 138, Art. I of the 1981 Code)]
§ 464-1. Excavations for utility services.164
A. Laying or constructing pipe or conduits. Whenever any company having
rights or privileges in, through or along the streets of the City shall
intend to make an excavation in the public streets or places of the City
for the purpose of laying or constructing any pipe, conduits or other
works to be used in supplying telephone, telegraph, television, gas or
electricity service to said City or to the inhabitants thereof, or laying
any wires, conduits or cables in said streets, at least two days' notice in
writing of such intention shall be given to the Director of Public Works
by the company intending to make such excavation, stating specifically
the street or streets and the parks thereof and the places in and
through which such excavation is proposed to be made, and such notice
shall contain the exact time at which such excavation shall commence.
[Amended 9-28-1981 by L.L. No. 4-1981]
B. Making repairs. Whenever it shall become necessary for any company,
because of leakage, the bursting of pipes or other accident, to make
excavation in the public streets or places of said City for the purpose of
making repairs, notice in writing shall forthwith be given to the
Director of Public Works of such accident and the intention to make
excavation for such purpose, by the company intending to make the
same, stating therein the place or places where such excavation is
about to be made. [Amended 9-28-1981 by L.L. No. 4-1981]
C. Excavation at intersections. Every excavation at street intersections
shall be properly and safety refilled, to the satisfaction of the Director of
Public Works, by the company making the same, as soon as possible,
and shall not remain unfilled for a longer period than 48 hours, and at
all other places as soon as possible and not for a period longer than five
days. [Amended 9-28-1981 by L.L. No. 4-1981]
D. Restoration of surface. The company making the same shall restore the
street in which any excavation is made, as herein provided, to the same
condition as existed prior thereto and shall regrade, repave or
remacadamize, as the case may be, commencing said regrading,
repaving or remacadamizing within 48 hours after said excavations are
refilled and completing the same without unnecessary delay. Said
company shall keep the same in good repair and condition for a period
of 12 months thereafter, shall also relay all crosswalks within 48 hours
after the excavations necessitating their removal are refilled and shall
164. Editor's Note: Original § 24-1, which immediately preceded this section and which dealt
with the apportionment of expenses for street repairs, was deleted 9-28-1981 by L.L. No.
4-1981.
§ 464-1 SHOPPING CARTS § 464-1
451:497
§ 464-2. Curb and sidewalk specifications; curb cuts. [Amended
9-28-1981 by L.L. No. 4-1981; 8-12-1996 by L.L. No. 14-1996]
§ 464-3. Permit required to excavate or remove pavement; bond;
violations. [Amended 9-28-1981 by L.L. No. 4-1981]
keep the same in good repair and condition for a period of 12 months
thereafter.
E. Size of excavation; location of barricades. No company shall maintain
any excavation in any public street or place for a distance of more than
two blocks at a time. Sufficient guards shall be placed and maintained
about each excavation to secure public safety until said street is ready
for public use; and at street intersections such excavations shall be fully
protected by barricades placed at least three feet distant therefrom;
and at night all excavations shall be protected by a sufficient number of
lighted lamps, upon said guards or barricades, to apprise all persons of
danger.
F. Limitation on opening of new paving. Public streets which have been
newly paved or repaved shall not be opened for a period of five years
after the completion of such paving or repaving, except in case of
emergency, the existence of such shall be determined by the Director of
Public Works. [Added 9-28-1981 by L.L. No. 4-1981; amended
6-14-1994 by L.L. No. 13-1994]
A. No person shall construct, improve, lay or relay any sidewalk or curb
unless the width and grade of such sidewalk and the thickness of such
curb and grade are first fixed by the Director of Public Works, and every
24 hours that such sidewalk or curb remains after notice, in writing,
that the same is not according to specifications furnished shall be
deemed a violation of this section.
B. Any person requesting a curb cut shall first forward his or her request
in writing to the office of the Mayor and Common Council and shall
state the reason for making such request. The request will be brought
to the Common Council and referred to any committee deemed
appropriate by the Common Council for a recommendation. The
Committees will forward said request, with their recommendation
regarding its approval or denial, to the Common Council for full Council
approval or denial.
A. Permit required; conditions. No person shall, without permission of the
Director of Public Works in writing, take up, remove or injure any
sidewalk, pavement, bridge, crosswalk or sewer, nor dig any area nor
make any excavation in any public street, highway or public place of the
City, nor remove any earth or stone therefrom, and any person so doing,
by permission or otherwise, shall immediately or upon the expiration of
the time limited in such permission restore the same to its original
condition, applying and conforming to standards that are customary
within the industry, including but not limited to compacting,
§ 464-1 PORT JERVIS CODE § 464-3
451:498
§ 464-4. Barricades and lights required for street work.
Whenever any public street or place within said City is being constructed
or repaired, it shall be the duty of the person performing the work to place
and maintain such sufficient guards about said construction or repairs as
to secure public safety until said street is ready for public use and at all
times during the night to have and keep lighted red-colored lamps not more
than 20 feet apart upon said guards to give warning to all persons of said
construction or repairs.
§ 464-5. Interference with construction work prohibited. [Amended
9-28-1981 by L.L. No. 4-1981]
No person shall hinder or obstruct the construction or repair of any
pavement, sidewalk or crosswalk, sewer or other public improvement which
is being done under the authority or direction of the Director of Public
Works.
blacktopping and sealing; and the same, when so restored, shall be kept
in good and safe condition for at least one year thereafter; provided,
however, that if the sidewalk taken up or removed is located in the
district lighted by the ornamental lighting system, the same shall not
be replaced or restored until after such notice to the Director of Public
Works as will permit the City to protect the cable connected with
the ornamental lighting system by laying the cable in a conduit or
otherwise. [Amended 6-14-1994 by L.L. No. 11-1994]
B. Bond: amount and condition. The person applying for any such
permission shall file with the City a bond, with a surety or sureties to be
approved by the Director of Public Works, in an amount of not less than
$1,500, conditioned to indemnify said City and save the same free and
harmless from any claims for or recovery of damages, costs and
expenses resulting from the taking up or removing of any sidewalk,
pavement, crosswalk or sewer or the making of any excavation in any
public street or public place in said City or by reason of the negligence
of the applicant in so disturbing said street, sidewalk or public place.
[Amended 7-27-1992 by L.L. No. 5-1992]
C. Violation of section. It shall be the duty of the Director of Public Works
and also of the members of the police force of said City to notify any
such person of any violation of this section, and, upon and after such
notice, every person who shall, for every 24 hours or part thereof,
neglect or refuse to comply therewith shall be subject to the penalty
prescribed for violation of this Code; and said Director of Public Works,
after the expiration of five days from said notice, shall cause said street,
sidewalk or public place to be restored to its original and perfect
condition, and the expense thereof shall be a charge against and be
collected from the person offending as aforesaid.
§ 464-3 SHOPPING CARTS § 464-6
451:499
§ 464-6. Barricades and lights required for excavations near
streets. [Amended 9-28-1981 by L.L. No. 4-1981]
Every person who shall dig any cellar or other excavation adjacent to and
within five feet of the line of any public street within said City shall erect
such sufficient barriers between said street and excavation as to secure
public safety and at all times during the night shall keep lighted red lamps
upon said barriers in such a manner as to give warning to all persons of
such excavation; and if such requirement is not complied with, then the
Director of Public Works may cause such barriers and lights to be placed at
the expense of the person so in default.
§ 464-7. Interference with lights and barricades prohibited.
No unauthorized person shall remove or interfere in any way with any
barriers, lamps or danger signals erected or placed for public safety or any
monument placed to locate the line of any public street, sidewalk or public
improvement within the City.
§ 464-8. Responsibility of lot owner for abutting sidewalks, curbs,
gutters; violation notice. [Amended 12-22-1980]
The owner of record, in part or in whole, of any lot or any portion thereof
abutting upon any street or alley in said City shall at all times maintain
the sidewalk, curb and gutter adjoining the same in good condition. Said
owner may relay flagging or repair concrete sidewalks and/or curbs without
special permission of said City, provided the requirements as set forth
in § 464-4 in compliance with proper barricades, lights and pedestrian
protective devices are complied with.
A. Where the Building Official of said City shall note or be so notified by
the Chief of Police that a dangerous condition exists due to defects in
said sidewalks or curbs, he shall serve written notice upon the property
owner, setting forth the nature of the condition and the maximum time
specified to correct same.
B. Upon failure of the property owner to comply with said notice in the
time specified therein, the Common Council may order, by Council
motion, that said work as described in the violation notice be performed
and the cost of same billed to the owner of record. Failure of payment
thereof shall become a lien upon said property and be added to the tax
roll the following year.
C. Owners of record in said City may, in writing directed to the attention of
the City Clerk-Treasurer, request that said City provide for the service
of repairs or new installations of curbs and/or sidewalks or the relaying
of stone flagging on their property which abuts any street. Upon receipt
of said request, the Director of Public Works shall submit a written
deposit estimate to the property owner. Upon receipt of said deposit by
the City Clerk-Treasurer, the property owner shall be notified of a
tentative date for said work. Upon completion of work, an itemized bill
§ 464-6 PORT JERVIS CODE § 464-8
451:500
§ 464-9. Dropping or unloading heavy objects upon pavement.
No person shall drop or permit or allow to be dropped or to fall upon any
pavement any stone, box, crate, keg, barrel or other heavy article or thing,
nor shall any person unload from any vehicle upon any pavement any heavy
or cumbersome thing in such a manner as shall be liable to break, injure or
dislodge any paving brick or break or injure any pavement.
§ 464-10. Permit required to move buildings. [Amended 9-28-1981
by L.L. No. 4-1981]
No person shall at any time move any building through or upon any of the
public streets, lanes or alleys in said City unless by permission in writing of
the Director of Public Works, who shall fix the terms and conditions under
which the said moving may be permitted.166
§ 464-11. Permit required to erect banners and signs over streets.
[Amended 9-28-1981 by L.L. No. 4-1981]
No person shall erect or suspend any sign or banner over any public street
in the City without the permission of the Director of Public Works.
§ 464-12. Permit required to erect poles and signs in public places.
[Amended 9-28-1981 by L.L. No. 4-1981]
No person shall erect or maintain any pole, sign, post or posts in any public
street or place within the City without the consent and authority of the
Director of Public Works.
§ 464-13. Placement of merchandise on sidewalk regulated.
[Amended 9-28-1981 by L.L. No. 4-1981; 6-11-2018 by LL. No.
5-2018]
shall be submitted to the City Clerk-Treasurer, whereupon he shall
either return a refund or submit an additional bill for payment as
required.
D. Any work performed under Subsection C above shall be with the
proviso that upon completion of said work, the responsibility shall
immediately revert to the property owner as described herein.165
E. Lot owners shall be liable for any and all claims for alleged injury or
damage to person or property relating to sidewalks, curbs and gutters
adjoining and/or abutting the lot owner's property. [Added 2-23-2015
by L.L. No. 2-2015]
165. Editor's Note: Original § 24-10, which immediately followed this section and required a
permit for the placing of building materials in streets, was deleted 9-28-1981 by L.L. No.
4-1981. See now Art. III of this chapter.
166. Editor's Note: Original §§ 24-13 and 24-14, which immediately followed this section and
dealt with the depositing and removal of snow and ice, were deleted 9-28-1981 by L.L. No.
4-1981. See now Art. IV of this chapter.
§ 464-8 SHOPPING CARTS § 464-13
451:501
§ 464-14. Sidewalk cafes and vending. [Amended 6-11-2018 by LL.
No. 5-2018]
A. Location. No person shall place any merchandise or obstruction of any
kind upon any sidewalk within the City which shall extend more than 18
inches from the building or so as to leave a space less than five feet
clear and unobstructed for the use of the public, measured from the
curb, or in case of any pole or other obstruction within the curbline,
installed by or under the authority of the Director of Public Works in
front of such building, so as to leave a space less than five feet clear and
unobstructed for the use of the public from a line parallel to the curb
and distant therefrom as far as the inside distance of the sidewalk base
of such pole or other obstruction.
B. Time. Any merchandise or obstruction which shall extend from any
building within the 18 inches above mentioned upon any sidewalk
within said City shall remain on said sidewalk only during business
hours of the business selling the merchandise or using the obstruction.
All articles of food shall be placed on tables or benches not less than
two feet in height; and no person shall so place or suffer to remain any
barrel, box, crate, or other article or any chute or device for loading or
unloading goods upon any public street or place within the City as to
obstruct the free passage of the public, except while actually engaged a
reasonable time in loading or unloading goods.
C. Restriction of use. Any person seeking to display merchandise on a
public right-of-way shall only be permitted to display merchandise that
is sold in its normal course of business. No individual shall allow
another vendor to use their property.
D. Permit required. Any person seeking to display merchandise on a public
right-of-way shall require a permit from the Building Department of the
City of Port Jervis pursuant to § 464-14 of this chapter.
A. Purpose. The sidewalk cafe regulations as set forth in this section are
designed to allow sidewalk cafes on public sidewalks, between the
primary structure on the property and the public road it abuts, and to
promote the public health, safety and general welfare.
(1) To provide adequate space for pedestrians on the sidewalk adjacent
to sidewalk cafe areas and to ensure access to adjacent commercial
and retail uses.
(2) To preserve and enhance the character of neighborhoods through
the City and to protect adjacent residential areas.
(3) To simplify administrative and strengthen enforcement procedures
for outdoor and sidewalk cafes that are effective, efficient and
enforceable.
B. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
§ 464-13 PORT JERVIS CODE § 464-14
451:502
SIDEWALK — Any area between the curb line and a structure, whether
publicly or privately owned, which is used by the public or open to use
by the public.
SIDEWALK CAFE — An outdoor dining area, located on a private
sidewalk or public property, which is public through dedication or
easement, or public right-of-way that provides waiter or waitress
service and contains readily removable tables, chairs, railings and may
contain planters. It is otherwise unenclosed by fixed walls and open to
the air, except that it may have a retractable awning or umbrellas, or
other nonpermanent covers.
C. Permit required.
(1) No person shall engage in the operation of a sidewalk cafe or
vending except upon the granting of a permit by the Building
Department pursuant to this chapter and in accordance with the
terms and conditions of such permit. The permit application shall
take such form as determined by the Building Inspector.
(2) Permits shall be issued on or after January 1 of each year. All
permits, regardless of when issued, shall expire on December 31,
and shall be renewed each year thereafter.
(3) A permit to operate a sidewalk cafe or vending shall be issued only
to the owner of the business which operates the proposed sidewalk
cafe or vending. Sidewalk cafe or vending permits are
nontransferable. In the event of a change of ownership of a
business which operates a sidewalk cafe, a new permit must be
obtained prior to the continued operation of the sidewalk cafe.
(4) A permit may be revoked at any time for any violation of this
chapter, any other violation of the Code of the City of Port Jervis, or
any violation of applicable New York State or federal regulations.
(5) Application for a permit shall be subject to a fee set by resolution of
the Common Council.
D. Permitted use. Sidewalk cafes and vending shall be permitted on the
sidewalk in front of the principal place of business. The front of the
principal place of business shall be defined as to space extending from
the primary front of the building and the public street it abuts.
E. Special provisions for sidewalk cafes. Sidewalk cafes shall be permitted
uses in the Central Business District (CBD) and Service Commercial
(SC) Zoning Districts under the following conditions:
(1) It is an accessory use to a food service establishment, restaurant,
bar establishment lawfully operating on the first floor of premises.
(2) It is operated by the entity which operates the food service,
restaurant or bar establishment.
§ 464-14 SHOPPING CARTS § 464-14
451:503
(3) It shall be located adjacent to the primary structure on the
premises and may not be separate from the primary structure by
normal pedestrian use.
(4) All food and beverages to be served or consumed at sidewalk cafes
shall be prepared within the existing food service establishment.
The food service establishment shall not serve food or beverages to
a patron at a sidewalk cafe area unless the patron is seated at a
table.
(5) Any area designated for the possession of open containers, as
defined by Chapter 210 of the City Code of the City of Port Jervis, is
clearly separated from the rest of the public sidewalk by an
appropriate barrier which shall include weighted stanchions and
fencing with a minimum height of 36 inches and a maximum height
of 42 inches.
(6) Such barrier shall be of a type of material that is consistent with
the aesthetic of the neighborhood as determined by the Code
Enforcement Officer. Such barrier shall be made of steel or iron,
and weighted to prevent movement from the designated area.
(7) No permanent structure may be affixed to the sidewalk or any
building.
(8) The sidewalk cafe area shall not violate the minimum sidewalk
clearance required for a public sidewalk under the Americans with
Disabilities Act, the regulations of the New York State Department
of Transportation, or any other applicable New York State or
federal statutory requirements.
(9) Sidewalk cafe area shall not block FDC connection.
(10)No sidewalk cafe shall operate after 10:00 p.m. or when the
establishment for which it is associated is not open to the public.
(11) The public property on which sidewalk cafes are located and the
surrounding area shall at all times be kept free and clear of litter,
debris and any substance that may damage the sidewalk and
surrounding premises free of litter at all times.
(12)No live or mechanical music shall be permitted outdoors in the
sidewalk cafe area.
F. Penalties for offenses.
(1) The applicant shall be responsible for any damage caused to any
sidewalk or public property as a result of the applicant's operations
under this chapter.
(2) The Building Inspector shall have the power to revoke a permit for
violation of any provision contained herein.
§ 464-14 PORT JERVIS CODE § 464-14
451:504
§ 464-15. Inviolability of street line; encroachments.
No person shall, except as herein otherwise provided, erect, build or place,
or cause to be erected, built or placed, or, being responsible therefor or
the cause thereof, allow to remain, within the line of any highway, street or
alley, any building, fence or other erection or structure, nor shall the said
highway, street or alley be obstructed in any manner or encroached upon by
any such building, fence, erection or structure.167
§ 464-16. Gates not to swing over sidewalk.
No person shall construct or maintain a gate that shall swing outward over
any sidewalk.
§ 464-17. Sawing firewood in streets; unloading wood or coal.
No person shall saw or split or cause to be sawed or split any firewood in
any street in the City, nor shall any person place or permit to be placed
in any roadway or sidewalk wood or coal, nor shall the same be unloaded
except in front of the premises occupied by the person for whom it is left.
§ 464-18. Washing animals or vehicles; cleaning rugs in streets.
No person shall clean or spread any carpet, rug or cloth in any street in the
City, nor shall any person clean or wash any animal or vehicle therein.168
§ 464-19. Property abutting watercourses.
(3) Any violation of this section shall also be subject to penalties as set
forth in Article I of the City Code of the City of Port Jervis.
A. Obstruction of water prohibited. No person owning, leasing or
controlling property covering any portion of the bed or channel of any
brook or stream flowing or running through the City, and no person
owning, leasing or controlling property along the banks of any brook or
stream flowing or running through the City, shall permit any stones,
gravel, dirt, silt or other obstruction to be or remain on said property so
owned, leased or controlled by him. Any deposit of stones, gravel, dirt,
silt or other material in any brook or stream is hereby declared to be a
public nuisance.
167. Editor's Note: Original § 138-16, Dangerous fences, which immediately followed this
section, as amended 9-28-1981 by L.L. No. 4-1981 and 2-27-1984 by L.L. No. 1-1984, was
deleted at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II). For fence
regulations see Ch. 535, Zoning.
168. Editor's Note: Original § 138-20, Depositing ashes and filthy wastes on streets; § 138-21,
Depositing dirt, litter and debris on streets and sidewalks, as amended 2-8-1993 by L.L.
No. 1-1993; and § 138-22, Throwing fruits and peels on streets or public places, which
immediately followed this section, were deleted at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. II). For regulations regarding the deposit of litter on streets, see
§§ 1219 and 1220 of the New York State Vehicle and Traffic Law.
§ 464-14 SHOPPING CARTS § 464-19
451:505
§ 464-20. Transporting ashes and refuse; accidental deposits; dead
animals.
§ 464-21. Playing games in street.
No person shall play at any game or sport with a ball, fly a kite nor pitch
quoits in any streets within the City.
§ 464-22. Skating and sliding on sidewalks.
No person shall slide, coast or skate upon any sidewalk in the City.
B. Duty of owner, occupant. Every person owning, leasing or controlling
property as aforesaid shall remove all stones, gravel, dirt, silt or other
obstruction deposited, lodged and being within the bounds of the
channel of said brook or stream on his said property or on which his
property abuts so that there shall and may be at all times a free and
uninterrupted flow of water in said brook or stream.
C. Projecting structures regulated. No person owning, leasing or
controlling property covering any portion of the bed or channel of
Reservoir Brook, being the brook leading from the reservoir of the Port
Jervis Waterworks Company to the old Delaware and Hudson Canal at
or near the Marvin property, shall erect, build or move upon his said
land any chicken coop, garage or other building which shall be or hang
over the channel of said brook unless there shall be a clearance of at
least four feet between said structure and the bed or channel of said
brook, and any person so building or moving a structure thereon or
thereover as aforesaid shall build a solid and substantial foundation
wall of concrete under said structure along the banks of said brook.
A. Receptacle required.169 No person shall draw ashes, dirt, manure,
garbage, debris, stones or refuse of any sort or kind in any vehicle upon
and along any public street or place within the City except the same be
contained in a wagon box or other receptacle sufficiently tight to
prevent any of said materials from sifting, spilling or being blown out of
or off from said wagon box or receptacle upon said street or place.
B. Accidental deposit. Whenever any dirt, ashes, garbage, manure or other
substance aforesaid being transported over the streets or public places
shall by accident be dropped or deposited upon such street or place, the
person transporting the same shall forthwith remove all such dirt or
other substance and shall not permit such street or place to remain
littered or encumbered thereby.
C. Dead animals. No person or persons shall draw a dead animal or
animals through the streets or public places of the City unless said
animal or animals shall be covered with a blanket sufficient to obscure
said animal or animals being so drawn.
169. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 457, Solid Waste.
§ 464-19 PORT JERVIS CODE § 464-23
451:506
§ 464-23. Skateboards and in-line roller skates. [Added 6-12-1989
by L.L. No. 17-1989; amended 12-13-1993 by L.L. No. 3-1993]
§ 464-24. Animals and vehicles prohibited on sidewalks.
No person shall drive or lead any horse, ox, cow, bull, goat or dog team,
nor propel any cart, wagon, sleigh, wheelbarrow, hand delivery cart or swill
cart, on any sidewalk in said City, except in crossing the same to enter a
yard or lot.
§ 464-25. Window boxes and sill objects to be secured.
No person shall place or permit to be placed upon the windowsill or
projection of any building within six feet of the line of any public street,
square or place in the City any box, flowerpot or other article unless the
same is firmly secured to prevent its falling. The maintenance of any such
box, flowerpot or other article not so secured is hereby declared to be a
nuisance.
A. No person shall ride, propel or operate any skateboard as herein
defined nor shall any person slide, coast or skate using in-line roller
skates as herein defined upon any street, highway, sidewalk, public
path or public parking lot within the City of Port Jervis.
B. The parent of any child or the guardian of any ward shall not knowingly
permit such child or ward to violate this section.
C. A violation of this provision shall be punishable by a fine not less than
$100 but not more than $250. [Amended 7-23-2012 by L.L. No.
2-2012]
D. A "skateboard" is a beard of wood, plastic, fiberglass or similar rigid
material, with roller skate or other type wheels attached, and used for
gliding or moving on any hard surface.
E. An "in-line roller skate" is a roller skate which can be shoe-type or type
which attaches to already worn shoes, with roller skate or other type
wheels attached in a single line along the bottom, which is used to slide
and coast along a hard surface.
F. The foregoing provisions shall not apply to any City-approved facility
that would permit the use of skateboards or in-line roller skates.
§ 464-23 SHOPPING CARTS § 464-25
451:507

ARTICLE II
Awnings, Canopies and Marquees
[Adopted 7-27-1964 as part of Ch. 24, Art. II of the 1964 Code of
Ordinances (Ch. 138, Art. II of the 1981 Code)]
§ 464-26. Applicability.
This article shall govern the construction and maintenance of awnings,
canopies and marquees over the sidewalks in the City.
§ 464-27. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CANOPY or MARQUEE — A structure of metal or wood or other approved
building material which protrudes from the face of a building and overhangs
or covers part of a sidewalk.
§ 464-28. Clearance; width; support. [Amended 2-26-2007 by L.L.
No. 2-2007]
Minimum clearance from a sidewalk to the underside of a canopy or
marquee shall be nine feet, including supporting members. Width is limited
to within one foot of curbline and no supporting columns will be allowed.
The structure must be supported by struts or by cantilever or other
approved method, other than by posts.
§ 464-29. Dead roof load.
Such canopy or marquee must be able to support a minimum load of 40
pounds per square foot.
§ 464-30. Materials and method of installation.
The materials used and the method of installation of such structures shall
be approved by the City Building Official.
§ 464-31. Maintenance; liability of owner.
A canopy or marquee is to be considered part of the building to which it is
attached, and the owner of the same shall assume full responsibility for the
safe maintenance and care of said structure and full liability for damages of
whatsoever nature arising out of the defective or unsafe condition of said
structure.
§ 464-32. Awning specifications.
Cloth awnings may be constructed in front of any store or building within
the City to project over the sidewalk not to exceed 10 feet, provided that
such awnings shall be supported by iron brackets or iron framework
§ 464-26 SHOPPING CARTS § 464-32
451:509
securely attached to said building in such a manner as to be at all times
safe and self-supporting, and provided that every part of such awnings shall
be at least six feet six inches above the sidewalk and the iron brackets or
framework attached to said awnings shall be erected at least seven feet
above the sidewalk. All cloth awnings now or hereafter erected shall be
supported or sustained in such a manner that they will not sink or sag below
the above height.
§ 464-32 PORT JERVIS CODE § 464-32
451:510
ARTICLE III
Use of Sidewalks and Streets Adjacent to Construction Sites
[Adopted 2-8-1965 (Ch. 138, Art. III of the 1981 Code)]
§ 464-33. Compliance with provisions required.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to construct or
alter any building or structure, other than fences, in the City except upon
compliance with the provisions of this article.
§ 464-34. Application procedure; conditions for approval; bond.
Permission for the use of streets or sidewalks for the storage of materials
in the process of construction or alteration of a building or the alteration
or improvement of vacant premises may be granted when the same will not
unduly interfere with traffic and will not reduce the usable width of the
street or sidewalk to less than 2/3 thereof; no portion of a street or sidewalk
other than that directly abutting on the premises on which work is being
done shall be used except with the consent of the owner or occupant of the
premises abutting on such portion. Any person seeking to make such use
of the street or sidewalk shall file an application with the Clerk-Treasurer,
together with a bond with sureties to be approved by and in such amount
as the Clerk-Treasurer may determine, to indemnify the City for any loss or
damage which may be incurred by reason of such use and occupation.
§ 464-34.1. Sidewalk and curb installation at existing building sites.
[Added 11-27-2006 by L.L. No. 4-2006]
For provisions requiring sidewalk and curb installations for all new
construction and/or substantial redevelopment of existing building sites,
see § 535-72N.
§ 464-35. Construction at night restricted.
No construction or alteration operations shall be carried on at nighttime if
the same are accompanied by loud or annoying noises.
§ 464-36. Special permit required for obstruction or removal of
sidewalk.
No sidewalk shall be obstructed in the course of building operations without
a special permit from the Clerk-Treasurer, and whenever a removal of a
sidewalk is required, such work shall not be done until a special permit is
secured from the Clerk-Treasurer.
§ 464-37. Exercise of care for safety.
It shall be the duty of a person or corporation doing any constructing,
altering or wrecking to do the same with proper care for the safety of
persons and property.
§ 464-33 SHOPPING CARTS § 464-38
451:511
§ 464-38. Barricades and lanterns; roofs over sidewalks.
Warning barricades and red lanterns shall be maintained whenever
necessary for the protection of pedestrians or traffic; and temporary roofs
over sidewalks shall be constructed whenever there is danger from falling
articles or materials to pedestrians.
§ 464-39. Repair of damages. [Amended 9-28-1981 by L.L. No.
4-1981]
Any damage resulting from the obstruction, encumbrance or occupation of
a public street, highway or sidewalk area or from the storage of materials
or operation of construction equipment or machinery shall be repaired by
the permittee to the satisfaction of the Director of Public Works when so
ordered.
§ 464-40. Obstruction of fire hydrants, manholes and catch basins.
The permittee shall keep clear and unobstructed at all times and shall in no
way interfere with prompt access to or adequate operation of all manholes,
catch basins, hydrants, valves or fire alarm boxes that may be situated in or
near the area obstructed or occupied in accordance with the permit.
§ 464-41. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 9-28-1981 by L.L. No.
4-1981]
Any person committing an offense against any provision of this article shall
be punishable as provided in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article I.
§ 464-38 PORT JERVIS CODE § 464-41
451:512
ARTICLE IV
Snow and Ice Removal
[Adopted 1-26-1948 by L.L. No. 2-1948; amended in its entirety
8-8-1988 by L.L. No. 4-1988 (Ch. 138, Art. IV of the 1981 Code)]
§ 464-42. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PERSON — One or more persons, corporations, partnerships, associations
and any and all other entities having a legal status and capable of suing and
being sued and of owning real property.
SNOW REMOVAL — The moving of snow by the use of any type hand
tool, snow blower, plows attached to tractors or other vehicles, conveying
devices or loaders of any type.
§ 464-43. Removal required; time limit. [Amended 2-27-1989 by L.L.
No. 3-1989; 2-14-2000 by L.L. No. 2-2000]
§ 464-44. Placement of snow.
A. It shall be the duty of any owner, lessee or occupant or other person
having control of any occupied or unoccupied lot, land, dwelling or
other building or structure, in the event of ice or snow accumulation, to
maintain a clear path, clear of ice or snow, at least 36 inches wide along
the sidewalk areas adjacent to said lot, land, dwelling or structure.
Such clear path must be provided within 24 hours after the end of any
precipitation in the form of snow, sleet, freezing rain, hail or otherwise.
The property owner shall clear snow to a width of 12 inches on each and
every side of any fire hydrants adjacent to his or her property.
Contracting out the responsibilities outlined in this article shall not
relieve the owner or other responsible person of his/her responsibilities
hereunder. [Amended 2-22-2016 by L.L. No. 5-2016]
B. Each owner, lessee, occupant or other person in control of the premises
shall be further responsible to maintain said two-foot path by means of
causing suitable materials (such as sand, salt or other such suitable
material) to be strewn on said path as soon after any storm as weather
may permit. The use of deleterious materials such as lime, saltpeter or
any other material that may be harmful or injurious to health is hereby
prohibited and unlawful.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit snow in a public street as a
result of his snow removal activities. Snow storage in windrows along
the edge of the sidewalk and the curb is allowed.
B. Snow may not be piled more than 36 inches higher than street level
within 10 feet of an intersection.
§ 464-42 SHOPPING CARTS § 464-45
451:513
§ 464-45. Removal from structures. [Amended 2-14-2000 by L.L. No.
2-2000]
It shall be the duty of any owner, lessee, occupant or other person having
control of any occupied or unoccupied dwelling or structure to remove from
the roof or any other portion of said structure or any protrusions therefrom,
including sign(s), any ice or snow which might fall onto a public place or
which in the judgment of the Building official of the City of Port Jervis
or his designated representative may possibly cause structural failure of
such structure. Said removal shall take place within 24 hours after any
precipitation that causes such accumulation of ice or snow.
§ 464-46. Snow emergency routes/tires.
The Chief of Police and/or the Director of Public Works may establish
emergency snow routes, designated by "Emergency Snow Route" signs.
§ 464-47. Enforcement. [Amended 2-14-2000 by L.L. No. 2-2000]
If the provisions of this chapter are not complied with, the Building Official,
any police officer or the Director or Assistant Director of Public Works or
such other person designated this responsibility by the Common Council of
the City of Port Jervis may elect to do one of the following:
A. Parking shall be prohibited along such routes during a snow emergency.
Designation of a snow emergency shall be made at the discretion of the
Chief of Police and/or Director of Public Works.
B. Only vehicles equipped with snow tires, all-season radial tires and/or
chains may be operated on Skyline Drive between November 15 and
April 1 inclusive.
A. Serve written notice, either personally or by mail, upon the owner,
lessee or occupant or any person having the care and/or control of any
such dwelling or structure to comply with the provisions hereof. If said
person so served fails, neglects or refuses to perform any of the duties
prescribed in this chapter, within five days after receipt of such notice,
or if no person can be found in the City who either is or claims to be the
owner of said property or who represents or claims to represent such
owner, the Building Official or other representative of the City as
designated above shall cause such snow or ice to be removed. The
actual cost of such removal, plus 25% for inspection and other
additional costs in connection therewith, shall be certified to the City
Clerk-Treasurer and shall thereupon become and be a lien upon the
premises and shall become and form a part of the taxes next to be
assessed and levied upon such premises and shall further bear interest
at the same rate as taxes and shall be collected and enforced by the
same officer and in the same manner as taxes.
B. Issue a court appearance ticket to the owner, lessee or occupant or any
person having the care and/or control of the premises alleging violation
§ 464-45 PORT JERVIS CODE § 464-47
451:514
§ 464-48. Disposal of snow.
The City shall provide a location wherein residents of the City of Port Jervis
may dispose of snow at no fee. Said location is to be provided within 12
hours after the City snow removal operation starts.
§ 464-49. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 2-14-2000 by L.L. No.
2-2000]
Any person who shall be found to have violated any provision of this chapter
shall be guilty of a violation and shall be subject to a fine of between $100
and $250 for each offense.
of a provision of this chapter and requiring a court appearance to
defend against same.170
170. Editor's Note: Original § 138-52, Removal by City; billing and assessment procedure,
which immediately followed this section, was repealed 2-14-2000 by L.L. No. 2-2000.
§ 464-47 SHOPPING CARTS § 464-49
451:515

ARTICLE V
Special Legend Signs
[Adopted 5-29-1973; amended in its entirety 8-8-1988 by L.L. No.
4-1988 (Ch. 138, Art. V of the 1981 Code)]
§ 464-50. Authority to erect signs.
The Director of Public Works shall have the authority to erect special
legend signs specifically designating seasonal road closings, seasonal park
closings, prohibition of all-terrain vehicles and snowmobiles and similar
signs necessary for the safe and appropriate use of public streets and
properties.
§ 464-51. Penalties for offenses.
Any person committing an offense against any provisions of this article shall
be punished as provided for in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article I.
§ 464-50 SHOPPING CARTS § 464-51
451:517
Chapter 470
SUBDIVISION OF LAND
GENERAL REFERENCES
Planning Board — See Ch. 126.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 288.
Zoning — See Ch. 535.
Chapter 475
TAXATION
§ 464-51 PORT JERVIS CODE § 464-51
470:518
ARTICLE I
Utility Services Sales Tax
[Adopted 1-8-1968 (Ch. 142, Art. II of the 1981 Code)]
§ 475-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PERSON — An individual, partnership, society, association, joint-stock
company, corporation, estate, receiver, trustee, assignee, referee and any
other person acting in a fiduciary or representative capacity, whether
appointed by a court or otherwise, and any combination of the foregoing.
PURCHASER — A person who purchases property or to whom are rendered
services, the receipts from which are taxable under this article.
RECEIPT — The amount of the sale price of any property and the charge
for any service taxable under this article valued in money, whether received
in money or otherwise, including any amount for which credit is allowed by
the vendor to the purchaser, without any deduction for expenses or early
payment discounts.
SALE, SELLING or PURCHASE — Any transfer of title or possession, or
both, exchange or barter, rental, lease or license to use or consume,
conditional or otherwise, in any manner or by any means whatsoever for
a consideration, or any agreement therefor, including the rendering of any
service taxable under this article for a consideration or any agreement
therefor.
VENDOR — Includes:
§ 475-2. Imposition of tax. [Amended 1-22-1968]
On and after the first day of March 1968, there is hereby imposed and there
shall be paid a tax of 3% upon the receipts from every sale, other than sales
for resale, of gas, electricity, refrigeration and steam, and gas, electric,
refrigeration and steam service of whatever nature, and from every sale,
other than sales for resale, of telephony and telegraphy and telephone and
telegraph service of whatever nature, except interstate and international
telephony and telegraphy and telephone and telegraph service.
A person making sales of property or services, the receipts from which
are taxed by this article.
A.
The State of New York, any of its agencies, instrumentalities, public
corporations (including a public corporation created pursuant to
agreement or compact with another state or Canada) or political
subdivisions when such entity sells services or property of a kind
ordinarily sold by private persons.
B.
§ 475-1 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 475-3
470:519
§ 475-3. Transitional provisions.
The tax imposed by this article shall be paid with respect to receipts for
property or services sold on or after the first day of March 1968 although
made under a prior contract. Where property or service is sold on a monthly,
quarterly or other term basis and the bills for such property or service are
based on meter readings, the amount received on each bill for such property
or service for a month or other term shall be a receipt subject to the tax,
but such tax shall be applicable to all bills based on meters read on or after
the first day of March 1968 only where more than 1/2 of the number of
days included in the month or other period billed are days subsequent to
the 29th day of February 1968; provided, however, that where such bills are
for telephone or telegraph service, the tax shall apply to all receipts on such
bills dated on or after the first day of March 1968 for which no previous bill
was rendered, excepting, however, charges for services furnished before
the date of the first of such bills.
§ 475-4. Exemptions.
Receipts from the following shall be exempt from the tax imposed by this
article:
§ 475-5. Exempt organizations.
A. Gas, electricity, refrigeration and steam, and gas, electric, refrigeration
and steam service of whatever nature for use or consumption directly
and exclusively in the production of tangible personal property; gas,
electricity, refrigeration or steam, for sale, by manufacturing,
processing, assembling, generating, refining, mining, extracting,
farming, agriculture, horticulture or floriculture.
B. Gas, electricity, refrigeration and steam, and gas, electric, refrigeration
and steam service of whatever nature for use or consumption directly
and exclusively in research and development in the experimental or
laboratory sense. Such research and development shall not be deemed
to include the ordinary testing or inspection of materials or products for
quality control, efficiency surveys, management studies, consumer
surveys, advertising, promotions or research in connection with
literary, historical or similar projects.
C. Telephony and telegraphy and telephone and telegraph service used by
newspapers, radio broadcasters and television broadcasters in the
collection or dissemination of news if the charge for such services is a
toll charge or a charge for mileage services, including the associated
station terminal equipment.
D. Telephone and telegraph service paid for by inserting coins in coinoperated
telephones where the charge is $0.10 or less.
§ 475-3 PORT JERVIS CODE § 475-5
470:520
§ 475-6. Territorial limitations.
The tax imposed under the authority of this article shall apply only within
the territorial limits of the City of Port Jervis, except that any establishment
located partially within this City and partially within a town or towns and
receiving any services or utilities provided by this City shall be deemed to
be wholly within the City for the purposes of the tax.
§ 475-7. Administration and collection.
The tax imposed by this article shall be administered and collected by the
State Tax Commission in the same manner as the taxes imposed under
Article 28 of the Tax Law of the State of New York are administered
A. Except as otherwise provided in this section, any sale by or to any of the
following shall not be subject to the tax imposed under this article:
[Amended 1-22-1968]
(1) The State of New York or any of its agencies, instrumentalities,
public corporations (including a public corporation created
pursuant to agreement or compact with another state or Canada)
or political subdivisions where it is the purchaser, user or consumer
or where it is a vendor of services or property of a kind not
ordinarily sold by private persons.
(2) The United States of America and any of its agencies and
instrumentalities, insofar as it is immune from taxation where it is
the purchaser, user or consumer or where it sells services or
property of a kind not ordinarily sold by private persons.
(3) The United Nations or any international organization of which the
United States of America is a member where it is the purchaser,
user or consumer or where it sells services or property of a kind not
ordinarily sold by private persons.
(4) Any corporation, association, trust or community chest, fund or
foundation organized and operated exclusively for religious,
charitable, scientific, testing for public safety, literary or
educational purposes or for the prevention of cruelty to children or
animals, no part of the net earnings of which inures to the benefit of
any private shareholder or individual, no substantial part of the
activities of which is carrying on propaganda or otherwise
attempting to influence legislation, and which does not participate
in or intervene in (including the publishing or distributing of
statements) any political campaign on behalf of any candidate for
public office.
B. Nothing in this section shall exempt retail sales of gas, electricity,
refrigeration or steam by any shop or store operated by an organization
described in Subsection A(4) above from the tax imposed hereunder
unless the purchaser is an organization exempt under this section.
§ 475-5 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 475-7
470:521
and collected by such Commission. All of the provisions of said Article 28
relating to or applicable to the administration and collection of the taxes
imposed by that article shall apply to the taxes imposed by this article,
including but not limited to §§ 1101, 1111 and 1131 through 1147, with the
same force and effect as if those provisions had been incorporated in full
into this article, except as otherwise provided in § 1250 of the Tax Law.
§ 475-8. Disposition of revenues.
§ 475-9. Interpretation; enforcement.
This article shall be construed and enforced in conformity with Articles 28
and 29 of the Tax Law of the State of New York, pursuant to which the same
is enacted.
A. Net collections distributed to this City by the State Tax Commission
pursuant to § 1261 of the Tax Law of the State of New York shall be paid
into the treasury of the City, shall be credited to and deposited in the
general fund thereof and shall be available for any City purpose.
Expenditures from the proceeds of the tax imposed by this article shall
not be considered as part of the cost of government within the meaning
of any limitation on expenditures contained in any general, special or
local law applicable to this City.
B. As used in this section, "net collections" shall mean the moneys
collected from the taxes imposed pursuant to this article after
deducting therefrom expenses of administration and collection and
amounts refunded or to be refunded.
§ 475-7 PORT JERVIS CODE § 475-9
470:522
ARTICLE II
Utility Services Income Tax
[Adopted 6-15-1942 by L.L. No. 4-1942 (Ch. 142, Art. III of the 1981
Code)]
§ 475-10. Legislative intent. [Amended 6-23-1944 by L.L. No.
3-1944; 6-19-1945 by L.L. No. 1-1945; 6-10-1946 by L.L. No. 2-1946;
6-24-1947 by L.L. No. 3-1947; 5-24-1948 by L.L. No. 4-1948;
6-28-1949 by L.L. No. 1-1949]
By § 20-b of the General City Law, as added by Chapter 321 of the Laws of
1937 and as last amended by Chapter 479 of the Laws of 1945, cities are
authorized to enact local laws imposing a tax such as is imposed by § 186-a
of the Tax Law. Pursuant to such authority, this article is modeled upon said
§ 186-a. It is intended thereby and likewise by this article, enacted pursuant
to the above-mentioned authority, to impose a tax on utility services whether
rendered by utilities in the strict sense or not, and whether such services
are in the main or incidental part of their business and regardless of
whether the public streets are used in any manner. Accordingly, such a
utility is defined for the purpose of the tax as including every person subject
to the supervision of the Department of Public Service and every other
person furnishing utility services. It is intended to include persons and
corporations which are directly in competition with ordinary utilities, such
as landlords and submeterers, who buy their services from other utilities
and in turn resell such services. For that reason the tax is imposed on
receipts from sales to ultimate consumers. Receipts from the sale of such
utility services to submeterers are not taxed, but receipts of submeterers
from their own customers are intended to be taxed. Any other construction
would result in a complete exemption from taxation of utility services sold
or furnished by this particular method. Furthermore, it is believed that
submeterers have common characteristics that distinguish them from other
businesses and justify the conclusion that the method, character and nature
of their business, in this aspect, is substantially similar to the business
of an ordinary utility and requires similar treatment for purposes of the
tax. This conclusion is strongly fortified by the fact that such landlords
and submeterers are in direct competition with ordinary utilities and hence
should bear similar tax burdens in order to avoid inequality of treatment.
§ 475-11. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
GROSS INCOME — Receipts received in or by reason of any sale,
conditional or otherwise (except sales hereinafter referred to with respect
to which it is provided that profits from the sale shall be included in gross
income), made or service rendered for ultimate consumption or use by the
purchaser in the City of Port Jervis, including cash, credits and property
of any kind or nature (whether or not such sale is made or such service
is rendered for profit), without any deduction therefrom on account of the
§ 475-10 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 475-11
470:523
cost of the property sold, the cost of the materials used, labor or services or
other costs, interest or discount paid or any other expense whatsoever; also
profits from the sale of securities; also profits from the sale of real property
growing out of the ownership or use of or interest in such property; also
profits from the sale of personal property (other than property of a kind
which would properly be included in the inventory of the taxpayer if on hand
at the close of the period for which a return is made); also receipts from
interest, dividends and royalties derived from sources within the City of
Port Jervis, other than such as are received from a corporation a majority of
whose voting stock is owned by the taxpaying utility, without any deduction
therefrom for any expenses whatsoever incurred in connection with the
receipt thereof, and also profits from any transaction (except sales for resale
and rentals) within the City of Port Jervis whatsoever.
GROSS OPERATING INCOME — Receipts received in or by reason of any
sale, conditional or otherwise, made for ultimate consumption or use by
the purchaser of gas, electricity, steam, water, refrigeration, telephony or
telegraphy, or in or by reason of the furnishing for such consumption or use
of gas, electric, steam, water, refrigerator, telephone or telegraph service
in the City of Port Jervis, including cash, credits and property of any kind
or nature, without any deduction therefrom on account of the cost of the
property sold, the cost of materials used, labor or services or other costs,
interest or discount paid, or any other expenses whatsoever.
PERSONS — Persons, corporations, companies, associations, joint-stock
associations, copartnerships, estates, assignees of rents, any person acting
in a fiduciary capacity or any other entity, and persons, their assignees,
lessees, trustees or receivers appointed by any court whatsoever or by any
other means, except the state, municipalities, political and civil subdivisions
of the state or municipality, and public districts.
UTILITY — Includes every person subject to the supervision of either
division of the State Department of Public Service, except persons engaged
in the business of operating or leasing sleeping and parlor railroad cars
or of operating railroads other than street surface, rapid transit, subway
and elevated railroads, and also includes every person (whether or not
such person is subject to such supervision) who sells gas, electricity, steam,
water, refrigeration, telephony or telegraphy delivered through mains,
pipes or wires, or furnishes gas, electric, steam, water, refrigerator,
telephone or telegraph service by means of mains, pipes or wires,
regardless of whether such activities are the main business of such person
or are only incidental thereto or whether use is made of the public streets.
§ 475-12. Imposition of tax; applicability. [Amended 6-23-1944 by
L.L. No. 3-1944; 6-19-1945 by L.L. No. 1-1945; 6-10-1946 by L.L. No.
2-1946; 6-24-1947 by L.L. No. 3-1947; 5-24-1948 by L.L. No. 4-1948;
6-28-1949 by L.L. No. 1-1949; 6-27-1950 by L.L. No. 4-1950]
Pursuant to the authority granted by § 20-b of the General City Law of the
State of New York, a tax equal to 1% of its gross income from and after
July 1, 1937, is hereby imposed upon every utility doing business in the City
§ 475-11 PORT JERVIS CODE § 475-12
470:524
of Port Jervis which is subject to the supervision of the State Department
of Public Service, which has a gross income for the 12 months ending May
31 in excess of $500, except motor carriers or brokers subject to such
supervision under Article 3-b of the Public Service Law, and a tax equal to
1% of its gross operating income is hereby imposed upon every other utility
doing business in the City of Port Jervis which has a gross operating income
for the 12 months ending May 31 in excess of $500, which taxes shall have
application only within the territorial limits of the City of Port Jervis and
shall be in addition to any and all other taxes and fees imposed by any other
provisions of law for the same period. Such taxes shall not be imposed on
any transaction originating or consummated outside the territorial limits
of the City of Port Jervis, notwithstanding that some act be necessarily
performed with respect to such transaction within such limits.
§ 475-13. Records to be kept.
Every utility subject to tax under this article shall keep such records of its
business and in such form as the City Clerk-Treasurer may require, and
such records shall be preserved for a period of three years, except that the
City Clerk-Treasurer may consent to their destruction within that period or
may require that they be kept longer.
§ 475-14. Filing of quarterly returns. [Amended 6-23-1944 by L.L.
No. 3-1944; 6-19-1945 by L.L. No. 1-1945; 6-10-1946 by L.L. No.
2-1946; 6-24-1947 by L.L. No. 3-1947; 5-24-1948 by L.L. No. 4-1948;
6-28-1949 by L.L. No. 1-1949; 6-27-1950 by L.L. No. 4-1950]
Every utility subject to tax hereunder shall file, on or before September
25, December 25, March 25 and June 25, a return for the three calendar
months preceding each such return date, including any period for which
the tax imposed hereby or by any amendment hereof is effective, each of
which returns shall state the gross income or gross operating income for
the period covered by each such return. Returns shall be filed with the City
Clerk-Treasurer on a form to be furnished by him for such purpose and shall
contain such other data, information or matter as the City Clerk-Treasurer
may require to be included therein. Notwithstanding the foregoing
provision of this section, any utility whose average gross income or average
gross operating income, as the case may be, for the aforesaid three months'
periods is less than one $1,500, may file a return annually on June 25
for the 12 preceding calendar months, and the City Clerk-Treasurer may
require any utility doing business in the City of Port Jervis to file an annual
return, which shall contain any data specified by the City Clerk-Treasurer,
regardless of whether the utility is subject to tax under this article. The City
Clerk-Treasurer, in order to ensure payment of the tax imposed, may require
at any time a further or supplemental return, which shall contain any data
that may be specified by the City Clerk-Treasurer. Every return shall have
annexed thereto an affidavit of the head of the utility making the same, or
of a copartner thereof, or of a principal officer of the corporation, if such
business be conducted by a corporation, to the effect that the statements
contained therein are true.
§ 475-12 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 475-15
470:525
§ 475-15. Payment of tax.
At the time of filing a return as required by this article, each utility shall
pay to the City Clerk-Treasurer the tax imposed by this article for the period
covered by such return. Such tax shall be due and payable at the time of
filing the return or, if a return is not filed when due, on the last day on which
the return is required to be filed.
§ 475-16. Unsatisfactory returns.
In case any return filed pursuant to this article shall be insufficient or
unsatisfactory to the City Clerk-Treasurer, and if a corrected or sufficient
return is not filed within 20 days after the same is required by notice
from the City Clerk-Treasurer, or if no return is made for any period, the
City Clerk-Treasurer shall determine the amount of tax due from such
information as he is able to obtain, and, if necessary, may estimate the tax
on the basis of external indices or otherwise. The City Clerk-Treasurer shall
give notice of such determination to the person liable for such tax. Such
determination shall finally and irrevocably fix such tax, unless the person
against whom it is assessed shall, within 30 days after the giving of notice
of such determination, apply to the City Clerk-Treasurer for a hearing, or
unless the City Clerk-Treasurer, of his own motion, shall reduce the same.
After such hearing, the City Clerk-Treasurer shall give notice of his decision
to the person liable for the tax. The decision of the City Clerk-Treasurer may
be reviewed by a proceeding under Article 78 of the Civil Practice Law and
Rules of the State of New York if application therefor is made within 30 days
after the giving of notice of such decision. An order to review such decision
shall not be granted unless the amount of any tax sought to be reviewed,
with interest and penalties thereon, if any, shall be first deposited with the
City Clerk-Treasurer and an undertaking filed with him, in such amount
and with such sureties as a Justice of the Supreme Court shall approve, to
the effect that if such proceeding be dismissed or the tax confirmed, the
applicant will pay all costs and charges which may accrue in the prosecution
of such proceeding, or, at the option of the applicant, such undertaking may
be in a sum sufficient to cover the tax, interest, penalties, costs and charges
aforesaid, in which event the applicant shall not be required to pay such
tax, interest and penalties as a condition precedent to the granting of such
order.
§ 475-17. Notification procedure.
Any notice authorized or required under the provisions of this article may
be given by mailing the same to the person for whom it is intended, in a
postpaid envelope, addressed to such person at the address given by him
in the last return filed by him under this article, or, if no return has been
filed, then to such address as may be obtainable. The mailing of such notice
shall be presumptive evidence of the receipt of the same by the person to
whom addressed. Any period of time which is determined according to the
provisions of this article by the giving of notice shall commence to run from
the date of mailing of such notice.
§ 475-15 PORT JERVIS CODE § 475-18
470:526
§ 475-18. Penalties for noncompliance; remission.
Any person failing to file a return or corrected return or to pay any tax or
any portion thereof within the time required by this article shall be subject
to a penalty of 5% of the amount of the tax due, plus 1% of such tax for
each month of delay or fraction thereof, excepting the first month, after
such return was required to be filed or such tax became due; but the City
Clerk-Treasurer, if satisfied that the delay was excusable, may remit all or
any portion of such penalty.
§ 475-19. Refunding procedure.
If, within one year from the payment of any tax or penalty, the payer thereof
shall make application for a refund thereof and the City Clerk-Treasurer or
the court shall determine that such tax or penalty or any portion thereof was
erroneously or illegally collected, the City Clerk-Treasurer shall refund the
amount so determined. For like cause and within the same period, a refund
may be so made on the initiative of the City Clerk-Treasurer. However, no
refund shall be made of a tax or penalty paid pursuant to a determination
of the City Clerk-Treasurer as hereinbefore provided unless the City Clerk-
Treasurer, after a hearing as hereinbefore provided or of his own motion,
shall have reduced the tax or penalty or it shall have been established
in a proceeding under Article 78 of the Civil Practice Law and Rules of
the State of New York that such determination was erroneous or illegal.
All refunds shall be made out of moneys collected under this article. An
application for a refund, made as hereinbefore provided, shall be deemed an
application for the revision of any tax or penalty complained of and the City
Clerk-Treasurer may receive additional evidence with respect thereto. After
making his determination, the City Clerk-Treasurer shall give notice thereof
to the person interested, and he shall be entitled to an order to review such
determination under said Article 78, subject to the provisions hereinbefore
contained relating to the granting of such an order.
§ 475-20. Tax as part of operating costs of utility.
The tax imposed by this article shall be charged against and be paid by the
utility and shall not be added as a separate item to bills rendered by the
utility to customers or others but shall constitute a part of the operating
costs of such utility.
§ 475-21. Failure to pay.
Whenever any person shall fail to pay any tax or penalty imposed by this
article, the Corporation Counsel shall, upon the request of the City Clerk-
Treasurer, bring an action to enforce payment of the same. The proceeds of
any judgment obtained in any such action shall be paid to the City Clerk-
Treasurer. Each such tax and penalty shall be a lien upon the property of the
person liable to pay the same, in the same manner and to the same extent
that the tax and penalty imposed by § 186-a of the Tax Law is made a lien.
§ 475-18 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 475-22
470:527
§ 475-22. Powers of City Clerk-Treasurer.
In the administration of this article, the City Clerk-Treasurer shall have
power to make such reasonable rules and regulations, not inconsistent with
law, as may be necessary for the exercise of his powers and the performance
of his duties, and to prescribe the form of blanks, reports and other records
relating to the administration and enforcement of the tax, to take testimony
and proofs, under oath, with reference to any matter within the line of his
official duty under this article, and to subpoena and require the attendance
of witnesses and the production of books, papers and documents.
§ 475-23. Confidential nature of information in returns; penalty for
offense; exceptions.
A. Except in accordance with proper judicial order or as otherwise
provided by law, it shall be unlawful for the City Clerk-Treasurer or any
agent, clerk or employee of the City of Port Jervis to divulge or make
known in any manner the amount of gross income or gross operating
income or any particulars set forth or disclosed in any return under this
article. The officer charged with the custody of such returns shall not be
required to produce any of them or evidence of anything contained in
them in any action or proceeding in any court except on behalf of the
City of Port Jervis in an action or proceeding under the provisions of this
article or on behalf of the State Tax Commission in an action or
proceeding under the provisions of the Tax Law of the State of New
York or on behalf of any party to any action or proceeding under the
provisions of this article when the returns or facts shown thereby are
directly involved in such action or proceeding, in either of which events
the court may require the production of and may admit in evidence so
much of said returns or of the facts shown thereby as are pertinent to
the action or proceeding and no more. Nothing herein shall be
construed to prohibit the delivery to a person or his duly authorized
representative of a copy of any return filed by him, nor to prohibit the
publication of statistics so classified as to prevent the identification of
particular returns and the items thereof or the publication of delinquent
lists showing the names of persons who have failed to pay their taxes at
the time and in the manner provided for by this article, together with
any relevant information which in the opinion of the City Clerk-
Treasurer may assist in the collection of such delinquent taxes, nor to
prohibit the inspection by the Corporation Counsel or other legal
representatives of the City of Port Jervis of the return of any person who
shall bring action to set aside or review the tax based thereon or against
whom an action has been instituted in accordance with the provisions of
this article.
B. Any offense against the foregoing secrecy provisions shall be
punishable by a fine not exceeding $1,000 or by imprisonment not
exceeding six months, or both, and if the offender be an officer, agent,
clerk or employee of the City of Port Jervis, he shall be dismissed from
§ 475-22 PORT JERVIS CODE § 475-23
470:528
§ 475-24. Disposition of funds.
All taxes and penalties received by the City Clerk-Treasurer under this
article shall be credited to and deposited by him in the general fund of the
City.
office and shall be incapable of holding any office or employment in the
City of Port Jervis for a period of five years thereafter.
C. Notwithstanding any provisions of this section, the City Clerk-Treasurer
may exchange with the chief fiscal officer of any other City in the State
of New York information contained in returns filed under this article,
provided such other City grants similar privileges to the City of Port
Jervis, and provided such information is to be used for tax purposes
only, and the City Clerk-Treasurer shall, upon request, furnish the State
Tax Commission with any information contained in such returns.
§ 475-23 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 475-24
470:529

ARTICLE III
Alternative Veterans Exemption
[Adopted 12-26-1984 by L.L. No. 1-1985; amended in its entirety
2-27-1989 by L.L. No. 4-1989 (Ch. 142, Art. V of the 1981 Code)]
§ 475-25. Legislative intent.
The State Legislature has adopted § 458-a of the Real Property Tax Law of
the State of New York to provide an alternative exemption for veterans from
real property taxes and allowing and providing for municipalities the option
not to grant said alternative or to adopt a reduced version of the alternative
plan.
§ 475-26. Exemption established; amount.
Pursuant to the provisions of Subdivision 2(d) of § 458-a of the Real
Property Tax Law of the State of New York, the maximum veterans
exemption from real property taxes allowable pursuant to § 458-a of the
Real Property Tax Law is established as follows:
A. Qualifying residential real property shall be exempt from taxation to the
extent of 15% of the assessed value of such property; provided,
however, that such exemption shall not exceed the lesser of $12,000 of
the product of $12,000 multiplied by the latest state equalization for the
City of Port Jervis.
B. In addition to the exemption provided by Subsection A of this section,
where the veteran served in a combat theater or combat zone of
operations, as documented by the award of a United States campaign
ribbon or service medal, qualifying residential real property also shall
be exempt from taxation to the extent of 10% of the assessed value of
such property; provided, however, that such exemption shall not exceed
the lesser of $8,000 or the product of $8,000 multiplied by the latest
state equalization rate for the City of Port Jervis.
C. In addition to the exemptions provided by Subsections A and B of this
section, where the veteran received a compensation rating from the
United States Veterans Administration because of a service-connected
disability, qualifying residential real property shall be exempt from
taxation to the extent of the product of the assessed value of such
property multiplied by 50% of the veteran's disability rating; provided,
however, that such exemption shall not exceed the lesser of $40,000 or
the product of $40,000 multiplied by the latest state equalization rate
for the City of Port Jervis.
§ 475-25 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 475-26
470:531

ARTICLE IV
Senior Citizens Tax Exemption
[Adopted 2-27-1989 by L.L. No. 5-1989 (Ch. 142, Art. VI of the 1981
Code)]
§ 475-27. Exemption established; statutory authority; maximum
limit. [Amended 2-26-1990 by L.L. No. 2-1990; 12-9-1991 by L.L. No.
6-1991; 2-13-1995 by L.L. No. 4-1995]
§ 475-28. Application filing extension granted. [Added 2-27-1989 by
L.L. No. 6-1989]
The Assessor of the City of Port Jervis is authorized, pursuant to Real
Property Tax Law § 467, Subdivision 8, to accept applications for renewal
of exemptions pursuant to such section after the taxable status date. In the
event that the owner or all of the owners of property which has received an
exemption pursuant to this section on the preceding assessment roll fail to
file the application required pursuant to this section on or before the taxable
status date, such owner or owners may file the application, executed as if
such application had been filed on or before the taxable status date, with
the Assessor on or before the date for the hearing of complaints.
A. A partial tax exemption of real property within the City of Port Jervis
owned by certain persons with limited income who are 65 years of age
or older is hereby enacted pursuant to the authority and in accordance
with all of the provisions, terms, conditions and qualifications of § 467
of the New York State Real Property Tax Law as it is written and as it
may be hereafter, from time to time, amended, adopting the state
maximum income limit of $17,500 with 50% exemption.
B. For incomes greater than the state maximum income limit, a sliding
scale per centum exemption shall apply as provided in the following
schedule:
Annual Income
Percentage Assessed
Valuation Exempt
from Taxation
Maximum income $17,500 50
$17,500 but less than $18,500 45
$18,500 but less than $19,500 40
$19,500 but less than $20,500 35
$20,500 but less than $21,400 30
$21,400 but less than $22,300 25
$22,300 but less than $23,200 20
$23,200 but less than $24,100 15
$24,100 but less than $25,000 10
§ 475-27 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 475-28
470:533

ARTICLE V
Homestead Base Proportions
[Adopted 1-30-1989 by L.L. No. 1-1989 (Ch. 142, Art. VII of the
1981 Code)]
§ 475-29. Adoption of statutory provisions.
The provisions of Real Property Tax Law § 1903 concerning homestead base
proportions are hereby adopted.
§ 475-30. Establishment; applicability. [Amended 2-26-2007 by L.L.
No. 2-2007]
The homestead base proportions shall be established by resolution of the
Common Council of the City of Port Jervis in accordance with the rules of
the State Board of Real Property Services and shall apply to taxes levied on
the 1989 final assessment roll and to taxes levied on subsequent rolls, until
this article shall be repealed.
§ 475-29 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 475-30
470:535

ARTICLE VI
Exemption for Improvements to Residential Buildings
[Adopted 5-28-2018 by L.L. No. 4-2018171]
§ 475-31. Purpose.
This article is adopted pursuant to § 421-f of the Real Property Tax Law for
the purpose of exemption of capital improvements to residential buildings
from taxation and special ad valorem levies as hereinafter provided and
shall be applied in accordance with that statute, as amended from time to
time.
§ 475-32. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
RECONSTRUCTION, ALTERATION, and IMPROVEMENT — Shall not
include ordinary maintenance and repairs.
RESIDENTIAL BUILDING — Any building or structure designed and
occupied exclusively for residential purposes by not more than two families.
§ 475-33. Exemption.
§ 475-34. Calculation of exemption.
A. Residential buildings reconstructed, altered, or improved subsequent
to the effective date of this article shall be exempt from taxation and
special ad valorem levies to the extent provided herein.
B. No such exemption shall be granted for reconstruction, alterations, or
improvements unless:
(1) Such reconstruction, alteration or improvement was commenced
subsequent to the effective date of this article; and
(2) The value of such reconstruction, alteration, or improvement
exceeds $5,000; and
(3) The greater portion, as so determined by square footage, of the
building reconstructed, altered, or improved is at least five years
old.
C. Nothing herein shall require any assessor to find that any alteration,
installation or improvement has necessarily increased or improved the
assessed value of any property.
A. The buildings described in § 475-33 shall be exempt for a period of
eight years to the extent of the following percentages of the increase in
171. Editor’s Note: This local law also superseded former Art. VI, Exemption for Improvements
to Residential Buildings, adopted 6-13-2016 by L.L. No. 12-2016.
§ 475-31 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 475-34
470:537
§ 475-35. Application for and grant of exemption.
§ 475-36. Termination of exemption.
In the event that a building granted an exemption pursuant to this article
ceases to be used primarily for residential purposes or title thereto is
transferred to other than the heirs or distributes of the owner, the
exemption shall cease.
§ 475-37. When effective; expiration of article.
the "exemption base" as defined in Real Property Tax Law § 421-f as the
increase in assessed value thereof attributable to such reconstruction,
alteration or improvement, modified as required by Subdivision 2(a)(ii)
of RPTL § 421-f.
Year
Exemption
(Percent)
1 100.0%
2 75.0%
3 50.0%
4 25.0%
5 0.0%
6 0.0%
7 0.0%
8 0.0%
B. The exemption shall be limited to $80,000 in increased market value of
the property attributable to such reconstruction, alteration, or
improvement, but not less than $5,000.
A. An exemption shall be granted only upon application by the owner of
the building on a form prescribed by the Real Property Tax Law or
equivalent form distributed by the City of Port Jervis Assessor. The
application shall be filed with the City of Port Jervis Assessor having
power to assess property for taxation on or before the appropriate
taxable status date for the City of Port Jervis.
B. If satisfied that the applicant is entitled to an exemption pursuant to
this article, the Assessor shall approve the application, and such
building shall thereafter be exempt from taxation and special ad
valorem levies as herein provided commencing with the assessment roll
prepared on the basis of the taxable status date. The assessed value of
any exemption granted pursuant to this article shall be entered by the
Assessor on the assessment roll with the taxable property, with the
amount of the exemption shown in a separate column.
§ 475-34 PORT JERVIS CODE § 475-37
470:538
A. This article shall become effective upon filing in the office of the
Secretary of State, as provided and in the manner described in the
Municipal Home Rule Law. Following its adoption, a copy of this article
shall be sent to and filed with the Assessor for the City of Port Jervis.
B. This article shall automatically expire and the exemption authorized
hereunder shall no longer be available to new applicants after two
years from the date of its adoption unless further acted upon by action
of the Port Jervis Common Council. This article shall automatically
expire and be no further effect and the exemption granted hereunder
shall cease immediately upon the adoption of a local law by the City of
Port Jervis Common Council pursuant to any amendment of Real
Property Tax Law § 421-f, including a Special Law enacted by the State
Legislature pursuant to a Home Rule request under Municipal Home
Rule Law. However, all exemptions granted hereunder which shall have
become effective prior to the automatic expiration thereof by any event
defined in this subsection shall continue beyond such expiration
according to the terms of §§ 475-31 through 475-36 hereof.
§ 475-37 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 475-37
470:539

ARTICLE VII
Collection of Delinquent Fees, Fines and Other Charges
[Adopted 2-8-2016 by L.L. No. 3-2016]
§ 475-38. Penalty for nonpayment; recordkeeping.
If there shall be any payments which are due to the City of Port Jervis and/
or the Building Department thereof, pursuant to any article or section of the
Port Jervis City Code, including fees, penalties or fines due under Chapter
231 of the Code, which shall remain due and unpaid, in whole or in part,
for a period of 20 calendar days from the date of billing by the City of Port
Jervis, or 20 calendar days from the date of any court order to pay same,
the same shall constitute a default and there shall be added to the entire
amount of the original bill a penalty equal to 5% per month of the original
bill, retroactive to the date of the original billing. The Building Official of
the City of Port Jervis shall keep a record of these delinquent/unpaid fees,
penalties and fines and report same to the City Clerk-Treasurer and the
Corporation Counsel of the City of Port Jervis after said twenty-day period
has expired.
§ 475-39. Fees, penalties and fines to be added to property taxes.
In the event that there are any Building Department fees, penalties or fines
or other service charges which shall have been delinquent for a period of at
least 45 calendar days as of December 15 of any year as described in this
section, the City Clerk-Treasurer shall report the names of the defaulting
persons to the City of Port Jervis, Common Council and the Mayor, on or
before December 15 of the same year. The City of Port Jervis City Clerk-
Treasurer is hereby directed to add the entire amount of the Building
Department fees, penalties or fines or other service charges which shall
be in default, plus penalties and interest, as provided for in this article, to
the real property taxes due and owing to the City of Port Jervis in the next
succeeding year, and the City of Port Jervis City Clerk-Treasurer is directed
to collect same in the same manner as real property taxes due and owing to
the City of Port Jervis are collected.
§ 475-40. Nonresident delinquent charges.
Where charges are delinquent and the violator is not a resident of the City
of Port Jervis or is located outside the geographical boundaries of the City
of Port Jervis, then the Corporation Counsel of the City of Port Jervis is
authorized to seek recovery of charges, including punitive damages, in a
court of competent jurisdiction.
§ 475-38 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 475-40
470:541

ARTICLE VIII
Grievances of Assessments
[Adopted 10-23-2017 by L.L. No. 14-2017]
§ 475-41. Required filings.
A. Where a grievance has been filed with the Board of Assessment Review
in the City of Port Jervis and the subject property is income producing,
the owner shall be required to submit the following information no later
than seven calendar days after filing the grievance in all succeeding
years:
(1) As used in this article, the term "income producing property"
means real property owned for the purpose of securing an income
from the property itself but shall not include residential property
containing three or fewer dwelling units or property classified as
homestead as defined in Article 19 of the Real Property Tax Law of
the State of New York.
(2) A statement of all income derived from any and all expenses
attributable to the operation of such property as follows:
(a) The statement shall be for the calendar year preceding the
date the statement shall be filed when the owner's books and
records reflecting the operation of the property are maintained
on a calendar year basis.
(b) The statement shall be for the last fiscal year concluded as of
the first day of August preceding the date the statement shall
be filed when the owner's books and records reflecting the
operation of the property are maintained on a fiscal year basis
for federal income tax purposes.
(c) The statement shall be for the period of ownership where the
owner of the property has not operated the property and is
without knowledge of the income and expenses of the
operation of the property for a consecutive twelve-month
period concluded as of the first day of August preceding the
date the statement shall be filed.
(d) The Assessor may extend the time for filing an income and
expense statement by a period not to exceed 14 days upon a
demonstration of good cause by the filer.
B. Such statements shall contain the following declaration: "I certify that
all information contained in this statement is true and correct to the
best of my knowledge and belief. I understand that the willful making of
any false statement of material fact herein will subject me to the
provisions of law relevant to the making and filing of false instruments
and will render this statement null and void."
§ 475-41 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 475-41
470:543
§ 475-42. Authority of the Assessor.
The Assessor shall be authorized to promulgate rules and regulations
necessary to effectuate the purposes of this article.
§ 475-43. Confidentiality.
Any officer, agent, independent contractor, or assign of the City of Port
Jervis shall maintain the confidentiality of the contents of any and all income
and expense statements submitted.
§ 475-44. Failure to file.
C. The form on which such statement shall be submitted and the manner
by which the form shall be submitted shall be the determination of the
City Assessor.
A. In the event that the owner of the income-producing property files a
grievance and fails to file an income and expense statement within
seven days after filing the grievance, on a form and in the method
prescribed by the Assessor, such owner shall be subject to a penalty in
amount of 3% of the assessed value of such income-producing property
for the current fiscal year.
B. Where an income and expense statement required under the provisions
of this article has not been timely filed, the Assessor may compel the
production of the books and records of the owner of the relevant
property by subpoena. The Assessor may also make application to any
court of competent jurisdiction for an order compelling the owner to
furnish the required income and expense statement.
§ 475-41 PORT JERVIS CODE § 475-44
470:544
Chapter 479
TAXICABS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 505.
§ 475-44 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 475-44
470:545

ARTICLE I
Licensing and General Regulations
§ 479-1. Definitions.
Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meaning of terms
used in this chapter shall be as follows:
DRIVER'S LICENSE — Permission granted by the City of Port Jervis to a
person to drive a taxicab upon the streets of the City of Port Jervis.
PERSON — An individual, a corporation or other legal entity, partnership
and any other unincorporated association.
STREET — Any street, alley, avenue, court, bridge, lane or public place in
the City.
TAXICAB — Any motor vehicle engaged in the business of carrying
passengers for hire, whether the same is operated from a street stand
or subject to calls from a garage or otherwise operated for hire, except
vehicles subject to provisions of the Transportation Corporation Law,
ambulances or hearses.
TAXICAB DRIVER — Any person who drives a taxicab, whether such person
is the owner of such taxicab or employed by a taxicab owner or operator
and whether operated on a regular, part-time or occasional basis.
TAXICAB LICENSE — Such license issued by the City of Port Jervis
authorizing the holder thereof to conduct a taxicab business in the City of
Port Jervis.
TAXICAB STAND — Any place designated by the City of Port Jervis and so
marked by an appropriate sign alongside the curb of a street or elsewhere
which is exclusively reserved for use of taxicabs.
§ 479-2. Licenses required generally.
It shall be unlawful for any person to drive, operate or keep for hire or pay
within the limits of the City any taxicab without first having obtained and
paid for a license to drive, a license to operate or keep for pay or hire, or
both, and having the same in force and effect, under the provisions of this
chapter.
§ 479-3. Driver's license required; taxicab business license
required.
A. No person shall drive a taxicab and no person shall permit anyone to
drive a taxicab within the limits of the City without such driver having
first obtained and paid for and having in force and effect a driver's
license under the provisions of this chapter.
B. No person shall conduct a taxicab business in the City of Port Jervis
without having first obtained a taxicab license under the provisions of
this chapter. Conducting a taxicab business in the City of Port Jervis
§ 479-1 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 479-3
470:547
§ 479-4. Application for taxicab driver's license.
shall be defined as entities having offices within or without the City
limits which pick up and/or discharge passengers/customers within or
without the City limits for a fare.
A. Each applicant for a taxicab driver's license must properly complete
and submit to the Port Jervis Police Department a taxi driver's
application which shall contain the following information and
satisfactory proof thereof:
(1) Applicant must possess a valid proper class license from New York
State necessary to operate a taxi or a valid proper class license
from another state of the United States. [Amended 5-22-2017 by
L.L. No. 10-2017]
(2) Physical condition. Written report of a physician that the applicant
is physically sound; possesses good eyesight and hearing; is not the
subject of any diseases of the heart, blood vessels, brain, spinal
cord, or organs of the respiratory system or their appendages; if
the applicant has had any serious illness or injury which is
perceptible in the heart, lungs, kidneys, or other abdominal organs,
or the skin, eyes, ears, or limbs, etc.; that the functions of the brain
and nervous system are in a healthy state; and whether the
applicant uses stimulants, tobacco, or narcotic drugs. In addition, a
statement from a physician stating that the applicant is mentally
and physically fit to safely drive a public taxi.
(3) Literacy. The applicant must be able to read and write the English
language.
(4) Such other information as the Chief of Police or his designee may
deem necessary from time to time.
B. The foregoing application shall be signed and sworn to by the applicant
and filed with the Port Jervis Police Department as a permanent record.
Any false statement made by the applicant shall be cause for the
immediate revocation of the taxicab driver's license issued by the City
of Port Jervis. In the event the applicant disputes the cause for
revocation of the taxicab driver's license pursuant to the aforesaid, he
may notify the Port Jervis Police Department within 10 days after the
date of revocation of said taxicab driver's license, and upon such
notification, a public hearing shall be held before the Common Council
of the City of Port Jervis at its regularly scheduled meeting or at a
special meeting called for such purpose. The decision of the Common
Council with respect to the disposition of the driver's license in
connection with said revocation shall be final and binding upon the City
of Port Jervis and the applicant.
C. Applicant qualifications.
§ 479-3 PORT JERVIS CODE § 479-4
470:548
§ 479-5. Photographs to accompany application for driver's license.
Each applicant for a taxicab driver's license must file with his application
three unmounted, untouched photographs of himself, in such position as
the Port Jervis Police Department may direct, taken within the 30 days
preceding the filing of his application. Photographs shall be of a size which
may be easily attached to the license. One shall be attached to the license
when issued, one shall be filed with the application, and one shall be filed
with the Chief of Police. The photograph shall be so attached to the license
that it cannot be removed and another photograph substituted without
detection. Each licensed driver shall, upon demand, exhibit his license and
photograph for inspection.
§ 479-6. Background checks.
(1) In order to be granted a City of Port Jervis taxicab driver's license,
an applicant must:
(a) Hold a valid New York State driver's license in the proper class
or classification necessary to drive a taxicab in New York State.
(b) Not have any wants or warrants anywhere in any jurisdiction.
(c) Have no felony convictions anywhere in any jurisdiction.
(d) Have no felony charges pending anywhere in any jurisdiction.
(e) Not be a registered or designated sex offender anywhere in
any jurisdiction.
(2) If during the term of the taxicab driver's license issued by the City
of Port Jervis any of the aforementioned conditions or requirements
change, the same shall be cause for the immediate revocation of
the Port Jervis taxicab driver's license by the appropriate individual
board or agency of the City of Port Jervis.
A. Taxicab license. Each applicant for a taxicab license shall comply with
the requirements of Article II, Background Check for Taxicab License,
of this chapter.
(1) Any applicant for a taxicab license who shall have previously
complied with the requirements of Article II, Background Check for
Taxicab License, of this chapter shall be relieved of the obligation
to resubmit processing fees or fingerprint documentation relative
to the background check required under said Article II upon
subsequent renewal applications for such taxicab license.
(2) Any applicant for a taxicab license who had previously been issued
a taxicab license by the City of Port Jervis and who had previously
reported and disclosed on said license application prior criminal
convictions shall not be barred from being granted a taxicab
license based upon said prior disclosed and reported convictions.
§ 479-4 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 479-6
470:549
§ 479-7. Driving history checks.
§ 479-8. Issuance of license; defacement prohibited; duration;
display.
Any nonreported or subsequent conviction shall result in denial of
the requested license as set forth in Article II of this chapter.
B. Taxi driver's license. Each applicant for a taxi driver's license shall
comply with the requirements of Article IV, Background Check for
Taxicab Driver's License, of this chapter.
(1) Any applicant for a taxicab driver's license who shall have
previously complied with the requirements of Article IV,
Background Check for Taxicab Driver's License, of this chapter
shall be relieved of the obligation to resubmit processing fees or
fingerprint documentation relative to the background check
required under said Article IV upon subsequent renewal
applications for such a taxicab driver's license.
(2) Any applicant for a taxicab driver's license who had previously
been issued a taxicab driver's license by the City of Port Jervis and
who had previously reported and disclosed on said license
application prior criminal convictions shall not be barred from
being granted a taxicab driver's license based upon said prior
disclosed and reported convictions. Any nonreported or subsequent
conviction shall result in denial of the requested license as set forth
in Article IV.
A. Taxicab license. Each applicant for a taxicab license shall comply with
the requirements of Article III, Driving History Check for Taxicab
License, of this chapter.
B. Taxicab driver's license. Each applicant for a taxi driver's license shall
comply with the requirements of Article V, Driving History Check for
Taxicab Driver's License, of this chapter.
A. Form; terms. Upon satisfactory fulfillment of the foregoing
requirements, there shall be issued to the applicant a license which
shall be in such form as to contain a photograph and signature of the
licensee and blank spaces upon which a record may be made of any
arrest of or serious complaint against him. Each license shall be
stamped with the Seal of the City upon at least a portion of the
photograph. All licenses shall be numbered in the order in which they
are issued and shall contain the name and place of residence of the
licensee and the dates of the issuance and expiration of the license.
B. Prohibited acts. The defacing, removal or obliteration of any official
entry made upon a license issued by the City of Port Jervis to a driver
shall be cause for immediate revocation of said license.
§ 479-6 PORT JERVIS CODE § 479-8
470:550
§ 479-9. Renewal of driver's license.
The Port Jervis Police Department may renew a driver's license from year to
year.
§ 479-10. Fee for driver's license.
The license fee for a taxi driver's license or renewal thereof shall be as
provided in Chapter 280, Fees, plus any additional processing fees. The
applicable additional processing fees as set by the Division of Criminal
Justice Services or other appropriate state agency shall be required to be
submitted at the time of application for said license in order to be remitted
to the Division of Criminal Justice Services of the State of New York for
fingerprint processing fees. The remaining balance shall be required to be
submitted at the time of approval of the application for said license and shall
be retained by the City of Port Jervis.
§ 479-11. Notice of conviction.
Any person who shall apply for and receive a taxi license or renewal thereof,
or a taxi driver's license or renewal thereof, and who shall thereafter be
convicted of any felony crime, whether in New York State or otherwise, shall
be obligated to inform the Chief of the Port Jervis Police Department, or
his designee, of said conviction within 72 hours of said conviction having
been entered. Said notification is required notwithstanding the filing of an
appeal of said conviction or otherwise. Failure to notify the Chief of the Port
Jervis Police Department, or his designee, of said conviction within 72 hours
of said conviction having been entered shall result in immediate revocation
of the taxi driver's license or taxi license, subject to rights of appeal as
otherwise provided in this chapter or other local laws of the City of Port
Jervis.
§ 479-12. Suspension or revocation of driver's license.
C. Duration. Taxi drivers' licenses or taxi licenses shall be issued as of
February 1, 2004, and shall be valid to and including the day preceding
the birthday of the applicant commencing in 2005, unless previously
suspended or revoked. All licenses, commencing in 2005, must be
renewed on or before the applicant's birthday in order not to lapse.
D. Display. Such license or permit shall be carried by the licensee at all
times when operating or in charge of any taxicab and shall be produced
when demanded by any policeman or peace officer within the City of
Port Jervis.
A. Procedure. A driver's license or permit may at any time be suspended or
revoked for cause, after a hearing on notice by the Common Council of
the City of Port Jervis. Any such suspension shall be for the time period
specified by said Common Council and shall be noted on the license,
together with a statement for the reasons therefor. Notification of such
suspension or revocation, as the case may be, shall be sent to the Police
§ 479-8 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 479-12
470:551
§ 479-13. Records.
There shall be kept in the office of the Port Jervis Police Department a
complete record of each license or permit issued to a driver and of all
renewals, suspensions and revocations thereof, which record shall be kept
on file with the original application of the driver for a license.
§ 479-14. Application for taxicab license; duration.
Department of the City of Port Jervis, which shall immediately
confiscate said license. The license shall be returned to the licensee
at the expiration of the period for which the license was suspended
without payment of any additional fee.
B. Revocation; effect. A second suspension for the same reason or in any
case a third suspension of a driver's license shall effect revocation
thereof. No taxicab driver whose license or permit has been revoked in
accordance with the terms and conditions of this chapter shall again be
licensed as a taxicab driver in the City of Port Jervis except upon written
application to the Common Council of the City of Port Jervis, whose
decision thereon shall be final and binding upon the applicant and the
City of Port Jervis.
A. Required; duration. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or
permit to be operated a taxicab upon the streets of the City without first
having obtained therefor a taxicab license under the provisions of this
chapter from the Port Jervis Police Department. Such license shall be
issued as of March 1 and shall expire on the last day of February next
succeeding, unless sooner suspended or revoked.
B. Application. Application for a taxicab license shall be made by the
owner upon blank forms furnished by the Port Jervis Police Department.
Such application shall contain the following information:
(1) The name, age and residence of the person applying for the license
and what, if any, previous experience he has had in such business.
(2) The name, age and residence of the persons to be in immediate
charge of any such taxicab or taxicabs.
(3) Make, year, model, type, VIN (vehicle identification number),
license plate number, seating capacity, odometer reading and date
of purchase of the vehicle to be used as a taxicab.
(4) Whether previously licensed to operate a taxicab, and if so, where.
(5) Whether the license to operate a taxicab has ever been revoked,
and if so, for what cause.
(6) Such other information as the Port Jervis Police Department may
deem necessary.
§ 479-12 PORT JERVIS CODE § 479-15
470:552
§ 479-15. Inspection of vehicles; unfit vehicles.
§ 479-16. Issuance of taxicab license.
§ 479-17. Fee for taxicab license.
The license fee for a taxi license or renewal thereof shall be as provided
in Chapter 280, Fees, plus any additional processing fees. The applicable
additional processing fees as set by the Division of Criminal Justice Services
or other appropriate state agency shall be required to be submitted at the
time of application for said license in order to be remitted to the Division of
Criminal Justice Services of the State of New York for fingerprint processing
fees. The remaining balance per vehicle shall be required to be submitted at
the time of approval of the application for said license and shall be retained
by the City of Port Jervis.
A. Inspection. In addition to any motor vehicle inspection required by the
Motor Vehicle Department of the State of New York, no vehicle shall be
licensed as a taxicab to be operated in the City of Port Jervis as a
taxicab until it has been thoroughly and carefully inspected and
examined and found to be in a thoroughly safe condition for the
transportation of passengers, clean, fit, of good appearance and well
painted and varnished. The Chief of Police or someone designated by
him shall make such examination and inspection before a license is
issued and shall make such inspection of such licensed vehicle two
times annually.
B. Unfit vehicle. The Port Jervis Police Department shall refuse to issue a
license for or, if already issued, revoke or suspend the license of any
vehicle found by the Chief of Police of the City of Port Jervis to be unfit
or unsuited for public patronage.
A. Issuance. If upon inspection a taxicab is found to be of lawful
construction and in proper condition, in accordance with the provisions
of this chapter, and upon the approval of the application and the
payment of the license fee hereinafter set forth, the same shall be
licensed by delivering to the owner a card of such size and form as may
be prescribed by the Port Jervis Police Department.
B. Contents; use. The card shall contain the official license number of the
taxicab, together with the date of inspection of the same and a
statement to the effect that in case of any complaints the Port Jervis
Police Department shall be notified, giving the license number of the
taxicab. Such card shall be signed by the licensing official and shall
contain blank spaces upon which an entry shall be made of the date of
every inspection of the vehicle by the Chief of Police or his
representative.
§ 479-15 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 479-18
470:553
§ 479-18. Periodic inspections of vehicles; reports.
The Chief of Police shall, from time to time, see that all taxicabs licensed
by the City of Port Jervis are kept clean and in good repair on the interior
and exterior for public use and shall inspect or cause to be inspected all
taxicabs from time to time, as hereinbefore provided or on the complaint of
any person of full age, as often as may be necessary. Reports in writing of
all inspections shall be promptly filed in the office of the Port Jervis Police
Department.
§ 479-19. Suspension or revocation of vehicle license.
In the event, after conviction by a court of competent jurisdiction, it is
determined that any vehicle so licensed pursuant to the terms and
conditions of this chapter has been used for an illegal business or purpose,
the license for such vehicle shall be deemed revoked forthwith without
any further action by the City of Port Jervis. The Police Department of the
City of Port Jervis shall cause such license to be confiscated and returned
to the Port Jervis Police Department. No new license shall be issued until
after application therefor and good cause has been shown. In the event the
issuance of a license is refused after revocation, as in this section provided,
the applicant may demand a hearing before the Common Council of the
City of Port Jervis, which hearing shall be held not less than 20 days after
request therefor at a regular or special meeting of the Common Council
of the City of Port Jervis. The decision of the Common Council of the City
of Port Jervis on the issuance or denial of said license shall be final and
binding upon the applicant and the City of Port Jervis. In the event a court
of competent jurisdiction has determined that a vehicle licensed by the City
of Port Jervis is in violation of any ordinance of said City or any state law
governing the use, operation or licensing of motor vehicles, then and in that
event the license shall be suspended forthwith, and the Police Department
shall confiscate the same. The period of suspension shall be determined by
the Common Council of the City of Port Jervis at its next regular meeting.
Said period of suspension shall be based upon report of the Chief of Police
to the Common Council. Upon the expiration of said suspension period, said
taxicab license shall be returned.
§ 479-20. Register of licensed vehicles.
The Port Jervis Police Department shall keep a register or card index of
the name of each person owning or operating a taxicab licensed under this
chapter, together with the license number and the description and make
of such vehicle and the date and complete record of inspection made of it.
Such record shall be open to the inspection of the public at all reasonable
times.
§ 479-21. Location and designation of taxicab stands.
A. Authority of Chief of Police. The Chief of Police shall be authorized to
locate and designate taxicab stands. He shall further designate the
§ 479-18 PORT JERVIS CODE § 479-21
470:554
§ 479-22. Use regulations for taxicab stands; permit to occupy
stand.
Only taxicabs in such numbers as are provided for by parking spaces may
remain at the stand while waiting for employment, and only in single file,
pointed in accordance with applicable traffic regulations. The taxicab stand
shall be used only for the purpose of parking, and while any licensed taxicab
is in any of said spaces it shall not be repaired, washed or otherwise
serviced. No vehicle shall occupy a stand unless a permit therefor has been
issued by the Port Jervis Police Department. Applications for permits to
occupy a stand shall designate the stand and shall be made in writing to the
Port Jervis Police Department by the owner upon forms prescribed by the
licensing official.
§ 479-23. Disposition of articles found in taxicabs.
Every driver of a taxicab immediately after the termination of any hiring or
employment must carefully search such taxicab for any property lost or left
therein, and any such property, unless sooner claimed or delivered to the
owner, must be taken to the nearest police station and deposited with the
officer in charge within 24 hours after the finding thereof.
§ 479-24. Return of license upon discontinuing operation;
assignability, transfer; duplicate licenses.
number of such taxicabs that shall be allowed to stand at any of the
places designated by him and shall provide a metal sign, which shall be
attached to a post or stanchion adjacent to such stand.
B. Application for stand. Owners of any property may apply to the Port
Jervis Police Department for the establishment of taxicab stands
adjacent to their premises, stating in such application the number of
taxicabs they desire to occupy such stand. Such application shall be
granted solely in the discretion of the Common Council and may be
revoked by it at any time.
A. Duty of licensee. Every person to whom a license or permit has been
issued under the provisions of this chapter shall, upon discontinuing or
abandoning the operation or driving of a taxicab, return such license or
permit to the Port Jervis Police Department unless such license or
permit has been lost or for other reasons cannot be restored.
B. Assignment and transfer prohibited. Such license and permit shall not
be assigned or transferred to any other person or be applicable to any
motor vehicle other than the one specified therein. Any licensee who
permits his license or permit to be used by any other person, and any
person who uses such license or permit granted or given to any other
person, shall each be guilty of a violation of this chapter.
C. Duplicate licenses and permits. Whenever a license or permit shall be
lost, stolen or destroyed without fault on the part of the holder, his
§ 479-21 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 479-24
470:555
§ 479-25. Deception of passengers prohibited.
No person owning or driving a taxicab shall deceive any passenger who may
ride or who may desire to ride in any such vehicle as to his destination by
the shortest route or the lawful price to be charged for such person, nor
shall he convey such passenger or cause him to be conveyed to a place other
than that directed by him. Taxicab fees shall be set by the Common Council,
and any price or fee increase must be approved by the Common Council.
§ 479-26. Misrepresentation of employer; passengers intending to
commit unlawful acts.
It shall be unlawful for any licensed driver of any taxicab to misrepresent
the name of his employer or knowingly to receive or transport any person or
persons who intend to commit any unlawful act in such vehicle during the
voyage or at the termination thereof, whether within such vehicle or not.
It shall also be unlawful for any such driver to solicit or procure or to aid
or assist in soliciting or procuring any person to ride in a licensed taxicab
with the intent to commit any unlawful act therein or at any time during the
voyage or at the termination thereof, whether within the vehicle or not.
§ 479-27. Maintenance and required apparatus of licensed vehicles.
agent or employee, a duplicate in lieu thereof under the original
application may be issued by the Port Jervis Police Department upon
the filing of a sworn affidavit containing facts of such loss or theft. A fee
as provided in Chapter 280, Fees, shall be charged for said duplicate
license or permit.
A. Cleanliness of vehicle. Every holder of a taxicab license shall at all
times keep the inside of the cab operated by him in a clean and sanitary
condition and shall at least once each day thoroughly clean the inside of
such taxicab.
B. Windows. Every owner of a taxicab shall provide windows in the
passenger portion of each taxicab sufficient in number and of such size
and dimension that at all times persons may be readily seen through
such windows with sufficient distinctness to identify such persons.
C. Locks on doors. No owner or driver of a taxicab shall at any time so
fasten or lock the doors on a taxicab that it is impossible for a passenger
to open the same from the inside. Every owner shall provide means for
unfastening doors on taxicabs so that such doors may be readily opened
on the inside by a passenger.
D. Changes in address. Changes in address of owner or driver shall be
reported to the Port Jervis Police Department in writing within three
days.
E. Every owner of a taxicab shall designate it as a taxicab by the use of the
word "Taxi," which shall be either painted on the driver and passenger
§ 479-24 PORT JERVIS CODE § 479-27
470:556
§ 479-28. Penalties for offenses.
front side doors or be attached to said doors by a magnetic strip or
decals. In either case, such letters shall be uniform size, at least four
inches in height, and each stroke of each letter shall not be less than
one inch in width.
A. Unauthorized vehicles. Any owner or driver of a taxicab not licensed or
equipped in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, or of a
taxicab the license of which has been suspended or revoked, who
engages in the business of a taxicab as defined herein or attempts to
engage in such business or solicits passengers for hire, shall, upon
conviction, be punished as prescribed in Chapter 1, General Provisions,
Article I.
B. Unauthorized drivers. Any person not having been duly licensed as a
taxicab driver, or any person whose license as such driver has been
revoked, or any person whose license has been suspended and who
during the term of suspension drives for hire a taxicab upon the streets,
shall, upon conviction, be punished as prescribed in Chapter 1, General
Provisions, Article I.
C. Other offenses. Upon conviction of any person for any offense against a
provision of this chapter for which no punishment is specifically
provided, the punishment, upon conviction for such offense, shall be as
prescribed in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article I.
D. License suspension or revocation in addition to other penalties. In
addition to the fine, imprisonment, or both, authorized by this chapter,
any licensee shall be subject to the suspension or revocation of his
license upon conviction for any violation of this chapter. The Common
Council may, in its discretion, suspend or revoke a license granted
under any provision of this chapter pending or in advance of any
criminal prosecution of the licensee.
§ 479-27 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 479-28
470:557

ARTICLE II
Background Check for Taxicab License
§ 479-29. Legislative intent.
By the adoption of this article, the City of Port Jervis declares its intent
to delegate to the Chief of Police, or his designee, and Port Jervis Police
Department established in the City of Port Jervis the authority, presently
entrusted to the Common Council of and for the City of Port Jervis, to
determine the criminal history of persons applying for a taxicab license in
the City of Port Jervis. It is specifically the intent of the City of Port Jervis
to reserve to the Common Council of the City of Port Jervis the power to
approve or deny persons applying for a taxicab license in the City of Port
Jervis but that all other supervisory and administrative duties, including
background checks, be delegated to the Chief of Police or his designee and
Police Department of the City of Port Jervis.
§ 479-30. Definitions.
The words and phrases and definitions of words as used in the New York
State Town Law and/or the New York State Vehicle and Traffic Law shall be
applied in the enforcement of this article.
§ 479-31. Authority retained.
The City of Port Jervis is delegating authority for the comparison of
fingerprint analysis to the Division of Criminal Justice Services by
submission of fingerprint cards and appropriate processing fees. The Port
Jervis Police Department will secure fingerprint cards and the appropriate
processing fees for said applicants and submit them to the Division of
Criminal Justice Services. The Chief of the Port Jervis Police Department,
or his designated agent within the Port Jervis Police Department, shall
be responsible for reviewing the criminal history record information
disseminated by the Division of Criminal Justice Services. The Chief, or his
designee, will then provide a statement to the Common Council regarding
an applicant's suitability for licensure.
§ 479-32. Eligibility.
Any applicant determined to have been convicted of any felony, as defined
in § 10.00 of the New York State Penal Law or as defined by the Vehicle and
Traffic Law of the State of New York, will be denied approval for a taxicab
license in the City of Port Jervis, County of Orange, State of New York,
unless the disability created by conviction of a felony has been removed as
provided in the Correction Law of the State of New York.
§ 479-33. Appeal of denial.
Any applicant having been denied approval for a taxicab license in the City
of Port Jervis, County of Orange, State of New York, shall have the right
to appeal the denial to the Safety Committee of the Common Council of
§ 479-29 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 479-33
470:559
the City of Port Jervis, Orange County, New York. Said appeal must be filed
within 15 days of receipt of notice of the denial of the taxicab license and
must be in writing, delivered to the office of the Police Department of the
City of Port Jervis. Any challenge regarding criminal history records must
be conducted in accordance with the rules and regulations of the Division
of Criminal Justice Services of the State of New York.
§ 479-33 PORT JERVIS CODE § 479-33
470:560
ARTICLE III
Driving History Check for Taxicab License
§ 479-34. Legislative intent.
By the adoption of this article, the City of Port Jervis declares its intent
to delegate to the Chief of Police, or his designee, and Port Jervis Police
Department established in the City of Port Jervis the authority, presently
entrusted to the Common Council of and for the City of Port Jervis, to
determine the past driving history of persons applying for a taxicab license
in the City of Port Jervis. It is specifically the intent of the City of Port
Jervis to reserve to the Common Council of the City of Port Jervis the
power to approve or deny persons applying for a taxicab license in the
City of Port Jervis but that all other supervisory and administrative duties,
including background checks, shall be delegated to the Chief of Police, or
his designee, and Police Department of the City of Port Jervis.
§ 479-35. Definitions.
The words and phrases and definitions of words as used in the New York
State Town Law and/or the New York State Vehicle and Traffic Law shall be
applied in the enforcement of this article.
§ 479-36. Authority retained.
The City of Port Jervis is delegating authority for the comparison of
identifying information to the New York State Department of Motor Vehicles
by submission of required personal information and appropriate processing
fees to be secured by the Port Jervis Police Department from applicants
for a taxicab license in the City of Port Jervis for the specific purpose
of identification, processing and determination of prior driving history by
the New York State Department of Motor Vehicles. The Port Jervis Police
Department will secure necessary personal information/identifiers and
appropriate processing fees for said applicants for submission to the New
York State Department of Motor Vehicles. The Chief of the Port Jervis Police
Department or his delegated agent within the Port Jervis Police Department
shall be responsible for reviewing the driving history record information
disseminated by the New York State Department of Motor Vehicles after
the review and submission of the personal information/identifiers and
appropriate processing fees as set forth above.
§ 479-37. Eligibility.
Any applicant determined to have seven points as established by the New
York State Department of Motor Vehicles assessed against his/her license
will be denied a taxicab license in the City of Port Jervis, County of Orange,
State of New York.
§ 479-34 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 479-38
470:561
§ 479-38. Appeal of denial.
Any applicant having been denied a taxicab license in the City of Port Jervis,
County of Orange, State of New York, shall have the right to appeal the
denial to the Safety Committee of the Common Council of the City of Port
Jervis, Orange County, New York. Said appeal must be filed within 15 days of
receipt of notice of the denial of the taxicab license and must be in writing,
delivered to the office of the Police Department of the City of Port Jervis.
§ 479-38 PORT JERVIS CODE § 479-38
470:562
ARTICLE IV
Background Check for Taxicab Driver's License
§ 479-39. Legislative intent.
By the adoption of this article, the City of Port Jervis declares its intent
to delegate to the Chief of Police, or his designee, and Port Jervis Police
Department established in the City of Port Jervis the authority, presently
entrusted to the Common Council of and for the City of Port Jervis, to
determine the criminal history of persons applying for a taxicab driver's
license in the City of Port Jervis. It is specifically the intent of the City of
Port Jervis to reserve to the Common Council of the City of Port Jervis the
power to approve or deny persons applying for a taxicab driver's license
in the City of Port Jervis but that all other supervisory and administrative
duties, including background checks, be delegated to the Chief of Police, or
his designee, and Police Department of the City of Port Jervis.
§ 479-40. Definitions.
The words and phrases and definitions of words as used in the New York
State Town Law and/or the New York State Vehicle and Traffic Law shall be
applied in the enforcement of this article.
§ 479-41. Authority retained.
The City of Port Jervis is delegating authority for the comparison of
fingerprint analysis to the Division of Criminal Justice Services by
submission of fingerprint cards and appropriate processing fees. The Port
Jervis Police Department will secure fingerprint cards and the appropriate
processing fees for said applicants and submit them to the Division of
Criminal Justice Services. The Chief of the Port Jervis Police Department,
or his designated agent within the Port Jervis Police Department, shall
be responsible for reviewing the criminal history record information
disseminated by the Division of Criminal Justice Services. The Chief, or his
designee, will then provide a statement to the Common Council regarding
an applicant's suitability for licensure.
§ 479-42. Eligibility.
Any applicant determined to have been convicted of any felony, as defined
in § 10.00 of the New York State Penal Law or as defined by the Vehicle
and Traffic Law of the State of New York, will be denied approval for a
taxicab driver's license in the City of Port Jervis, County of Orange, State of
New York, unless the disability created by conviction of a felony has been
removed as provided in the Correction Law of the State of New York.
§ 479-43. Appeal of denial.
Any applicant having been denied approval for a taxicab driver's license
in the City of Port Jervis, County of Orange, State of New York, shall have
the right to appeal the denial to the Safety Committee of the Common
§ 479-39 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 479-43
470:563
Council of the City of Port Jervis, Orange County, New York. Said appeal
must be filed within 15 days of receipt of notice of the denial of the taxicab
driver's license and must be in writing, delivered to the office of the Chief
of Police of the Port Jervis Police Department. Any challenge regarding
criminal history records must be conducted in accordance with the rules
and regulations of the Division of Criminal Justice Services of the State of
New York.
§ 479-43 PORT JERVIS CODE § 479-43
470:564
ARTICLE V
Background Check for Taxicab Driver's License
§ 479-44. Legislative intent.
By the adoption of this article, the City of Port Jervis declares its intent
to delegate to the Chief of Police, or his designee, and Port Jervis Police
Department established in the City of Port Jervis the authority, presently
entrusted to the Common Council of and for the City of Port Jervis, to
determine the past driving history of persons applying for a taxicab driver's
license in the City of Port Jervis. It is specifically the intent of the City of Port
Jervis to reserve to the Common Council of the City of Port Jervis the power
to approve or deny persons applying for a taxicab driver's license in the
City of Port Jervis but that all other supervisory and administrative duties,
including background checks, shall be delegated to the Chief of Police, or
his designee, and Police Department of the City of Port Jervis.
§ 479-45. Definitions.
The words and phrases and definitions of words as used in the New York
State Town Law and/or the New York State Vehicle and Traffic Law shall be
applied in the enforcement of this article.
§ 479-46. Authority retained.
The City of Port Jervis is delegating authority for the comparison of
identifying information to the New York State Department of Motor Vehicles
by submission of required personal information and appropriate processing
fees to be secured by the Port Jervis Police Department from applicants
for a taxicab driver's license in the City of Port Jervis for the specific
purpose of identification, processing and determination of prior driving
history by the New York State Department of Motor Vehicles. The Port Jervis
Police Department will secure necessary personal information/identifiers
and appropriate processing fees for said applicants for submission to the
New York State Department of Motor Vehicles. The Chief of the Port Jervis
Police Department or his delegated agent within the Port Jervis Police
Department shall be responsible for reviewing the driving history record
information disseminated by the New York State Department of Motor
Vehicles after the review and submission of the personal information/
identifiers and appropriate processing fees as set forth above.
§ 479-47. Eligibility.
Any applicant determined to have seven points as established by the New
York State Department of Motor Vehicles assessed against his/her license
will be denied a taxicab driver's license in the City of Port Jervis, County of
Orange, State of New York.
§ 479-44 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 479-48
470:565
§ 479-48. Appeal of denial.
Any applicant having been denied a taxicab driver's license in the City
of Port Jervis, County of Orange, State of New York, shall have the right
to appeal the denial to the Safety Committee of the Common Council
of the City of Port Jervis, Orange County, New York. Said appeal must
be filed within 15 days of receipt of notice of the denial of the taxicab
driver's license and must be in writing, delivered to the office of the Police
Department of the City of Port Jervis.
§ 479-48 PORT JERVIS CODE § 479-48
470:566
Chapter 486
TOWING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 505.
§ 486-1. Definitions.
Unless otherwise expressly stated, whenever used in this chapter, the
following words shall have the meanings given to them by this section:
ABANDONED VEHICLE — Any vehicle which is unattended or obstructing
traffic and which, in the judgment of the Police Department, shall be
removed.
ACCIDENT — Any incident or occurrence in which one or more vehicles
come into contact with each other or another object thereby causing
personal injury or property damage.
DISABLED VEHICLE — Any vehicle that requires towing because of
accident or because it is unable to proceed under its own motive power.
DRIVER — Any person driving a tow truck upon the public highways for
hire.
FOR HIRE — Includes any incident where a fee, charge or other
consideration is directly or indirectly imposed for towing, carrying or
removing any vehicle, and shall be inclusive of repairs made on a towed
vehicle for a consideration, although no charge is expressly imposed for the
towing of such a vehicle.
OPERATE — Includes the control and direction of the use of a vehicle for
towing from places within the City of Port Jervis, for hire.
RESTRICTED LICENSE — That license issued to the owners of towing
trucks authorizing the holder thereof to engage in all tow truck operations,
except that he will not be permitted at scenes of accidents unless
specifically called by the person in charge of the disabled vehicle and will
not be placed on the preferred tow truck list at police headquarters.
SCENE OF ACCIDENT — Includes any area of a street to which a vehicle
is removed to prevent obstruction of traffic, and will remain so until the
vehicle or vehicles is removed, either under its own power or by a properly
licensed tow truck.
TERMINAL — Any place of business where there is maintained or operated,
on a full-time basis, an automobile wrecking, filling station, public garage,
gasoline station, junkyard or motor vehicle service station, as these terms
are defined in the Code of the City of Port Jervis, with sufficient storage
for at least two disabled vehicles, provided that the same is a New York
§ 479-48 TOWING § 486-1
486:567
State licensed motor vehicle repair shop.[Amended 3-26-1984 by L.L.
No. 4-1984; 11-24-2003 by L.L. No. 3-2003]
TOWING — The moving or removing of disabled or abandoned motor
vehicles by a tow truck for hire.
TOW TRUCK — A motor vehicle which is either equipped for the purpose
of carrying, lifting, pushing, pulling or otherwise removing, for hire, any
motor vehicle or motor vehicles, or is used in the business of removing such
vehicles.
UNRESTRICTED LICENSE — That license which is issued to owners of
towing trucks permitting the holder thereof to be placed on a preferred
roster of tow trucks located at police headquarters in addition to being
permitted to do all normal towing.
§ 486-2. License required.
It shall be unlawful to operate a tow truck for hire in the City of Port Jervis
unless the owner thereof shall have obtained a license from the City Clerk-
Treasurer.
§ 486-3. Application for license; term; expiration; inspections;
investigation.
A. A license shall be obtained by filing an application therefor, on forms
furnished by the City Clerk-Treasurer, verifying under oath:
(1) The full name, residence address, date of birth, place of birth,
personal description, social security number and business address
of the applicant. [Amended 3-26-1984 by L.L. No. 4-1984]
(2) The number of tow trucks proposed to be operated by the applicant
and description of each tow truck including the make, model, year
of manufacture and New York State registration number.
(3) Address of place from which tow trucks are proposed to be garaged
and dispatched.
(4) The name and address of the insurance carrier which covers each
tow truck against public liability in the limits required by law,
which insurance shall be maintained in force during the period
covered by the license in a sum not less than $500,000 for personal
injury and $50,000 for property damage, with the City named as
additional insured.
(5) All crimes of which the applicant or any member thereof, or any
officer, if a corporation, has been convicted, stating the name and
location of the court and the date on which such convictions were
had and the penalties imposed therefor.
(6) The experience of the applicant in the towing of vehicles for hire.
§ 486-1 PORT JERVIS CODE § 486-3
486:568
B. Said license is to be for a period of one year and shall be renewable
yearly upon payment of the annual license fee to the City Clerk-
Treasurer. All monies received for such license fees shall be paid to the
City Clerk-Treasurer and shall be credited to the general funds of the
City.
C. All licenses issued pursuant to this chapter shall expire on January 31 of
each year and shall be renewed during the month of January.
D. Upon receipt of a license application, the City Clerk-Treasurer shall
transmit the same to the City Police Department and the Building
Official. The Building Official shall inspect all proposed terminals to
determine whether the proposed terminal complies with the
requirements set forth in this chapter. If the proposed terminal is
located in the City of Port Jervis, the Building Official shall inspect the
proposed terminal to determine if the proposed terminal is also in
compliance with all other City rules, regulations, ordinances and local
laws and if the proposed terminal is properly identified on the
application. [Added 3-26-1984 by L.L. No. 4-1984; amended
11-24-2003 by L.L. No. 3-2003]
E. Reinspection. [Added 3-26-1984 by L.L. No. 4-1984]
(1) Upon expiration of a license, the Building Official shall reinspect
each terminal and approve the same prior to the license being
renewed. [Amended 11-24-2003 by L.L. No. 3-2003]
(2) The Building Official shall have 30 days in which to report back to
the City Clerk-Treasurer. In the event the Building Official
determines there are any violations, no license shall be issued until
said violations are corrected.
F. Investigation. [Added 3-26-1984 by L.L. No. 4-1984]
(1) The City Police Department shall cause a full criminal background
check to be performed on all persons named in the application.
(2) The City Police Department shall have 30 days in which to report
back to the City Clerk-Treasurer.
(3) The criminal background check, together with the recommendation
of the Chief of Police or his designee, shall be provided to the
Safety Committee of the Common Council, and no license shall be
issued except upon approval by a majority of the Safety Committee
of the Common Council.
§ 486-3 TOWING § 486-4
486:569
§ 486-4. Fee for restricted license; limitations. [Amended 12-8-1986
by L.L. No. 8-1986; 7-27-1992 by L.L. No. 5-1992172]
Applicants for a restricted license will be required to pay a nonrefundable
fee as provided in Chapter 280, Fees, and will be limited to normal towing
and will not be permitted at scenes of accidents unless specifically called by
the person in charge of the disabled vehicle.
§ 486-5. Unrestricted license; fee; qualifications for license.
A. Applicants for an unrestricted license will be required to pay a
nonrefundable fee as provided in Chapter 280, Fees, per year and, in
addition to normal towing privileges, will be placed on a preferred
roster of tow trucks which will be available at the communications desk
at police headquarters. When a vehicle owner or other authorized
person at the scene of the accident requests the police officer at the
scene for a specified tow truck owner, the police officer shall so inform
police headquarters, and the requested tow truck owner shall be
notified of the request, if available. In the event that no request is made,
or in the event the requested tow truck owner does not respond, the
desk officer at police headquarters shall notify the next successive tow
truck owner on the preferred roster, in rotation, after the last called
owner and, upon failure to respond, shall call the next succeeding tow
truck owner on the preferred roster until the tow service is accepted.
The desk officer at police headquarters shall keep a record concerning
the date and the acceptance or refusal of each call made. Each licensed
tow truck owner on the preferred roster who fails or refuses to accept a
tow service when called in his proper turn on the roster shall be
deemed to have forfeited that turn on the roster. [Amended 12-8-1986
by L.L. No. 8-1986; 7-27-1992 by L.L. No. 5-1992173]
B. In order to qualify for an unrestricted license: [Amended 3-26-1984
by L.L. No. 4-1984; 11-24-2003 by L.L. No. 3-2003]
(1) The licensee must:
(a) Own and/or operate and maintain a bona fide terminal.
(b) Be available or on call on a twenty-four-hour basis to tow
disabled vehicles.
(c) Agree to abide by the fees contained within this chapter.
(d) Be able to respond within 20 minutes between the hours of
7:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. and within 40 minutes between the
hours of 8:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
172. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
173. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 486-4 PORT JERVIS CODE § 486-5
486:570
§ 486-6. Towing rates.
§ 486-7. Storage fees to be charged.
§ 486-8. Posting and filing of price schedule.
§ 486-9. Excessive charges.
It shall be unlawful for any licensee to demand or receive any payment in
excess of the rates permitted by this chapter or shown on the schedule filed
by the tow truck owner with the Chief of Police, and violation of this section
shall subject the violator to loss of license in addition to other penalties set
forth herein.
(2) All tow trucks shall have sufficient equipment to properly pick up
and tow a disabled vehicle or a fire-damaged vehicle.
A. No such license shall be issued unless the applicant agrees to charge no
more than the following maximum rates for towing within the City of
Port Jervis:
(1) For all passenger cars, regardless of weight, and other vehicles one
to 1 3/4 tons and lighter, not to exceed $75, excluding incidental
work such as winching and dolly towing, during the hours of 8:00
a.m. to 8:00 p.m., and not to exceed $125 between the hours of 8:00
p.m. and 8:00 a.m. [Amended 7-23-1990; 2-12-2007 by L.L. No.
1-2007]
(2) These towing charges shall not apply to the towing of motor trucks
or special equipment exceeding 1 1/2 tons' capacity.
B. The rates set forth above may be altered by the Common Council by
resolution alone.
A. No license shall be issued unless the applicant agrees to charge no
more than a maximum of $50 per day for outside storage. Inside
storage rates may be determined by agreement of the parties. All
vehicles must be stored on the premises of the licensee, whether
indoors or outdoors, and shall not be permitted on City streets.
[Amended 7-23-1990; 2-12-2007 by L.L. No. 1-2007]
B. The rates set forth above may be altered by the Common Council by
resolution alone.
A. All licensees shall be required to post in their garage, terminal or
service station, a schedule of the maximum rates for towing and storage
as herein set forth.
B. All licensees shall file with the Chief of Police a schedule showing their
charges for all services rendered.
§ 486-5 TOWING § 486-10
486:571
§ 486-10. Soliciting.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to solicit towing
work by any means whatsoever from any person at or near the scene of an
automobile accident within the City of Port Jervis. It shall be unlawful for
any tow truck to proceed to the scene of an accident or disablement without
having first been requested or notified to do so by the vehicle owner or a
police officer, and the operator of any tow truck so doing shall be deemed
to have committed a violation of this chapter. Violation of this section shall
subject the violator to loss of license in addition to other penalties set forth
herein.
§ 486-11. Signs.
Each tow truck operated hereunder shall have inscribed on the side of such
vehicle the trade name and business address of the owner in letters not less
than three inches in height, either painted or otherwise securely affixed in
a conspicuous place as herein provided.
§ 486-12. Consent required prior to towing. [Amended 7-24-1989 by
L.L. No. 19-1989]
It shall be unlawful to tow away any motor vehicle which has been involved
in an accident, disablement or abandonment without prior consent of the
owner, or of an authorized operator, or of the police officer at the scene of
the accident.
§ 486-13. Failure to respond quickly. [Added 3-26-1984 by L.L. No.
4-1984]
In the event that the licensee called does not respond as quickly as is
necessary, in the opinion of the police officer in charge at an accident scene,
the police officer may call another licensed operator.
§ 486-14. Exception.
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply when the owner of a damaged
car specifically requires the car to be taken from said City by an unlicensed
tow truck from outside of the City.
§ 486-15. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 2-26-2007 by L.L. No.
2-2007]
An offense against any provision of this chapter shall be a violation of
this chapter, which shall be punishable as provided in Chapter 1, General
Provisions, Article I, General Penalty.
§ 486-16. Enforcement.
The provisions of this chapter shall be enforced by the Chief of Police or his
designated representative.
§ 486-10 PORT JERVIS CODE § 486-16
486:572
Chapter 492
TREES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Shade Tree Commission — See Ch. 153.
Brush, grass and weeds — See Ch. 417, Art. I.
Streets, sidewalks and public property — See
Ch. 464.
§ 492-1. Public tree care.
§ 492-2. Responsibility for trimming; minimum clearances;
noncompliance with notice.
A. The City shall have the right to plant, prune, maintain and remove
trees, plants and shrubs within the lines of all streets, alleys, avenues,
lanes, squares and public grounds as may be necessary to ensure public
safety or to preserve or enhance the symmetry and beauty of such
public grounds.
B. The City Shade Tree Commission, as established in Chapter 153 of this
Code, may order to be removed any tree or part thereof which is in an
unsafe condition or which by reason of its nature is injurious to sewers,
electric power lines, gaslines, waterlines or other public improvements
or is affected with any injurious fungus, insect or other pest. This
section does not prohibit the planting of street trees by adjacent
property owners, provided that the selection and location of said tree is
in accordance with §§ 153-7 through 153-9 of this Code.
A. Property owners shall be responsible for all trees between the curb and
sidewalk that abut a public street. Every owner of any tree overhanging
any street or right-of-way within the City shall prune the branches so
that such branches shall not severely obstruct the light from any street
lamp or obstruct the view of any street intersection and so that there
shall be a clear surface of 14 feet above the street surface or nine feet
above the sidewalk surface.
B. The City shall have the right to prune any tree, shrub or bush on private
property when it interferes with the proper spread of light along the
street from a streetlight or interferes with visibility of any traffic control
device or sign at intersections.
C. Each and every week that such trees remain untrimmed after receipt of
proper notice by the Director of Public Works shall be deemed a
separate and distinct violation of this section.
D. Where said notice is not complied with within 10 days after the same
has been received, the Director of Public Works may trim such trees,
§ 486-16 TREES § 492-2
492:573
§ 492-3. Permit required; arborist license; insurance requirements.
§ 492-4. Removal of trees; noncompliance; deposit.
shrubs or bushes at the expense of the owner so that they shall comply
with the provisions hereinbefore stated.
A. No person shall, without a written permit issued by the Director of
Public Works, plant, cut, prune, trim, injure or remove any living tree in
a public street (between the curb and property line) or cut, disturb or
interfere with the roots of any such tree or place or attach ropes,
cables, wire or chain or attach signs to any tree in a public street or
public property within the City.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person or firm to engage in the business or
occupation of pruning, treating or removing street or park trees within
the City without first applying for and procuring a license; provided,
however, that no license shall be required of any public service
company, including electric utilities and their agents and contractors or
City employees, doing such work in the pursuit of its public service
endeavors. Before any license shall be issued, each applicant shall first
file evidence of possession of liability insurance in the minimum
amounts of $1,000,000 for bodily injury and $1,000,000 for property
damage, indemnifying the City against any and all claims made by any
person injured or damaged as a result of the pursuit of such endeavors
as herein described.174
A. Property owners shall remove all dead, diseased, broken or decayed
trees or limbs which constitute a menace to the safety of the public.
B. Where property owners or their authorized representatives intend to
undertake the removal of a tree or trees between the sidewalk and curb
along a public street which has/have become hazardous by reason of
decay, lightening, windstorm or other physical damage or for reason of
construction purposes, the following conditions shall be met:
(1) Application for a permit shall be made at the office of the Director
of Public Works (no fee).
(2) Evidence of required insurance shall be furnished.
(3) Evidence of experience and capability shall be furnished.
C. In the event of the failure of owners to comply with this provision, the
City shall have the authority to remove such trees as warrant removal
and charge the cost of removal on the owner's property tax notice.
D. Where owners of property request the City to effect the removal of a
tree or trees, written request shall be made to the attention of the
174. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 492-2 PORT JERVIS CODE § 492-4
492:574
§ 492-5. Removal of stumps.
All stumps of street and park trees shall be removed below the surface of
the ground so that the top of the stump shall not project above the surface
of the ground.
§ 492-6. Removal or trimming for utility purposes.
§ 492-7. Tree topping.
It shall be unlawful as normal practice for any person, firm or City
department to top any street tree, park tree or other tree on public property.
"Topping" is defined as the severe cutting back of limbs to stubs larger
than three inches in diameter within the tree's crown to such a degree
so as to remove the normal canopy and disfigure the tree. Trees severely
damaged by storms or other causes or certain trees under utility wires or
other obstructions where other pruning practices are impractical may be
exempted from this section at the determination of the City Shade Tree
Commission.
Director of Public Works. Inspection of the removal work shall be made
to confirm that said trees are within the classification as set forth in
Subsection B above.
E. The owners shall submit an advance deposit at the office of the City
Clerk-Treasurer in the following amounts:
(1) Trees up to and including a diameter of 20 inches: $100.
(2) Trees in excess of 20 inches in diameter: $150.
A. Tree limbs that grow near high-voltage electrical conductors shall be
maintained clear of such conductors by the electric utility company in
compliance with any applicable franchise agreements. A utility tree
trimming policy must be reviewed by the utility company and the City
Shade Tree Commission prior to any trimming by the utility company.
B. Where tree removals are necessitated for utility purposes, including but
not necessarily limited to new installation of required utility lines,
services or supporting facilities, the utility firm shall bear the cost of
tree replacement, which shall be performed by City forces.
Replacements shall be a minimum of 2 1/2 inches in caliber.
C. In cases where extensive cutting and trimming is required for utility
lines and where said cutting extends to such a degree as to jeopardize
the life of said tree or to impair the aesthetic beauty of the same, the
utility company may be required to completely remove the same and
bear the cost of a tree replacement as hereinbefore referred to.
§ 492-4 TREES § 492-8
492:575
§ 492-8. Penalties for offenses.
Any person willfully damaging any tree, bush, shrub or other planting in any
public street, public park or any property in the care, custody and control
of the City shall, upon conviction, be subject to a fine not to exceed $5,000.
Chapter 505
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
GENERAL REFERENCES
Appearance tickets — See Ch. 8.
Police Department — See Ch. 130.
Traffic Violations Bureau — See Ch. 170.
Streets, sidewalks and public property — See
Ch. 464.
Taxicabs — See Ch. 479.
Towing — See Ch. 486.
§ 492-8 PORT JERVIS CODE § 492-8
492:576
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 505-1. Definitions; interpretation.
A. Definitions of words and phrases.
(1) The words and phrases used in this chapter shall, for the purposes
of this chapter have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by
Article 1 of the Vehicle and Traffic Law of the State of New York.
(2) The following words and phrases, which are not defined by Article
1 of the Vehicle and Traffic Law of the State of New York, shall have
the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this section for the
purposes of this chapter:
CURBLINE — The prolongation of the lateral line of a curb or, in
the absence of a curb, the lateral boundary line of the roadway.
HOLIDAYS — New Year's Day, Lincoln's Birthday, Washington's
Birthday, Memorial Day, Independence Day, Labor Day, Columbus
Day, Veterans Day, Thanksgiving Day, Christmas Day and Easter
shall be considered "holidays."
PUBLIC PARKING LOT — A plot or parcel of land or building owned
and/or leased by this City not including highways, upon or within
which the parking of vehicles is regulated by signs and/or parking
meters.
B. Word usage; interpretation.
(1) Official time standard. Whenever certain hours are named herein
or on traffic control devices, they shall mean the time standard
which is in current use in this state.
(2) Measurements. Any linear measurements specified for various
regulations contained in this chapter shall be deemed to be
approximate to the extent that such measurements and the
regulation to which they pertain shall not be affected or altered in
any way by the widening of a street, by the construction of curbs,
gutters or sidewalks or by any other action which might tend to
obliterate the point from which such measurements were originally
made. Unless otherwise indicated, measurements shall be made
from the nearest curbline of the street referred to in the location
description or, if there is no curbline, from the nearest pavement
edge.
(3) For the purposes of this chapter and the regulations adopted
pursuant thereto, the Erie-Lackawanna Railroad main line and the
streets running generally parallel thereto are deemed to run in an
east-west direction, and streets running generally at right angles
thereto are deemed to run in a north-south direction.
§ 505-1 TREES § 505-2
492:577
§ 505-2. Authority to install traffic control devices.
The Chief of Police shall provide for the installation and maintenance of
traffic control devices when and as required under the provisions of this
chapter, to make effective the provisions of this chapter, and may install and
maintain such additional traffic control devices as he may deem necessary
to regulate, warn or guide traffic under the Vehicle and Traffic Law of the
State of New York, subject to the provisions of §§ 1682 and 1684 of that law.
§ 505-3. Schedules; adoption of regulations.
§ 505-4. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 2-26-2007 by L.L. No.
2-2007; 1-28-2013 by L.L. No. 1-2013]
Every person convicted of an offense against any provision of this chapter
which is not an offense against any provision of the Vehicle and Traffic
Law of the State of New York shall be deemed guilty of a traffic infraction
and shall be punished as provided in § 1800 of the Vehicle and Traffic Law.
Such will be subject however to any additional requirements, fines and or
punishments for convictions of an offense against any provision as defined
in § 505-19.
§ 505-5. When effective.
A. For the purpose of maintaining an accurate record of all regulations
adopted under the provisions of this chapter, there is hereby
established a system of schedules, appearing as Article VII of this
chapter, in which shall be entered all regulations after adoption or
promulgation. Such schedules shall be deemed a part of the section to
which they refer. All regulations shall be adopted with reference to the
appropriate schedule as indicated in the various sections of this
chapter.
B. Pursuant to § 1603 of the Vehicle and Traffic Law, the Chief of Police of
the City of Port Jervis is hereby authorized to adopt and promulgate
regulations in accordance with and implementing the provisions of this
chapter and the Vehicle and Traffic Law and, in particular, relating to
the schedules established by this chapter. Such regulations shall
become effective only upon filing of signed copies thereof with the City
Clerk-Treasurer. Notwithstanding the delegation of such authority to
the Chief of Police, the Common Council reserves the right to adopt
such regulations as it deems advisable under this chapter and to modify
or expand the authority delegated to the Chief of Police.
A. Except those parts, if any, which are subject to approval under § 1684 of
the Vehicle and Traffic Law of the State of New York and § 46 of the
Highway Law of the State of New York, this chapter and any regulations
adopted hereunder shall take effect as provided by law.
B. Any part or parts of this chapter and any regulations adopted
hereunder which are subject to approval under § 1684 of the Vehicle
§ 505-2 PORT JERVIS CODE § 505-5
492:578
§ 505-6. Severability.
If any article, section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause or provision
of this chapter shall be adjudged by any court of competent jurisdiction
to be invalid, such adjudication shall not affect, impair or invalidate the
remainder thereof but shall be confined in its operation to the article,
section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause or provision thereof
directly involved in the controversy in which such judgment shall have been
rendered.
§ 505-7. Repealer.
All prior local laws, ordinances, regulations and rules or parts of such of the
City of Port Jervis regulating traffic and parking are hereby repealed, except
that this repeal shall not affect or prevent the prosecution or punishment
of any person for any act done or committed in violation of any local law,
ordinance, regulation or rule hereby repealed prior to the taking effect of
this chapter.
§ 505-8. Repair and storage of vehicles on public streets; penalties.
[Added 11-24-1997 by L.L. No. 8-1997]
and Traffic Law and § 46 of the Highway Law of the State of New York
shall take effect from and after the day on which approval in writing is
received from both the New York State Department of Transportation
and the New York State Department of Public Works.
A. Regulations not exclusive. The provisions of this chapter imposing a
time limit on parking or standing on a public street for the purpose of
performing maintenance on a vehicle shall not relieve any person of the
duty to observe other and more restrictive provisions prohibiting or
limiting the stopping, standing or parking of vehicles as set forth in the
New York State Vehicle and Traffic Law or the Code of the City of Port
Jervis or any New York statute or as hereinafter provided.
B. Repairing vehicle parked on street. No person, persons, firm,
partnership or corporation shall, at any hour of the day or night, make
mechanical repairs or perform any routine maintenance of any nature
or description whatsoever to any motor vehicle while said motor vehicle
is parked, stored, positioned or standing on any public street, avenue,
road or highway within the corporate limits of the City of Port Jervis.
C. Limited repair permitted. Limited repair of a vehicle is permitted if
such repair is of an emergency nature and such repair shall not last
more than 15 minutes.
D. Penalties for offenses; enforcement. Any person committing an offense
against any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be
guilty of a violation pursuant to the Penal Law of the State of New York,
punishable by a fine not exceeding $250 or by imprisonment for a term
not to exceed 15 days, or both such fine and imprisonment. The
§ 505-5 TREES § 505-8
492:579
continuation of an offense against the provisions of this chapter shall
constitute, for each day the offense is continued, a separate and distinct
offense hereunder.
§ 505-8 PORT JERVIS CODE § 505-8
492:580
ARTICLE II
Traffic Regulations
§ 505-9. Traffic control signals.
Traffic control signals shall be installed, maintained and operated at the
intersections and locations described in Schedule A (§ 505-39).
§ 505-10. Obedience to and placement of traffic control devices.
[Added 7-27-1992 by L.L. No. 6-1992]
§ 505-11. One-way roadways designated.
The streets or parts of streets described in Schedule B (§ 505-40) are
hereby designated as one-way streets, and vehicles shall proceed along
those streets only in the direction indicated.
§ 505-12. Prohibited turns at intersections.
No person shall make a turn of the kind designated (left, right, all) at any of
the locations described in Schedule C (§ 505-41) during the hours indicated
of any day.
§ 505-13. Traffic control red signal indications. [Amended
6-25-1999]
A. Every person shall obey the instructions of any official traffic control
device applicable to him placed in accordance with the provisions of the
New York State Vehicle and Traffic Law, unless otherwise directed by a
traffic or police officer, subject to the exceptions granted the driver of
an authorized emergency vehicle as described in the New York State
Vehicle and Traffic Law.
B. No violation of Subsection A above for which signs are required shall be
enforced against an alleged violator if at the time and place of the
alleged violation an official sign is not in proper position and sufficiently
legible to be seen by an ordinarily observant person.
A. Red indications. Traffic facing a steady circular red signal, unless to
make such other movement as is permitted by other indications shown
at the same time, shall stop at a clearly marked stop line, but if none,
then shall stop before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the
intersection, or in the event that there is no crosswalk at the point
nearest the intersecting roadway where the driver has a view of the
approaching traffic on the intersecting roadway before entering the
intersections described in § 505-39, Schedule A, and shall remain
standing until an indication to proceed is shown, except as provided in
Subsection B of this section.
B. Unless a sign is in place prohibiting such turn, traffic facing a steady
circular red signal may cautiously enter the intersection to make a right
§ 505-9 TREES § 505-13
492:581
§ 505-14. U-turns.
The turning of vehicles so as to proceed in the opposite direction (otherwise
known as a U-turn) is hereby prohibited on any of the streets or parts of
streets described in Schedule E (§ 505-43).
§ 505-15. Stop intersections.
The intersections described in Schedule F (§ 505-44) are hereby designated
as stop intersections, and stop signs shall be erected as indicated.
§ 505-16. Yield intersections.
The intersections described in Schedule G (§ 505-45) are hereby designated
as yield intersections, and yield signs shall be erected as indicated.
§ 505-17. Speed regulations.
The maximum speed at which vehicles may proceed on or along any streets
or highways within the City is hereby established at 30 miles per hour,
except that the speed limit for vehicles proceeding on or along those streets
or parts of streets described in Schedule H (§ 505-46) shall be as indicated
in said schedule.
§ 505-18. School speed zones.
§ 505-19. Dimensions and weights of vehicles. [Amended 1-28-2013
by L.L. No. 1-2013]
turn after stopping as required by Subsection A of this section. Such
traffic shall yield the right-of-way to pedestrians within a marked or
unmarked crosswalk at the intersection and to other traffic lawfully
using the intersection. The intersections described in Schedule D175 are
designated as "no right turn on red" intersections.
A. Within the school speed zones described in § 505-48, no person shall
operate any motor vehicle in excess of the speed indicated on any
school day between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. [Amended
4-26-1982 by L.L. No. 4-1982]
B. Said school speed zones shall include that portion of the highway which
is sign-posted to designate such zone as such and that portion of the
highway adjacent to a school building and extending not more than 300
feet along such highway in either direction from the building line of a
school abutting on such highway.
A. Limitations on certain vehicles.
(1) Except as expressly permitted by the United States or the New York
State Department of Transportation, and except as otherwise
175. Editor's Note: See § 505-42.
§ 505-13 PORT JERVIS CODE § 505-19
492:582
expressly permitted herein, or where the requirement for local
delivery will permit no alternate legal route, no person shall
operate or move or cause or knowingly permit to be operated or
moved on any public street in the City of Port Jervis any vehicle
or combination of vehicles of a size or weight exceeding the
limitations provided for in this section.
(2) No person shall operate or move, or cause or knowingly permit to
be operated or moved, on any public street in the City of Port Jervis,
an auto, truck, agricultural truck or light delivery car registered in
this state or any other state, province or nation having a combined
weight of vehicle and load in excess of the maximum gross weight
for such vehicle as stated on the application for registration. Such
maximum gross weight cannot be more than 13 tons. Violations and
penalties shall be set forth in § 505-19Q.
B. Width.
(1) The width of a vehicle, inclusive of load, shall be not more than 96
inches, plus safety devices, on any public street in the City of Port
Jervis.
(2) The provisions of Subsection B(1) of this section shall not apply to
omnibuses or buses used solely for the transportation of children to
and from school, but the width of such omnibuses shall not exceed
98 inches.
(3) Notwithstanding the provisions of Subsection B(1) of this section,
the maximum width for omnibuses or buses having a carrying
capacity of more than seven passengers shall not exceed 102
inches.
C. The height of a vehicle from the underside of tire to the top of the
vehicle, inclusive of load, shall be not more than 13 1/2 feet. Any
damage to highways, bridges or highway structures resulting from the
use of a vehicle exceeding 13 feet in height where such excess height is
the proximate cause of the accident shall be compensated for by the
owner and operator of such vehicle.
D. Length.
(1) The length of a single vehicle, inclusive of load and bumpers, shall
not be more than 40 feet unless otherwise provided in this
subsection.
(2) The length of a semitrailer or trailer shall not exceed 48 feet except
as provided in this subsection; provided, however, that the length of
any trailer or semitrailer being operated in combination with
another trailer or semitrailer shall not exceed 28 1/2 feet.
§ 505-19 TREES § 505-19
492:583
(3) The length of buses having a carrying capacity of more than seven
passengers shall not exceed 45 feet, except that the length of
articulated buses shall not exceed 62 feet.
(4) When a vehicle has a crane, boom or other similar device attached
or is loaded with any material, and such crane, boom, device or
material extends four feet or more beyond the front or rear of such
vehicle, such vehicle shall be provided with a red flag not less than
24 inches square by day and a red light visible from the rear and an
amber light visible from the front for a distance of at least 500 feet
by night on the extreme end of the extending portion of such crane,
boom, device or material.
(5) The provisions of this subsection shall not apply to fire vehicles.
(6) It shall be unlawful for any owner to permit the operation of, or for
any person to drive or operate, a vehicle in excess of 40 feet or 13
tons, along, over or through a public street or highway in the City of
Port Jervis, unless said public street or highway is designated as a
street or highway adequate to handle vehicles exceeding the length
or weight as designated in this subsection.
(7) The following public streets or highways in the City of Port Jervis
are designated as capable of handling vehicles in excess of 40 feet
or 13 tons:
(a) Culvert Street;
(b) Kingston Avenue;
(c) Pike Street;
(d) East Main Street;
(e) Park Avenue; and
(f) West Main Street from the intersection with Pike Street to the
intersection with Park Avenue.
(8) All trucks, tractors and tractor-trailer combinations in excess of
five tons gross weight are hereby excluded from the streets or parts
of streets described in Schedule K (§ 505-49).
(9) Subsection D(6), (7), and (8) shall not apply to nor shall they affect
vehicles that are then being used for local delivery and/or pickup of
merchandise or property, and shall not apply to municipal vehicles,
or to official school buses that are then being used strictly for the
pickup and discharge of students.
E. Additional restriction on length; exceptions.
(1) The total length of a combination of vehicles, inclusive of load and
bumpers, shall not be more than 65 feet.
§ 505-19 PORT JERVIS CODE § 505-19
492:584
(2) The provisions of Subsections D(1) through (7) and E(1) of this
section shall not apply to:
(a) Vehicles of a corporation which are subject to the jurisdiction
of the Interstate Commerce Commission, the Public Service
Commission or other regulatory body and are used in the
construction, reconstruction, repair or maintenance of its
property or facilities, provided that any such vehicle complies
with the safety requirements of the laws and regulations of the
United States and of New York State pertaining to over-length
vehicles.
(b) Vehicles hauling poles, girders, columns or other similar
objects of excess length, provided that any such vehicle
complies with the safety requirements of the laws and
regulations of the United States and of New York State
pertaining to such over-length vehicles.
(c) Fire vehicles.
(d) Any vehicle or combination of vehicles which is disabled and
unable to proceed under its own power and is being towed for
a distance not in excess of 10 miles for the purpose of repairs
or removal from the highway.
(3) Notwithstanding the provisions of Subsection E(1) of this section, a
bumper overhang of not more than a total of three feet on the front
and four feet on the rear of the vehicle shall be permitted.
F. In determining the number of wheels and axles on any vehicle or
combination of vehicles within the meaning of this section, only two
wheels shall be counted for each axle, and axles which are less than 46
inches apart from center to center shall be counted as one axle.
However, in the case of multiple tires or multiple wheels, the sum of the
widths of all the tires on a wheel or combination of wheels shall be
taken in determining tire width.
G. Subject to the provisions of the section of this chapter governing
maximum vehicle gross weights, the weight per inch width of tire on
any one wheel of a single vehicle or a combination of vehicles equipped
with pneumatic tires, when loaded, shall be not more than 800 pounds.
H. Subject to the provisions of the section of this chapter governing
maximum vehicle gross weights, the weight on any one wheel of a
single vehicle or a combination of vehicles equipped with pneumatic
tires, when loaded, shall be not more than 11,200 pounds.
I. Subject to the provisions of the section of this chapter governing
maximum vehicle gross weights, the weight on any one axle of a single
vehicle equipped with pneumatic tires, when loaded, shall be not more
than 22,400 pounds.
§ 505-19 TREES § 505-19
492:585
J. Subject to the provisions of the section of this chapter governing
maximum vehicle gross weights, the weight on any two consecutive
axles of a single vehicle or a combination of vehicles equipped with
pneumatic tires, when loaded, and when such axles are spaced less
than eight feet from center to center, shall be not more than 36,000
pounds, except that where axles are spaced eight feet or greater but
less than 10 feet, the weight on those two axles shall not exceed that
permitted by Subsection K(2) of this section and, in addition, shall not
exceed 40,000 pounds. Axles shall be counted as provided in Subsection
F of this section.
K. Subject to the provisions of the section of this chapter governing
maximum vehicle gross weights, a single vehicle, or a combination of
vehicles having three axles or more and equipped with pneumatic tires,
when loaded, may have a total weight on all axles not to exceed 34,000
pounds, plus 1,000 pounds for each foot and major fraction of a foot of
the distance from the center of the foremost axle to the center of the
rearmost axle. Axles are to be counted as provided in Subsection F of
this section. In no case, however, shall the total weight exceed 80,000
pounds. For any vehicles or combination of vehicles having a total gross
weight less than 71,000 pounds, the higher of the following shall apply:
(1) The total weight on all axles shall not exceed 34,000 pounds, plus
1,000 pounds for each foot and major fraction of a foot of the
distance from the center of the foremost axle to the center of the
rearmost axle; or
(2) Weight formula.
(a) The overall gross weight on a group of two or more consecutive
axles shall not exceed the weight produced by the application
of the following formula, except that two consecutive sets of
tandem axles may carry a gross load not to exceed 34,000
pounds, provided that the overall distance between the first
and last axles of such consecutive sets of tandem axles is 36
feet or more.
W = 500 [(LxN)/(N-1) + (12xN)+36]
Where W = The overall gross weight on any group of two
or more consecutive axles to the nearest 500
pounds
L = The distance, in feet, from the center of the
foremost axle to the center of the rearmost
axle of any group of two or more consecutive
axles
N = The number of axles in the group under
consideration
(b) For any vehicle or combination of vehicles having a total gross
weight of 71,000 pounds or greater, this Subsection K(2) shall
§ 505-19 PORT JERVIS CODE § 505-19
492:586
apply to determine maximum gross weight which is permitted
hereunder, subject to the provisions of the subsection of this
section governing maximum vehicle gross weights.
L. No vehicle shall be operated on the public streets or highways of the
City of Port Jervis other than on pneumatic tires.
M. For the purpose of this section, the width of pneumatic tires shall be
ascertained by measuring the greatest width of the tire casing when the
tire is inflated.
N. No person shall operate or move a vehicle or a combination of vehicles
over, on or through any bridge or structure on any highway if the
weight of such vehicle, or combination of vehicles, and load, is greater
than the posted capacity of the structure or exceeds the height of the
posted clearance as shown by an official sign.
O. If a vehicle or combination of vehicles is operated in violation of this
section, an appearance ticket or summons may be issued to the
registrant of the vehicle or, if a combination of vehicles, to the
registrant of the hauling vehicle, rather than the operator. In the event
that the vehicle is operated by a person other than the registrant, any
appearance ticket or summons issued to the registrant shall be served
upon the operator, who shall be deemed the agent of the registrant only
for the purpose of receiving such appearance ticket or summons. In
addition, a notice containing all pertinent information relating to the
charge which is contained on the summons or appearance ticket shall
be mailed by or on behalf of the person who issued the appearance
ticket or summons to the registrant at the address given on the
registration certificate for the vehicle or, if no registration certificate is
produced at the time the appearance ticket or summons is issued, to the
address of the registrant on file with the Department of Motor Vehicles
of the state in which the vehicle is registered, within five days after the
date of issuance of the appearance ticket or summons, but at least five
days before the return date specified on the appearance ticket or
summons. Proof of mailing to the registrant under this subsection shall
be filed with the court in which the appearance ticket or summons is
returnable on or before the return date. The provisions of this
subsection shall not apply to owner-operators of any motor vehicle or to
any motor vehicle or trailer which is registered in the name of a person
whose principal business is the leasing or rental of motor vehicles or
trailers unless the lease or rental of motor vehicles or trailers is being
operated by an employee of the registrant or for a community of
interest other than the lease or rental agreement between the parties to
the lease or rental agreement.
P. In any case wherein the charge laid before the court alleges a violation
of this section, any plea of guilty thereafter entered in satisfaction of
such charge must include at least a plea of guilty to a violation of one of
the subsections of this section. No other disposition by plea of guilty to
any other charge in satisfaction of such shall be authorized; provided,
§ 505-19 TREES § 505-19
492:587
however, that if the prosecuting attorney or prosecuting police officer,
upon reviewing the available evidence, determines that the charge of a
violation of this section is not warranted, he or she may consent, and
the court may allow, a disposition by plea of guilty to that or another
charge in satisfaction of such charge; provided, however, that the court
must impose at least the minimum fine as authorized in this section for
the offense.
Q. Violations and penalties for offenses.
(1) A violation of the provisions of this section shall be punishable by a
fine of not less than $200 nor more than $500 or by imprisonment
for not more than 30 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment,
for the first offense; by a fine of not less than $500 nor more than
$1,000 or by imprisonment for not more than 60 days, or by both
such fine and imprisonment, for the second or subsequent offense;
and in both cases plus the fine provided in Subsection Q(2) of this
section.
(2) A violation of the provisions of this section by any vehicle or
combination of vehicles whose weight exceeds the weight
limitation as set forth in any of these sections, or the weight
limitations specified by a permit issued by the United States or
New York State Department of Transportation, shall be punishable
by fines levied on the registered owner of the vehicle or vehicles,
whether or not at the time of the violation the vehicle was in the
charge of the registered owner or his agent or lessee, in
accordance with the following schedule (which fines shall be in
addition to the fines as prescribed in Subsection Q(1) of this
section):
Excess Total
Weight1
(pounds)
Excess Total
Weight
(pounds)
Greater Than
Less Than or Equal
To Amount of Fine
0 2,000 $50
2,000 3,000 $75
3,000 4,000 $100
4,000 5,000 $200
5,000 6,000 $300
6,000 7,000 $400
7,000 8,000 $500
8,000 9,000 $600
9,000 10,000 $700
10,000 15,000 $1,200
§ 505-19 PORT JERVIS CODE § 505-19
492:588
Excess Total
Weight1
(pounds)
Excess Total
Weight
(pounds)
Greater Than
Less Than or Equal
To Amount of Fine
15,000 20,000 $1,700
20,000 25,000 $2,200
25,000 30,000 $2,700
Greater than 30,000 $2,700, plus $0.06/
pound2
NOTES:
1 Where the excess total weight is greater than the limits specified
by a United States or New York State Department of
Transportation excess weight permit, the permit shall, for the
purposes of computing the fine, be deemed void, and the amount
of fine shall be determined in accordance with the maximum
weight which would have been in effect for the operation of such
vehicle if the permit to exceed such maximum weight had not been
issued.
2 The $0.06 per pound in addition to the $2,700 is for each pound
greater than 30,000 pounds.
(3) A violation of the provisions of this section by any vehicle or
combination of vehicles whose weight exceeds the weight
limitations specified by a permit issued by the United States or
New York State Department of Transportation shall be punishable
by fines levied on the registered owner of the vehicle or vehicles,
whether or not at the time of the violation the vehicle was in the
charge of the registered owner or his agent or lessee, in
accordance with the following schedule (which fines shall be in
addition to the fines as prescribed in Subsection Q(1) of this
section):
Percentage of
Excess Weight
Greater Than1
Percentage of Excess
Weight Less Than or
Equal To Amount of Fine
0% 5.0% $100
5.0% 10.0% $200
10.0% 15.0% $350
15.0% 20.0% $600
20.0% 25.0% $1,000
25.0% 30.0% $1,600
§ 505-19 TREES § 505-19
492:589
§ 505-20. Lane designations.
Lanes are hereby designated upon the streets or parts of streets described
in Schedule L (§ 505-50), to be used exclusively as indicated (left turn, right
turn, through traffic, etc.) in said schedule.
Percentage of
Excess Weight
Greater Than1
Percentage of Excess
Weight Less Than or
Equal To Amount of Fine
30.0% $2,450
NOTE:
1 Where the excess axle or axles' weight is greater than the limits
specified by a permit issued by the United States or New York
State Department of Transportation, the permit shall, for the
purposes of computing the fine, be deemed void, and the amount
of the fine shall be determined in accordance with the maximum
weight which would have been in effect for the operation of such
vehicle if the permit to exceed such maximum weight had not
been issued.
(4) In connection with the weighing of a vehicle or combination of
vehicles, if it is found that there is a violation of Subsection K and
also of Subsection I or J, or both Subsections I and J, of this section,
there shall be a single fine imposed, and the maximum amount of
such fine shall not exceed the highest fine that could be imposed
under this section.
(5) The court may impose any sentence authorized by this section;
provided, however, that any such sentence must include a fine as
provided in this section.
(6) All fines collected as a result of the above schedule shall remain the
property of the City of Port Jervis.
R. Federal motor carrier safety regulations.
(1) No person shall operate or move or cause or knowingly permit to be
operated or moved, on any public street in the City of Port Jervis,
any vehicle in violation of Federal Motor Carrier Safety
Regulations, Parts 40, 382, 383 and 390 through 397.
(2) Penalties for offenses. A violation of this subsection shall be
penalized as set forth in § 505-19Q(1) and (2).
(3) All fines collected as a result of a violation of this subsection of the
Code shall remain the property of the City of Port Jervis.
§ 505-19 PORT JERVIS CODE § 505-21
492:590
§ 505-21. No-passing zones.
The streets or parts of streets described in Schedule M (§ 505-51) are
hereby designated as no-passing zones in which markings shall indicate that
overtaking and passing or driving to the left of or crossing such markings
would be especially hazardous.
§ 505-22. Manner of operation of vehicles.
Every person operating a motor vehicle upon public streets shall drive such
vehicle in a careful and prudent manner so as not to endanger the property
of another or the life or limb of any person.
§ 505-21 TREES § 505-22
492:591

ARTICLE III
Stopping, Standing and Parking
§ 505-23. Application of article.
The provisions of this article shall apply except when it is necessary to
stop a vehicle to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the
directions of a police officer or official traffic control device.
§ 505-24. Manner of parking.
Wherever a space shall be marked off for the parking of an individual
vehicle on any street, highway, public parking lot or private parking lot that
is open to the general public, every vehicle there parked shall be parked
within the lines or markings bounding such space.
§ 505-25. Observance of signs and markings required.
When signs, markings or other devices are erected giving notice thereof, it
shall be unlawful for any person to stop, stand or park a motor vehicle upon
streets or parts of streets so designated by such signs, markings or other
devices.
§ 505-26. Designation of areas and restrictions. [Amended
4-28-1997 by L.L. No. 4-1997; 9-25-2000; 3-26-2007]
The stopping, standing or parking of vehicles in the locations described in
Schedule P (§ 505-54) is hereby restricted as follows:
A. In locations designated as "no stopping," the stopping of vehicles is
hereby prohibited at all times or during the hours or time periods
indicated, if any. The fine for violating § 505-26A shall be $40.
[Amended 5-14-2018, effective 7-1-2018]
B. In locations designated as "no standing," the standing of vehicles is
hereby prohibited at all times or during the hours or time periods
indicated, if any. The fine for violating § 505-26B shall be $40.
[Amended 5-14-2018, effective 7-1-2018]
C. In locations designated as "no parking," the parking of vehicles is
prohibited at all times or during the hours or time periods indicated, if
any. The fine for violating § 505-26C shall be $40. [Amended
5-14-2018, effective 7-1-2018]
D. In locations designated as "limited parking," the parking of vehicles is
hereby prohibited for a longer period of time than that specified during
the hours or time periods indicated, if any. The fine for violating
§ 505-26D shall be $40. [Amended 5-14-2018, effective 7-1-2018]
E. In locations designated as "no parking -- commercial," the parking of
commercial vehicles is prohibited at all times or during the hours or
§ 505-23 TREES § 505-26
492:593
time periods indicated, if any. The fine for violating § 505-26E shall be
$40. [Amended 5-14-2018, effective 7-1-2018]
F. In locations designated as "loading zones," the standing or parking of
vehicles, except for the express purpose of loading or unloading
merchandise and goods, is hereby prohibited. The fine for violating
§ 505-26F shall be $40. [Amended 5-14-2018, effective 7-1-2018]
G. In locations designated as "taxi stands," the standing or parking of
vehicles other than taxis is hereby prohibited. Taxis using such stands
shall not be left unattended and shall be subject to all other vehicle and
traffic regulations of the City. The fine for violating § 505-26G shall be
$40. [Amended 5-14-2018, effective 7-1-2018]
H. In locations designated as "bus stops," the standing or parking of
vehicles other than buses is hereby prohibited. The fine for violating
§ 505-26H shall be $40. [Amended 5-14-2018, effective 7-1-2018]
I. In locations designated for "angle parking," vehicles shall be parked
only at the angle designated.
J. Handicapped parking. In locations of any parking area which is
designated for "Handicapped Parking," "Parking for Handicapped Only"
or the like, the parking or standing of vehicles is prohibited at all times
unless the proper permit or registration as set forth in § 1203-c,
Subdivision 4, of the New York State Vehicle and Traffic Law has been
obtained and is properly displayed. Any person who parks in spaces
clearly marked for use by the handicapped in accordance with said
§ 1203-c without said permit or registration shall be subject to a fine of
not less than $65 nor more than $90 for the first offense and $90 to
$165 for the second (or repeated offenses thereafter) occurring within a
period of two years within the City of Port Jervis. [Amended
5-14-2018, effective 7-1-2018]
K. In locations on the roadway side of any vehicle stopped, standing or
parked at the edge of a curb or street, as set forth in § 1202(a)1a of the
New York State Vehicle and Traffic Law. The fine for violating § 505-26K
shall be $65. [Amended 5-14-2018, effective 7-1-2018]
L. In locations on a sidewalk, as set forth in § 1202(a)1b of the New York
State Vehicle and Traffic Law. The fine for violating § 505-26L shall be
$65. [Amended 5-14-2018, effective 7-1-2018]
M. In locations on a crosswalk, as set forth in § 1202(a)1d of the New York
State Vehicle and Traffic Law. The fine for violating § 505-26M shall be
$65. [Amended 5-14-2018, effective 7-1-2018]
N. In locations in front of a public or private driveway, as set forth in
§ 1202(a)2a of the New York State Vehicle and Traffic Law. The fine for
violating § 505-26N shall be $65. [Amended 5-14-2018, effective
7-1-2018]
§ 505-26 PORT JERVIS CODE § 505-26
492:594
§ 505-27. Public parking lots.
O. In locations within 20 feet of the driveway entrance to any fire station
and, when on the side of the street opposite to the entrance of any fire
station, within 75 feet of said entrance, when properly signposted,
unless a different distance is indicated by official signs, markings or
parking meters as set forth in § 1202(a)2d of the New York State Vehicle
and Traffic Law, respectively. The fine for violating § 505-26O shall be
$65. [Amended 5-14-2018, effective 7-1-2018]
P. In locations within 15 feet of a fire hydrant, except when such vehicle is
attended by a licensed operator or chauffeur who is seated in the front
seat and who can immediately move such vehicle in case of emergency,
unless a different distance is indicated by official signs, markings or
parking meters, as set forth in § 1202(a)3b of the New York State
Vehicle and Traffic Law. The fine for violating § 505-26P shall be $65.
[Amended 5-14-2018, effective 7-1-2018]
Q. In locations on the left-hand side curb of a two-way street as set forth in
§ 1203(a) of the New York State Vehicle and Traffic Law. The fine for
violating § 505-26Q shall be $40. [Amended 5-14-2018, effective
7-1-2018]
R. No person shall park, stop or stand a vehicle which fails to display the
proper, valid license plates, as required by § 402 of the New York State
Vehicle and Traffic Law. The fine for violating § 505-26R shall be $40.
[Amended 5-14-2018, effective 7-1-2018]
S. No person shall park, stop or stand a vehicle which fails to display the
proper, valid registration sticker, as required by § 403, Subdivision 1, of
the New York State Vehicle and Traffic Law. The fine for violating
§ 505-26S shall be $65. [Amended 5-14-2018, effective 7-1-2018]
T. No person shall park, stop or stand a vehicle in such manner as to
unreasonably interfere with the removal of snow. The fine for violating
§ 505-26T shall be $40. [Amended 5-14-2018, effective 7-1-2018]
U. No person shall park, stop or stand a vehicle which fails to display a
current New York State inspection sticker, as required by § 301 of the
New York State Vehicle and Traffic Law. The fine for violating
§ 505-26U, when the displayed inspection sticker is less than 60 days
past due, shall be $40. The fine for violating § 505-26U, when the
displayed inspection sticker is more than 60 days past due, shall be $65.
[Amended 5-14-2018, effective 7-1-2018]
A. The areas owned or leased by the City of Port Jervis and described in
Schedule Q (§ 505-55) are public parking lots, and the stopping,
standing or parking of vehicles in such lots shall be subject to the
regulations and restrictions indicated in said schedule.
B. Any person who parks in such manner as to be in violation of the
regulations and rules as set forth in said Schedule Q (§ 505-55) shall be
§ 505-26 TREES § 505-27
492:595
§ 505-28. Overnight parking; continuous parking prohibited.
[Amended 4-26-1982 by L.L. No. 4-1982; 11-25-1996 by L.L. No.
20-1996; 4-28-1997 by L.L. No. 4-1997; 10-27-2000; 11-25-2002 by
L.L. No. 6-2002; 3-26-2007; 5-14-2018, effective 7-1-2018]
§ 505-29. Truck tractors and tractor-trailer combinations parking
on City streets prohibited. [Added 12-9-2002 by L.L. No. 7-2002;
amended 3-26-2007; 4-13-2009 by L.L. No. 4-2009]
Truck tractors, truck cabs and/or tractor-trailer body combinations,
whether separate or combined, in excess of 22 feet shall be prohibited from
parking on City streets, in City parking lots, or on City owned property.
Vehicles parked in violation of this section shall be subject to the removal
and storage provisions of §§ 505-33 through 505-35 of this chapter.
fined $45. [Added 4-28-1997 by L.L. No. 4-1997; amended
3-26-2007; 5-14-2018, effective 7-1-2018]
A. From December 1 through April 1, no vehicles shall park on any City
street or highway between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. The fine
for violating § 505-28A shall be $40.
B. No vehicle shall be parked on any City street or highway for a
continuous period of more than 24 hours. The fine for violating
§ 505-28B shall be $40.
§ 505-27 PORT JERVIS CODE § 505-29
492:596
ARTICLE IV
Private Roads and Parking Areas
§ 505-30. Private roads.
Pursuant to §§ 1640, 1641 and 1643 of the Vehicle and Traffic Law of the
State of New York, private roads open to public motor vehicle traffic in the
City of Port Jervis shall be subject to the provisions of this chapter, and
traffic and parking in such roads may be regulated by the Chief of Police as
otherwise provided in this chapter.
§ 505-31. Private parking areas and driveways.
As authorized by § 1640-a of the Vehicle and Traffic Law of the State of New
York and pursuant to the written request of the owner, the person in general
charge of the operation and control or the Chief of the Fire Department,
the Chief of Police is hereby authorized to regulate traffic and parking in
the private parking areas and driveways described in Schedule R (§ 505-56).
The rules and regulations in effect in such areas shall be as indicated in said
schedule.
§ 505-32. Disclaimer.
The regulation of traffic and parking on private roads, parking areas and
driveways pursuant to this article shall in no way obligate the City of
Port Jervis, New York, its employees, representatives, officers or agents
to otherwise maintain, regulate, operate, repair, construct, reconstruct or
in any other manner be responsible for any private road, parking area or
driveway within the City.
§ 505-30 TREES § 505-32
492:597

ARTICLE V
Removal and Storage of Vehicles
§ 505-33. Authority to impound vehicles.
§ 505-34. Storage and charges. [Amended 7-27-1992 by L.L. No.
5-1992]
After removal of any vehicle as provided in this article, the Chief of Police
may cause such vehicle to be stored in a suitable place at the expense of
the owner. Such owner or person in charge of the vehicle may redeem the
same upon payment to the person with whom stored, of the amount of all
expenses actually and necessarily incurred in effecting such removal, such
charges not to exceed $45 for removal and $30 per day or fraction thereof
for storage.
§ 505-35. Notice of removal.
It shall be the duty of the Chief of Police to ascertain to the extent possible
the owner of the vehicle or the person having same in charge and to notify
him of the removal and disposition of such vehicle and of the amount which
will be required to redeem same.
§ 505-36. Abandoned vehicles. [Added 11-24-2003 by L.L. No.
7-2003]
Section 1224(3)(c) of the Vehicle and Traffic Law of the State of New York
regulating abandoned vehicles now provides that ownership of abandoned
vehicles, if unclaimed, shall vest in the local authority or municipality
10 days after the date that notice is given to the last owner of such
vehicle by the local authority. The purpose of this section is to change the
requirements as set forth in § 1224(3)(c) of the Vehicle and Traffic Law of
the State of New York to provide that ownership of said abandoned vehicles,
if unclaimed, shall vest in the tow operator, salvage operator, dismantler
A. When any vehicle is parked or abandoned on any highway or public
parking lot within this City during a snowstorm, flood, fire or other
public emergency which affects that portion of the public highway or
public parking lot upon which said vehicle is parked or abandoned, said
vehicle may be removed under the direction of the Chief of Police of the
City of Port Jervis.
B. When any vehicle is found unattended on any highway or public parking
lot within the City where said vehicle constitutes an obstruction to
traffic, said vehicle may be removed under the direction of the Chief of
Police.
C. When any vehicle is parked or abandoned on any highway or public
parking lot within this City where stopping, standing or parking is
prohibited, said vehicle may be removed under the direction of the
Chief of Police.
§ 505-33 TREES § 505-36
492:599
or junkyard owner in possession of the vehicle at the time of the notice.
Further, the tow operator, salvage operator, dismantler or junkyard owner
shall have the responsibility to give the notice, acquire ownership and make
disposal of the abandoned vehicle as required in Subdivision 3 and all other
pertinent paragraphs of § 1224 of the Vehicle and Traffic Law of the State
of New York.
§ 505-36 PORT JERVIS CODE § 505-36
492:600
ARTICLE VI
Miscellaneous Regulations
§ 505-37. Safety zones.
Safety zones are hereby designated in the locations described in Schedule
S (§ 505-57).
§ 505-38. Obstructing removal of snow and ice.
It shall be unlawful to delay, hinder or obstruct any vehicle or equipment
engaged in the operation of snowplowing or snow removal upon the City
streets. After a precipitation of snow of three inches or more and thereafter
until the streets are plowed and clear of snow, it shall be unlawful for any
person to park any vehicle upon any City street while said street is being
plowed or cleared unless such vehicle is attended by a person capable of
operating it. The owner or person in charge or in control of any vehicle
standing in any street shall move or cause the same to be moved so as not
to be in the path of the equipment clearing the streets of snow.
§ 505-37 TREES § 505-38
492:601

ARTICLE VII
Schedules176
§ 505-39. Schedule A: Traffic Control Signals. [Amended 2-27-1991;
5-17-2000]
In accordance with the provisions of § 505-9, traffic control signals shall
be installed, maintained and operated at the following intersections and
locations:
Intersection (Location)
East Main Street, Fowler Street and Kingston Avenue
East Main Street and Jersey Avenue [Added 2-26-2007 by L.L. No.
2-2007]
East Main Street and Minisink Avenue
East Main Street and North Maple Avenue
East Main Street, Pike Street, Orange Street and West Main Street
East Main Street and South Maple Avenue
Kingston Avenue and Hamilton Street
Kingston Avenue, Ryan Street and Route 209 South (flashing yellow/red
signal) [Amended 2-25-2002]
North Maple Avenue railroad tunnel (flashing red signal at both
entrances) [Added 2-25-2002]
Pike Street and King Street
West Main Street and Park Avenue (flashing yellow signal) [Amended
2-25-2002]
§ 505-40. Schedule B: One-Way Streets.
In accordance with the provisions of § 505-11, the following-described
streets or parts of streets are designated as one-way streets in the direction
indicated:
Name of Street
Direction of
Travel Limits
Banach Circle [Added
7-23-2002]
South From Pike Street to McArthur
Circle
Barclay Street [Added
6-9-1998]
North From East Main Street to
Patterson Street
Cole Street South From East Main Street to Ball
Street
176. Editor's Note: The format of these schedules was established by Local Law No. 3-1981
which enacted this chapter. The original schedule entries were adopted by resolution of
the Chief of Police at the same time as the enactment of the local law adopting this
chapter (9-28-1981) pursuant to the provisions of § 505-3 of this chapter. Subsequent
amendments are noted where applicable.
§ 505-39 TREES § 505-40
492:603
Name of Street
Direction of
Travel Limits
Culvert Street North From Kingston Avenue to the
northerly intersection of
Kingston Avenue and Ryan
Street
Front Street West From Fowler Street to Jersey
Avenue
Kingston Avenue South From Ryan Street to the
southerly intersection of
Culvert Street and Kingston
Avenue
North Broome Street West From Sussex Street to Pike
Street
Pike Street North From King Street to Railroad
Avenue
Railroad Avenue East From Pike Street to First
Street
South Broome Street East From Pike Street to Sussex
Street
Water Street [Added
6-9-1998]
West From the east end of the
channelized island west to
Lumber Street/north side of
island
West Main Street [Added
3-1-2010]
West From West Main Street to
Hudson Street in front of 27
West Main Street
§ 505-41. Schedule C: Prohibited Turns at Intersections.
In accordance with the provisions of § 505-12, no person shall make a turn
of the kind designated below at any of the following locations during the
hours indicated of any day:
Name of Street
Direction of
Travel
Prohibited
Turn At Intersection of
Ball Street [Repealed 4-22-2002]
Ball Street West Left Pike Street
East Main Street East Left North Maple Avenue
Hammond Street West Left Pike Street
K Mart Plaza exit driveway [Repealed 12-22-2011]
Middletown Savings
Bank exit driveway
[Added 11-18-1993]
North Left East Main Street
§ 505-40 PORT JERVIS CODE § 505-41
492:604
Name of Street
Direction of
Travel
Prohibited
Turn At Intersection of
Pike Street North Left Hammond Street
Extension
Pike Street [Repealed 4-22-2002]
Union Street [Added
4-22-2002]
West Left Ferry Street
§ 505-42. Schedule D: Prohibited Turns on Red Signals. [Amended
6-25-1999]
In accordance with the provisions of Subsection B of § 505-13, no traffic
facing a steady circular red signal shall make a right turn on red at the
following intersections:
Intersection (Location)
East Main Street, Fowler Street and Kingston Avenue
East Main Street, Pike Street, Orange Street and West Main Street
Kingston Avenue and Hamilton Street
§ 505-43. Schedule E: U-Turns.
In accordance with the provisions of § 505-14, no person shall make a Uturn
at any of the following locations:
Name of Street Location
Kellogg Avenue (east side) [Added
5-14-2001]
90 feet north of East Main Street
Pike Street [Added 5-14-2001] 15 feet north of Hammond Street
§ 505-44. Schedule F: Stop Intersections. [Amended 3-2-1990]
In accordance with the provisions of § 505-15, the following-described
intersections are designated as stop intersections:
Stop Sign on
Direction of
Travel Intersecting Street
Ada Street [Added
3-13-1995]
North Erie Street
Ada Street [Added
1-21-2000]
South Erie Street
Ada Street South West Main Street
Allen Street [Added
3-13-1995]
North Erie Street
Allen Street [Added
1-21-2000]
South Erie Street
§ 505-41 TREES § 505-44
492:605
Stop Sign on
Direction of
Travel Intersecting Street
Allen Street South West Main Street
Ball Street [Added
3-13-1995]
East East Main Street
Ball Street [Added
3-13-1995]
East Fowler Street
Ball Street (4-way)
[Added 2-25-2002]
East Owen Street
Ball Street (4-way)
[Added 7-17-2008]
East Seward Avenue
Ball Street (4-way)
[Added 5-2-2003]
East Sussex Street
Ball Street (4-way)
[Added 2-25-2002]
West Owen Street
Ball Street (4-way)
[Added 7-17-2008]
West Seward Avenue
Ball Street (4-way)
[Added 5-2-2003]
West Sussex Street
Barcelow Street [Added
3-13-1995]
East Pennsylvania Avenue
Barcelow Street [Added
3-13-1995]
West Fowler Street
Barcelow Street [Added
3-13-1995]
West Pennsylvania Avenue
Beach Road [Added
3-13-1995]
West Kingston Avenue
Bennett Street North Patterson Street
Bennett Street South Minisink Avenue
Brooklyn Street [Added
3-13-1995]
West Orange Street
Brown Street South Water Street
Bruce Street [Added
3-13-1995]
West Kingston Avenue
Buckley Street [Added
3-13-1995]
North West Main Street
Buckley Street [Added
3-13-1995]
South West Main Street
Cahoonzie Street East Glass Street
Cahoonzie Street (4-way)
[Added 6-18-2007]
West Diane Place
§ 505-44 PORT JERVIS CODE § 505-44
492:606
Stop Sign on
Direction of
Travel Intersecting Street
Canal Street [Added
3-13-1995]
North Hamilton Street
Canal Street [Added
3-13-1995]
North Orange Street
Canal Street South Hamilton Street
Canal Street [Added
3-13-1995]
South Orange Street
Canal Street [Added
3-13-1995]
South West Main Street
Catherine Street (4-way)
[Added 3-13-1995;
amended 9-8-2000]
North Pine Street
Catherine Street [Added
10-20-1993]
South Mary Street
Cedar Street North Reservoir Avenue
Cedar Street [Added
9-17-1998]
South Elmendorf Street
Center Street North Erie Street
Center Street [Amended
3-13-1995]
South West Main Street
Charles Street [Added
3-13-1995]
South Richard Street
Chestnut Street [Added
3-13-1995]
East South Street
Chestnut Street [Added
3-13-1995]
West North Street
Church Street [Added
3-13-1995]
North Ball Street
Church Street [Added
3-13-1995]
North Barcelow Street
Church Street [Added
3-13-1995]
North East Main Street
Church Street [Added
3-13-1995]
North Franklin Street
Church Street (4-way)
[Added 3-13-1995;
amended 12-4-2007]
North Front Street
Church Street [Added
3-13-1995]
North Hammond Street
§ 505-44 TREES § 505-44
492:607
Stop Sign on
Direction of
Travel Intersecting Street
Church Street [Added
2-25-2002]
North Orchard Street
Church Street [Added
3-13-1995]
South Ball Street
Church Street [Added
3-13-1995]
South Barcelow Street
Church Street [Added
3-13-1995]
South Franklin Street
Church Street (4-way)
[Added 3-13-1995;
amended 12-4-2007]
South Front Street
Church Street [Added
3-13-1995]
South Hammond Street
Church Street [Added
2-25-2002]
South Hill Street
Church Street [Added
3-13-1995]
South Jersey Avenue
Clark Street South Washington Avenue
Clark Street West West Main Street
Coleman Street South West Main Street
Cole Street [Added
3-13-1995]
North Ball Street
Cole Street [Added
3-13-1995]
South Ball Street
Cole Street [Added
3-13-1995]
South Jersey Avenue
Court Helaine [Added
3-23-1998]
North Cahoonzie Street
Court Helaine [Added
3-23-1998]
South Robert Street
Crawford Street West Orange Street
Cross Street [Added
3-13-1995]
East North Orange Street
Cross Street [Added
3-13-1995]
West Maiden Lane
Delaware Street North West Main Street
Diane Place East Glass Street
Diane Place South Cahoonzie Street
Division Street West Fowler Street
§ 505-44 PORT JERVIS CODE § 505-44
492:608
Stop Sign on
Direction of
Travel Intersecting Street
DuBois Street [Added
5-6-1993]
East Broad Street
East Broome Street East Elizabeth Street
East Broome Street
[Added 3-13-1995]
West Sussex Street
East View Place [Added
3-23-1998]
West Elizabeth Street
Elizabeth Street [Added
3-13-1995]
North East Main Street
Elizabeth Street South East Broome Street
Elizabeth Street South Ridge Avenue
Elmendorf Street East Hudson Street
Erie Street West Ralph Street
Farnum Street [Added
3-23-1998]
North Hamilton Street
Farnum Street [Added
3-13-1995]
South Hamilton Street
Farnum Street [Added
3-23-1998]
South Johnson Avenue
Ferguson Avenue [Added
3-13-1995]
South East Main Street
First Street [Added
7-16-1993]
North King Street
First Street [Added
7-16-1993]
South King Street
Fossard Street South West Main Street
Fowler Street [Added
9-17-1998]
North Jersey Avenue
Fowler Street [Added
3-13-1995]
South Jersey Avenue
Francis Street [Added
3-13-1995]
North Erie Street
Francis Street South West Main Street
Franklin Street [Added
3-13-1995]
East Fowler Street
Franklin Street East Owen Street
Front Street (4-way)
[Added 12-4-2007]
East Church Street
Front Street East Owen Street
§ 505-44 TREES § 505-44
492:609
Stop Sign on
Direction of
Travel Intersecting Street
Front Street (4-way)
[Added 12-4-2007]
West Church Street
Gariss Street [Added
3-13-1995]
North Erie Street
Gariss Street South West Main Street
Glass Street [Added
6-28-1996]
North Cahoonzie Street
Glass Street [Added
3-13-1995]
North Hamilton Street
Glass Street (4-way)
[Added 3-13-1995;
amended 2-2-2001]
North West Street
Glass Street [Added
3-13-1995]
South Hamilton Street
Glass Street (4-way)
[Added 3-13-1995;
amended 9-8-2000]
South Pine Street
Glass Street (4-way)
[Added 3-13-1995;
amended 2-2-2001]
South West Street
Glass Street (4-way)
[Added 11-10-2003]
South and north Hamilton Street
Gordon Street [Added
6-20-2012]
South Bruce Street
Grand Street [Added
3-13-1995]
North Erie Street
Grand Street South West Main Street
Grand View Avenue East West Main Street
Grand View Avenue
[Added 3-13-1995]
West Park Avenue
Hamilton Street (4-way)
[Added 11-10-2003]
East and west Glass Street
Hamilton Street [Added
3-13-1995]
West Lincoln Street
Hammond Street [Added
3-13-1995]
East Fowler Street
Hammond Street East Owen Street
Hammond Street East Pike Street
Hammond Street (4-way)
[Added 12-1-2008]
East Seward Avenue
§ 505-44 PORT JERVIS CODE § 505-44
492:610
Stop Sign on
Direction of
Travel Intersecting Street
Hammond Street [Added
3-13-1995]
East Sussex Street
Hammond Street [Added
3-13-1995]
West Fowler Street
Hammond Street [Added
3-13-1995]
West Pike Street
Hammond Street (4-way)
[Added 12-1-2008]
West Seward Avenue
Hammond Street [Added
3-13-1995]
West Sussex Street
Harold Street [Added
3-13-1995]
North Erie Street
Harold Street South West Main Street
Hill Street [Added
3-13-1995]
East Church Street
Hill Street East Pennsylvania Avenue
Hill Street [Added
3-13-1995]
West Fowler Street
Holbrook Street [Added
3-13-1995]
North Erie Street
Hornbeck Avenue West Orange Street
Howard Street [Added
3-13-1995]
West Culvert Street
Hudson Street [Added
3-13-1995]
North Reservoir Avenue
Hudson Street [Added
3-13-1995]
South Reservoir Avenue
Hudson Street [Added
10-20-1993]
South West Main Street
Irving Place [Added
3-13-1995]
East North Orange Street
Irving Place [Added
3-13-1995]
West Maiden Lane
Johnson Avenue East Canal Street
Johnson Avenue [Added
5-6-1993]
West Broad Street
John Street [Added
3-23-1998]
West Elizabeth Street
§ 505-44 TREES § 505-44
492:611
Stop Sign on
Direction of
Travel Intersecting Street
Jones Street [Added
3-23-1998]
West Prospect Street
Kellogg Avenue (4-way)
[Amended 11-12-2002]
North Neversink Avenue
Kellogg Avenue [Added
3-13-1995]
South East Main Street
Kellogg Avenue (4-way)
[Added 3-23-1998;
amended 11-12-2002]
South Neversink Avenue
King Street (4-way)
[Added 10-20-1993;
amended 9-8-2000]
East Lumber Street
King Street (4-way)
[Amended 10-20-1993]
West Lumber Street
Lane Street [Added
9-30-2003]
South Ryan Street
Liberty Street [Added
3-13-1995]
North Erie Street
Liberty Street South West Main Street
Lincoln Street [Amended
3-13-1995]
South DuBois Street
Lumber Street [Added
6-9-1998]
South River Road
Lumber Street [Repealed 6-9-1998]
Lumber Street (4-way)
[Added 10-20-1993]
North King Street
Lumber Street (4-way)
[Added 10-20-1993]
South King Street
Lyman Avenue [Added
3-13-1995]
North Erie Street
Lyman Avenue South West Main Street
Lyman Street [Added
3-13-1995]
West Kingston Avenue
Maiden Lane [Added
3-13-1995]
South Reservoir Avenue
Marvin Street [Added
6-7-2010]
East Farnum Street
Mary Street [Added
3-13-1995]
East Ferguson Avenue
§ 505-44 PORT JERVIS CODE § 505-44
492:612
Stop Sign on
Direction of
Travel Intersecting Street
Mary Street [Added
3-13-1995]
West Sullivan Avenue
Mechanic Street [Added
8-7-1998]
North Erie Street
Mechanic Street [Added
8-7-1998]
South Erie Street
Merritt Place [Added
3-23-1998]
South East Main Street
Mill Street [Added
3-13-1995]
West Owen Street
Minisink Park Apartment
Complex on north side of
storage building [Added
6-4-1996]
East —
Mohawk Street East Kingston Avenue
Mountain Avenue [Added
3-13-1995]
East Orange Street
Mountain Avenue [Added
3-13-1995]
West Hudson Street
Mt. William Street North West Main Street
Mt. William Street [Added
4-22-1999]
South Clark Street
Myrtle Avenue East Hudson Street
Neversink Avenue (4-way)
[Added 11-12-2002]
East Kellogg Avenue
Neversink Avenue East Prospect Street
Neversink Avenue (4-way)
[Added 11-12-2002]
West Kellogg Avenue
Neversink Avenue [Added
3-13-1995]
West Kingston Avenue
Neversink Avenue West Prospect Street
New Ball Street [Added
3-13-1995]
West East Main Street
New Street West West Main Street
North Broome Street
[Added 3-13-1995]
West Pike Street
North Maple Avenue at
south side of tunnel
(underpass) [Added
2-25-2002]
North —
§ 505-44 TREES § 505-44
492:613
Stop Sign on
Direction of
Travel Intersecting Street
North Maple Avenue at
north side of tunnel
(underpass) [Added
2-25-2002]
South —
North Orange Street
[Added 3-13-1995]
South Reservoir Avenue
North Street [Added
3-13-1995]
North East Main Street
Oak Street [Added
9-17-1998]
East Elmendorf Street
Orchard Street [Added
3-13-1995]
East Church Street
Orchard Street [Amended
3-13-1995]
East Pennsylvania Avenue
Orchard Street [Added
3-13-1995]
East Seward Avenue
Orchard Street [Added
3-13-1995]
West Church Street
Orchard Street [Added
3-13-1995]
West Fowler Street
Orchard Street [Added
3-13-1995]
West Seward Avenue
Owen Street (4-way)
[Added 3-13-1995;
amended 2-25-2002]
North Ball Street
Owen Street (4-way)
[Added 3-13-1995;
amended 2-25-2002]
South Ball Street
Owen Street [Added
3-13-1995]
South Jersey Avenue
Patterson Street [Added
8-12-2004]
East Wright Street
Patterson Street [Added
3-13-1995]
West North Maple Avenue
Pearl Street East Hudson Street
Pennsylvania Avenue
[Added 3-13-1995]
North Ball Street
Pennsylvania Avenue
[Added 3-13-1995]
North East Main Street
§ 505-44 PORT JERVIS CODE § 505-44
492:614
Stop Sign on
Direction of
Travel Intersecting Street
Pennsylvania Avenue
[Added 3-13-1995]
North Franklin Street
Pennsylvania Avenue
[Added 3-13-1995]
North Front Street
Pennsylvania Avenue
[Added 3-13-1995]
North Hammond Street
Pennsylvania Avenue
[Added 3-13-1995]
South Ball Street
Pennsylvania Avenue
[Added 3-13-1995]
South Franklin Street
Pennsylvania Avenue
[Added 3-13-1995]
South Front Street
Pennsylvania Avenue
[Added 3-13-1995]
South Hammond Street
Pennsylvania Avenue
[Added 3-13-1995]
South Jersey Avenue
Pike Street North Ball Street
Pike Street South Front Street
Pine Street (4-way)
[Added 9-8-2000]
East Catherine Street
Pine Street [Added
3-13-1995]
East Kingston Avenue
Pine Street West Canal Street
Pine Street (4-way)
[Added 9-8-2000]
West Glass Street
Prospect Street [Added
3-13-1995]
South East Main Street
Ridge Avenue [Added
3-13-1995]
East Fowler Street
Robert Street East Glass Street
Robert Street [Added
3-13-1995]
West Canal Street
Rumsey Street [Added
3-13-1995]
North Dubois Street
Rumsey Street South Crawford Street
Ryan Street [Added
2-25-2002]
East Kingston Avenue (Route
209S)
Schultz Street [Added
3-13-1995]
West Kingston Avenue
§ 505-44 TREES § 505-44
492:615
Stop Sign on
Direction of
Travel Intersecting Street
Second Street North King Street
Seward Avenue (4-way)
[Added 3-13-1995;
amended 7-17-2008]
North Ball Street
Seward Avenue [Added
3-13-1995]
North Barcelow Street
Seward Avenue [Added
3-13-1995]
North East Main Street
Seward Avenue [Added
3-13-1995]
North Franklin Street
Seward Avenue [Added
3-13-1995]
North Front Street
Seward Avenue (4-way)
[Added 3-13-1995;
amended 12-1-2008]
North Hammond Street
Seward Avenue [Added
3-13-1995; amended
7-17-2008]
South Ball Street
Seward Avenue [Added
3-13-1995]
South Barcelow Street
Seward Avenue [Added
3-13-1995]
South Franklin Street
Seward Avenue [Added
3-13-1995]
South Front Street
Seward Avenue (4-way)
[Added 3-13-1995;
amended 12-1-2008]
South Hammond Street
Seward Avenue [Added
3-13-1995]
South Jersey Avenue
Skinner Street [Added
3-13-1995]
West East Main Street
South Broome [Added
3-13-1995]
Street East Sussex Street
South Street [Added
3-13-1995]
North East Main Street
Spring Street [Added
2-3-2009]
North East Broome Street
Spring Street [Added
3-13-1995]
North Franklin Street
§ 505-44 PORT JERVIS CODE § 505-44
492:616
Stop Sign on
Direction of
Travel Intersecting Street
Stoll Street [Added
6-10-2008]
Southeast Farnum Street
Sullivan Avenue [Added
3-13-1995]
North Pine Street
Sullivan Avenue [Added
3-13-1995]
South East Main Street
Sussex Street (4-way)
[Amended 5-2-2003]
North Ball Street
Sussex Street [Added
3-13-1995]
North East Main Street
Sussex Street [Added
9-17-1999]
North Front Street
Sussex Street (4-way)
[Amended 5-2-2003]
South Ball Street
Sussex Street South Front Street
Third Street [Added
3-23-1998]
North King Street
Third Street [Added
3-23-1998]
South King Street
Thompson Street South Water Street
Ulster Place [Added
3-13-1995]
South East Main Street
Union Street [Added
9-17-1998]
West Ferry Street
Wagner Place North Jersey Avenue
Warren Place [Added
3-13-1995]
East North Orange Street
Water Street [Added
6-9-1998]
West Lumber Street
West Broome Street
[Added 9-17-1997]
West Delaware Street
West Main Street South West Main Street (Fort
Decker)
West Main Street, by No.
27 — 29 [Added
10-20-1993]
West Hudson Street
West Street (4-way)
[Added 2-2-2001]
East Glass Street
West Street [Added
3-13-1995]
East Kingston Avenue
§ 505-44 TREES § 505-44
492:617
Stop Sign on
Direction of
Travel Intersecting Street
West Street [Added
3-13-1995]
West Canal Street
West Street (4-way)
[Added 2-2-2001]
West Glass Street
White Street [Added
3-13-1995]
East Kingston Avenue
White Street West Glass Street
Willard Street North Erie Street
Willard Street South Erie Street
Willard Street South West Main Street
Woodlawn Avenue South Minisink Avenue
Wright Street [Added
8-12-2004]
North Patterson Street
Wright Street South Minisink Avenue
§ 505-45. Schedule G: Yield Intersections.
In accordance with the provisions of § 505-16, the following described
intersections are designated as yield intersections:
Yield Sign on
Direction of
Travel At Intersection of
Front Street [Added
12-8-1995; amended
12-4-2007]
West Jersey Avenue
Grandview Avenue
[Added 5-22-1997]
South West Main Street
McArthur Circle [Added
5-22-1997]
South Pike Street
Reservoir Avenue [Added
11-23-1997]
East Orange Street
West Main Street East Park Avenue
§ 505-46. Schedule H: Speed Regulations.
In accordance with the provisions of § 505-17, the following speed limits
shall be indicated on the streets or parts of streets described below:
Name of Street
Speed Limit
(mph) Location
North Maple Avenue
[Added 8-16-1993]
10 Through the underpass
§ 505-44 PORT JERVIS CODE § 505-47
492:618
§ 505-47. Schedule I: (Reserved)
§ 505-48. Schedule J: School Speed Zones.
In accordance with the provisions of § 505-18, speed limits shall be as
indicated in the school speed zones described below:
Name of Street
Speed Limit
(mph) Location
Ball Street [Added
5-3-1993; amended
4-22-2002; repealed
11-17-2010]
East Main Street
[Amended 6-14-1999;
repealed 11-17-2010]
East Main Street 20 From 300 feet north of the
Middle School's north building
line to 300 feet south of the
school's south building line
Hamilton Street [Added
9-1-2012]
20 From intersection with
Kingston Avenue, east, to Port
Jervis City line located at Cold
Brook Bridge/Port Jervis High
School Complex (both
directions of travel)
Hammond Street [Added
5-3-1993; repealed
11-17-2010]
Kingston Avenue [Added
8-19-2010]
20 From 147 feet south of the
Anna S. Kuhl Elementary
School's southerly building line
to 165 feet north of the
school's northern building line
Sullivan Avenue [Added
6-14-1999; amended
4-22-2002; repealed
11-17-2010]
§ 505-49. Schedule K: Truck Weight Limits.
In accordance with the provisions of § 505-19, all trucks, tractors and
tractor-trailer combinations in excess of five tons are excluded from the
streets or parts of streets described below:
§ 505-47 TREES § 505-49
492:619
Name of Street Location
Ferguson Avenue From East Main Street to Pine
Street
Kellogg Avenue [Repealed 2-25-2002]
Mill Street [Added 9-7-1995] From Owen Street to dead end of
Mill Street
Mohawk Street [Added
10-26-1993]
From Kingston Avenue to Cahoonzie
Street
Prospect Street [Repealed 2-25-2002]
§ 505-50. Schedule L: Lane Designations.
In accordance with the provisions of § 505-20, the lanes designated at the
locations described below shall be used exclusively as indicated:
Location (Intersection)
Direction of
Travel Lanes Designated for
Culvert Street at Kingston
Avenue/Ryan Street [Added
11-10-1999]
North on
Culvert Street
Left turn; through traffic
East Main Street at Barclay
Street
East on East
Main Street
Left turn; through traffic
East Main Street at Fowler
Street and Kingston Avenue
East on East
Main Street
Left turn; right turn with
through traffic
East Main Street at Jersey
Avenue
North on East
Main Street
Left turn; through traffic
East Main Street at Kingston
Avenue and Fowler Street
[Amended 12-8-1995]
West on East
Main Street
Left turn; through traffic;
right turn
East Main Street at Orange
Street and Pike Street
West on East
Main Street
Left turn; right turn with
through traffic
East Main Street at South
Maple Avenue [Added
11-10-1999]
West on East
Main Street
Left turn; through traffic
Fowler Street at East Main
Street
North on Fowler
Street
Left turn; right turn with
through traffic
Jersey Avenue at East Main
Street
East on Jersey
Avenue
Left turn; right turn
Kingston Avenue at Hamilton
Street [Added 4-30-1996]
South on
Kingston
Avenue
Right turn; left turn with
through traffic
McArthur Circle Left turn; through traffic
§ 505-49 PORT JERVIS CODE § 505-50
492:620
Location (Intersection)
Direction of
Travel Lanes Designated for
North Maple Avenue at East
Main Street [Added
11-10-1999]
South on North
Maple Avenue
Right turn; left turn with
through traffic
Orange Street at Main Street
[Added 11-10-1999]
South on
Orange Street
Left turn; right turn with
through traffic
Pike Street at Ball Street
[Amended 12-8-1995;
4-30-1996]
North on Pike
Street
Right turn; through
traffic with semiright
turn onto Ball Street
Pike Street at King Street
[Amended 12-8-1995]
South on Pike
Street
Right turn; left turn with
through traffic
Pike Street at Main Street North on Pike
Street
Left turn; right turn with
through traffic
West Main Street at Park
Avenue/Mt. William Street
[Added 11-10-1999]
West on West
Main Street
Left turn; through traffic
West Main Street at Pike
Street [Amended 4-30-1996]
East on West
Main Street
Left turn; through traffic;
right turn
§ 505-51. Schedule M: No-Passing Zones.
In accordance with the provisions of § 505-21, the streets or parts of streets
described below are hereby designated as no passing zones:
Name of Street Location
Canal Street From Orange Street to Hamilton
Street
Canal Street [Added 12-7-1994] From West Main Street to Orange
Street
East Main Street From Fowler Street east to the City
line
East Main Street [Added
12-7-1994; amended 9-27-2007]
From Fowler Street west to Ulster
Place
Ferry Street [Added 12-7-1994] From West Main Street to River Road
Fowler Street [Added 12-7-1994] From Jersey Avenue to intersection of
East Main Street and Kingston
Avenue
Front Street [Added 12-7-1994] From Sussex Street to Pike Street
Grand View Avenue [Added
12-7-1994]
From Park Avenue to 31 Grand View
Avenue
Hamilton Street [Added
12-7-1994]
From Glass Street east to Kingston
Avenue from Kingston Avenue east to
the City line
§ 505-50 TREES § 505-51
492:621
Name of Street Location
Jersey Avenue [Amended
12-7-1994]
From Fowler Street to East Main
Street
Kingston Avenue From Culvert Street to the City line
Kingston Avenue From East Main Street to Culvert
Street
McArthur Circle From Ball Street to the intersection of
Pike Street and Front Street
McArthur Circle [Added
12-7-1994]
From entrance to Great American
Plaza to intersection of Pike and Front
Streets
Minisink Avenue [Added
12-7-1994]
From East Main Street to the City line
North Maple Avenue [Added
12-7-1994]
From East Main Street north to the
City line
Orange Street [Amended
12-7-1994]
From East Main Street to Canal
Street
Park Avenue From Mt. William Street to the City
line
Pike Street From Ball Street to the intersection of
East Main Street and West Main
Street
Pike Street From the Mid-Delaware Bridge to the
southerly part of the underpass
River Road [Added 12-7-1994] From Ferry Street to Lumber Street
Skyline Drive [Added 12-7-1994] From route 42 — 97 to the entrance
of Kolmar Plant
South Maple Avenue [Added
12-7-1994]
From East Main Street south to the
City line
Sussex Street [Added 12-7-1994] From Hammond Street to East Main
Street
Water Street [Added 12-7-1994] From Lumber Street to Pike Street
West Main Street From Delaware Street west to the
City line
§ 505-52. Schedule N: Vehicle size restrictions. [Added 12-23-2013]
A. Vehicles over 26 feet in length are prohibited from entering the streets
or parts of streets described below:
§ 505-51 PORT JERVIS CODE § 505-52
492:622
§ 505-53. Schedule O: (Reserved)
§ 505-54. Schedule P: Stopping, Standing and Parking Restrictions.
In accordance with the provisions of § 505-26, the stopping, standing or
parking of vehicles is restricted as follows:
Name of Highway/Side
Location Regulation Hours/Days
Ball Street/East
From Cole Street for 80 feet
north [Added 3-28-2002]
No parking of
vehicles over 26
feet
—
From 80 feet north of Cole
Street to East Main Street
[Added 3-28-2002]
No parking here to
corner
—
Ball Street/North
In front of 32 Ball Street for 20
feet east [Added 1-23-1997]
30-minute parking 8:00 a.m. to 6:00
p.m./Mon. through
Sat., except
holidays
In front of 56 Ball Street (Tri-
State Day-Care Center)
[Added 10-27-2000]
15-minute parking 6:00 a.m. to 6:00
p.m./Mon. through
Fri.
From Cole Street for 20 feet
west [Added 4-16-2010]
No parking —
From Cole Street for 25 feet
east [Added 4-16-2010]
No parking —
From Sussex Street for 25 feet
east [Added 3-3-1995]
No parking —
From Sussex Street to Pike
Street [Amended 3-3-1995]
No parking —
Ball Street/South
Name of Street
Direction of
Travel Location
First Street Both north and
south
Between King Street and
Railroad Avenue
Second Street Both north and
south
Between King Street and
Railroad Avenue
Third Street Both north and
south
Between King Street and
Railroad Avenue
§ 505-52 TREES § 505-54
492:623
Name of Highway/Side
Location Regulation Hours/Days
From Cole Street for 25 feet
east [Added 4-16-2010]
No parking —
From 40 feet west of
Pennsylvania Avenue to
Pennsylvania Avenue [Added
11-2-1995]
No parking here to
corner
—
From Pike Street east for 25
feet
No parking —
From 25 feet east of Pike
Street for 65 feet east [Added
3-3-2000; amended
12-23-2013]
90-minute parking —
From Sussex Street for 25 feet
east [Added 1-20-1995]
No parking this
space
—
From Sussex Street for 28 feet
west [Added 3-3-1995]
No parking —
From 195 east of Sussex Street
for 20 feet east [Added
4-11-2000]
No parking this
space
—
Barcelow Street/North
From No. 50 Barcelow Street
east for 20 feet [Added
11-18-1993; amended
8-12-2004]
30-minute parking 1:00 p.m. to 5:00
p.m./Mon. through
Fri.
From 50 feet west of Pennsylvania Avenue for 50 feet west [Added
11-25-1997; repealed 4-7-2009]
From 50 feet west of
Pennsylvania Avenue for 50
feet west [Added 1-26-2011]
Loading and
unloading only
—
From Pennsylvania Avenue 109
feet to 180 feet east [Added
6-18-2007]
No parking —
Barclay Street/East
From East Main Street north
for 100 feet
No parking —
Barclay Street/West
From 25 feet north of East
Main Street to East Main
Street
No parking —
Bruce Street/South
§ 505-54 PORT JERVIS CODE § 505-54
492:624
Name of Highway/Side
Location Regulation Hours/Days
From Kingston Avenue to end
of Bruce Street [Added
7-5-1996]
No parking this side —
Buckley Street/West
From 28 feet south of West
Main Street for 55 feet south
[Added 6-6-2003]
90 minute parking —
Cahoonzie Street/North [Added
3-25-2011]
From 25 feet from intersection
with Kingston Avnue
No parking this
space
—
Cahoonzie Street/South [Added
3-25-2011]
From 35 feet from intersection
with Kingston Avenue
No parking here to
corner
—
Canal Street/East
From Orange Street north for
85 feet [Amended 5-7-1995;
11-13-2012]
No parking this side —
From West Main Street 2
spaces [Added 5-7-1993]
30-minute parking 8:00 a.m. to 6:00
p.m./Mon. through
Sat., except
holidays
From 85 feet north of West
Main Street north for 25 feet
[Added 8-27-1993]
30-minute parking —
From 22 feet south of West
Main Street for 30 feet south
[Added 9-12-1994]
Bus stop parking
only
—
From 52 feet south of West
Main Street for 20 feet south
[Added 9-12-1994]
15-minute parking —-
From 95 feet south of West
Main Street for 22 feet south
[Added 9-18-1997]
30-minute parking 8:00 a.m. to 6:00
p.m./Mon. through
Sat.
From 20 feet south of West
Street north to West Street
[Added 4-11-2000]
No parking here to
corner
—
Canal Street/West
§ 505-54 TREES § 505-54
492:625
Name of Highway/Side
Location Regulation Hours/Days
From landfill gate for 130
south [Added 7-24-2000]
No parking —
Vicinity of 10 Canal Street, two
spaces, beginning from
intersection with West Main
Street, 231 feet north to 272
feet north [Added 3-15-2012]
90-minute parking 8:00 a.m. to 6:00
p.m./Mon. through
Sat.
From 50 feet north of Pine
Street south to Orange Street
[Added 3-3-2000]
No parking this side —
Clark Street
From West Main Street east to
Mt. William [Added 4-1-2004]
No thru traffic —
Coleman Street/West
From the Erie-Lackawanna
Railroad to West Main Street
No parking —
Cole Street/East
For 15 feet south of East Main
Street
No parking —
Cole Street/West
From Ball Street for 20 feet
south [Added 4-16-2010]
No parking —
From Ball Street for 150 feet
north [Added 4-16-2010]
No parking —
Crawford Street/South
From 50 feet east of Orange
Street west to Orange Street
[Added 8-23-2000]
No parking here to
corner
—
20 feet west of Johnson Avenue
[Added 8-12-2004]
No parking here to
corner
—
Culvert Street/East
From Kingston Avenue north to
Kingston Avenue (Rt. 209 N)
[Added 9-17-1999]
No parking this side —
Driveway along Erie-Lackawanna
Railroad/North
From Sussex Street to Pike
Street
No parking —
§ 505-54 PORT JERVIS CODE § 505-54
492:626
Name of Highway/Side
Location Regulation Hours/Days
Driveway along Erie-Lackawanna
Railroad/South
From Pike Street to Sussex No parking —
East Broome Street/South
From Spring Street for 65 feet
east [Added 12-15-1996]
No parking
commercial vehicles
—
East Main Street/North
From the City line west to
Minisink Avenue [Amended
2-11-2003]
No parking or
standing
—
From Barclay Street west to
North Maple Avenue
[Amended 2-11-2003]
No parking or
standing
—
From the west side of the Tri-
States Bridge west for 200 feet
No parking —
From the Erie-Lackawanna
Railroad trestle to Kellogg
Avenue
No parking —
From Kellogg Avenue to the
Mobil Oil Company driveway
No parking —
From 50 feet east of Ferguson
Avenue to Ferguson Avenue
No parking —
From Ferguson Avenue to
Sullivan Avenue
No parking
commercial
—
From Sullivan Avenue west for
38 feet [Added 6-26-2000]
No parking this
space
—
From 60 feet east of Ulster
Place to Ulster Place
[Amended 1-20-1995]
No parking to
corner
—
From 42 feet east of Orange
Street for 60 feet east [Added
2-11-2003]
90-minute parking 6:00 a.m. to 9:00
p.m.
From 50 feet east of Orange
Street to Orange Street
[Repealed 8-23-2000]
East Main Street/South
From Pike Street to No. 7 East
Main Street [Amended
8-9-1994]
No parking —
§ 505-54 TREES § 505-54
492:627
Name of Highway/Side
Location Regulation Hours/Days
From No. 7 East Main Street to
Sussex Street [Amended
8-9-1994]
90-minute parking;
no commercial
vehicles
—
From Elizabeth Street to
Fowler Street
No parking —
From Fowler Street to No. 57
East Main Street [Repealed
8-26-1994]
From Fowler Street for 108
feet east [Added 8-26-1994;
repealed 12-11-1995]
From 108 feet east of Fowler
Street for 30 feet east [Added
8-26-1994; repealed
12-11-1995]
From Fowler Street east to
Church Street [Added
8-26-1994]
No parking
commercial vehicles
—
From 30 feet east of Fowler
Street to 70 feet east of Fowler
Street [Added 11-15-2005]
30-minute parking —
From No. 57 East Main Street
to Church Street [Repealed
8-26-1994]
From Pennsylvania Avenue to
No. 125 East Main Street
No parking —
From 55 feet east of South
Street for 80 feet east (pulloff
area) [Added 4-15-1996]
No parking this side —
From Sussex Street for 23 feet
east [Added 8-4-1995]
No parking this
space
—
From 23 feet east of Sussex
Street for 200 feet east
[Added 8-4-1995]
90-minute parking —
From the east side of the Tri-
States Bridge to the City line
No parking —
East Main Street/West
From a point at the north end
of 155 East Main Street
[Added 6-2-1998]
90-minute parking
this space
—
§ 505-54 PORT JERVIS CODE § 505-54
492:628
Name of Highway/Side
Location Regulation Hours/Days
From 159 East Main Street to
Ball Street [Added 6-2-1998;
amended 4-16-2003]
No parking this side —
From 248 feet south of Ball
Street south to Jersey Avenue
[Amended 6-2-1998;
4-16-2003; 5-23-2003]
No parking this side
From Jersey Avenue to the
Erie-Lackawanna Railroad
Bridge [Amended 6-2-1998]
No parking this side —
Elizabeth Street/West
Thirty-five feet from
intersection with Ridge Avenue
[Added 6-20-2012]
No parking here to
corner
—
Ferguson Avenue/West
From 25 feet north of East
Main Street for 20 feet north
[Added 2-19-1999]
Handicapped
parking
—
Ferry Street/East
From River Road to West Main
Street
No parking —
Ferry Street/West
From West Main Street to
River Road
No parking —
Fossard Street/East
From West Main Street to the
Erie-Lackawanna Railroad
No parking —
Fossard Street/West
From West Main Street north
for 135 feet [Added
8-20-1993]
No parking —
Fowler Street/East
From the Erie-Lackawanna
Railroad property to 53 south
of Jersey Avenue [Repealed
5-17-1995]
From Ball Street north for 100
feet [Repealed 5-17-1995]
From No. 95 Fowler Street to
East Main Street
No parking —
§ 505-54 TREES § 505-54
492:629
Name of Highway/Side
Location Regulation Hours/Days
From Hammond Street for 25
feet north [Added
11-20-1995]
No parking this
space
—
From Hammond Street for 25
feet south [Added 8-11-1998]
No parking here to
corner
—
From 15 feet south of Jersey
Avenue for 60 feet south
[Added 5-17-1995; repealed
12-22-2011]
From 60 feet south of Jersey
Avenue for 40 feet south
[Added 5-17-1995]
Loading zone —
From Hill Street for 25 feet
south [Added 9-21-1999]
No parking this
space
—
Fowler Street/West
From 100 feet north of Ball
Street to Ball Street
[Repealed 5-17-1995]
From Hammond Street for 25
feet south [Added 8-11-1998]
No parking this
space
—
From Jersey Avenue south for
20 feet (1 space) [Repealed
5-17-1995]
From 15 feet south of Jersey
Avenue for 80 feet south
[Added 5-17-1995; repealed
12-22-2011]
Front Street/North
From 65 feet west of Church
Street for 20 feet east [Added
9-24-1996]
No parking this
space
—
From 25 feet east of Fowler
Street to Fowler Street
No parking —
From 22 feet west of Fowler
Street for 44 feet west [Added
12-2-1994; repealed
9-17-2018]
In front of 32 Front Street for
23 feet east [Added
3-28-2002]
Handicapped
parking space
—
§ 505-54 PORT JERVIS CODE § 505-54
492:630
Name of Highway/Side
Location Regulation Hours/Days
In front of 78 Front Street
[Added 9-22-1995; repealed
9-17-2018]
In front of 162 Front Street for
20 feet east [Added
11-15-1999;repealed
11-15-2005]
From 45 feet east of Pike
Street for 20 feet east [Added
12-11-1992; amended
4-21-1993; 5-17-2000]
30-minute parking/
handicapped space
—
From 65 feet east of Pike
Street for 20 feet east [Added
12-11-1992; amended
4-21-1993; 5-17-2000]
30-minute parking —
From 54 feet east of Sussex
Street to intersection with
Jersey Avenue [Added
8-17-1997; amended
8-6-2009; 9-17-2018]
2-hour parking —
For 54 feet east of intersection
with Sussex Street [Added
8-6-2009]
No parking —
Diagonal parking in front of 80
Front Street consisting of first
two spaces starting from
direction of Fowler Street
[Added 9-17-2018]
15-minute parking —
Diagonal parking in front of 80
Front Street middle spaces to
Front Street entrance of
municipal parking lot between
Ball Street and Front Street
next to mini-mall [Added
9-17-2018]
2-hour parking —
Last adjacent spot to municipal
parking lot entrance [Added
9-17-2018]
Handicapped
parking
—
Front Street/Rear service road
§ 505-54 TREES § 505-54
492:631
Name of Highway/Side
Location Regulation Hours/Days
From Fowler Street (west side)
to Sussex Street (east side)
adjacent to Metro North Rail
Road Line, south side of
service road [Added
12-23-2013]
No parking or
standing fire lane
—
Front Street/South
From Fowler Street east for 25
feet
No parking —
Front Street/South
From 172 feet east of Fowler
Street to 245 feet east of
Fowler Street [Added
4-1-2004]
Load and unload
only
—
In front of 55 Front Street for
20 feet east [Added 4-1-2006;
repealed 6-20-2012]
From 20 feet east of 55 Front
Street to 40 feet east [Added
4-1-2006; repealed
6-20-2012]
In front of 129 Front Street for
20 feet west [Added
11-15-1999; repealed
11-15-2005]
In front of 167 Front Street for
20 feet west [Added
11-15-1999; repealed
10-10-2002]
From Pike Street to Sussex
Street
No parking —
From 25 feet east of Sussex
Street for 405 feet east to
Jersey Avenue [Added
8-17-1997; amended
9-17-2018]
2-hour parking —
From _____ east for 100 feet No parking —
Hamilton Street/North [Added
5-11-2001]
From 160 feet east of Kingston
Avenue east to Cold Brook
No parking this side —
§ 505-54 PORT JERVIS CODE § 505-54
492:632
Name of Highway/Side
Location Regulation Hours/Days
From 160 feet east of Kingston
Avenue west to Kingston
Avenue
No parking here to
corner
—
Hamilton Street/South [Added
5-11-2001]
Between 167 feet west of
Farnum Street to 300 feet west
[Added 12-22-2011]
No parking —
From Kingston Avenue east to
Cold Brook
No parking this side —
Hammond Street/North
From Spring Street for 105
feet west [Added 12-4-2001]
No parking —
From 40 feet east of Sussex
Street for 72 feet east [Added
6-26-2000; amended
3-1-2010]
30-minute parking 8:00 a.m. to 6:00
p.m./Mon. through
Fri.
From 40 feet east of Sussex
Street west to Sussex Street
[Added 6-26-2000]
No parking here to
corner
—
From 115 feet west of Sussex
Street for 73 feet west [Added
6-2-1998]
30-minute parking 8:00 a.m. to 6:00
p.m./Mon. through
Sat., except
holidays
Hammond Street/South
From Pennsylvania Avenue for
35 feet east [Added
11-8-2001]
No parking this
space
—
From 25 feet east of Pike
Street for 60 feet east [Added
11-7-1997; amended
3-18-1999]
90-minute parking 8:00 a.m. to 6:00
p.m./Mon. through
Sat., except
holidays
From 25 feet east of Spring
Street for 120 feet east
[Added 12-4-2001; amended
3-28-2002]
No parking school
bus stop
7:00 a.m. to 4:00
p.m./Mon. through
Fri.
From Spring Street for 138
feet west [Added 12-4-2001]
Fire zone —
From Spring Street east for
250 feet [Repealed 5-3-1993]
§ 505-54 TREES § 505-54
492:633
Name of Highway/Side
Location Regulation Hours/Days
From 250 feet east of Spring
Street to Fowler Street
[Repealed 4-27-1995]
From 18 feet west of Sussex
Street for 60 feet west [Added
12-9-1994]
15-minute parking —
Hammond Street Extension/
North
Entire length (entrance to
Plaza)
No parking —
Hammond Street Extension/
South
Entire length (entrance to
Plaza)
No parking —
Handicapped Parking Zones
[Added 8-12-1991 by L.L. No.
4-1991]
No parking (except
as provided in
§ 505-26J)
—
Hill Street/North
From Pennsylvania Avenue
west to the dead end
No parking —
Hill Street/South
From Pennsylvania Avenue for
152 feet west [Added
3-1-2010
No parking this
space
—
Hornbeck Avenue/South
Adjacent to 18 Hornbeck
Avenue west to end of street
[Added 3-3-2000]
No parking this side —
From intersection with Orange
Street for 170 feet east
[Added 8-6-2009]
No parking —
Hudson Street/East
For 75 feet south from
intersection with Cross Street
[Added 8-6-2009]
No parking —
From No. 25 Hudson Street
north to Elmendorf Street
[Added 8-9-1994]
No parking this side —
From West Main Street for 32
feet north [Added 4-20-1994]
No parking this
space
—
§ 505-54 PORT JERVIS CODE § 505-54
492:634
Name of Highway/Side
Location Regulation Hours/Days
Hudson Street/West
Between Elmendorf Street and
Pearl Street [Added
8-9-1994]
No parking —
From 42 Hudson Street (north
side) for 330 feet south
[Added 8-15-2002]
No parking this side —
From 440 feet south of 42
Hudson Street (north side) to 4
Hudson Street [Added
8-15-2002]
No parking this side —
From No. 42 Hudson Street
south to No. 4 Hudson Street
[Added 8-9-1994]
No parking this side —
Jersey Avenue/North
From Church Street west to 50
feet east of Fowler Street
[Added 4-8-1998]
90-minute parking 8:00 a.m. to 6:00
p.m./Mon. through
Sat., except
holidays
From 198 feet west of Church
Street to 182 feet east of
Fowler Street [Added
4-1-2004]
Load and unload
only
—
From 110 feet west of Church Street 40 feet west [Added 6-11-1996;
repealed 4-8-1998]
From Cole Street to Church
Street
Limited parking 90
minutes
—
From East Main Street west to
Cole Street
No parking —
From 50 feet east of Fowler
Street west to Fowler Street
[Added 4-8-1998]
No parking here to
corner
—
From 20 feet west of Fowler
Street for 175 feet west
[Added 5-17-1995]
2-hour parking —
From 241 feet west of Fowler
Street for 75 feet west [Added
5-17-1995; repealed
9-17-2018]
From 100 feet east of Front Street to Front Street [Repealed
5-11-2001; 11-8-2001]
§ 505-54 TREES § 505-54
492:635
Name of Highway/Side
Location Regulation Hours/Days
From 55 feet west of
Pennsylvania Avenue for 20
feet west [Added 5-7-1993]
Limited parking 90
minutes
8:00 a.m. to 6:00
p.m., except Sun.
and holidays
From 75 feet west of
Pennsylvania Avenue for 20
feet west [Added 5-7-1993]
15-minute parking —
From 95 feet west of Pennsylvania Avenue for 20 feet west [Added
5-7-1993; repealed 1-20-1995]
From 115 feet west of Pennsylvania Avenue for 20 feet west [Added
5-7-1993; repealed 1-20-1995]
Jersey Avenue/South
From No. 95 to Wagner Place Limited parking 90
minutes
—
From 100 feet west of
Pennsylvania Avenue for 20
feet west [Added 5-7-1993]
15-minute parking —
From 43 feet west of Fowler
Street for 117 feet [Added
9-2-2008; amended
9-17-2018]
2-hour parking —
Johnson Avenue/North
From Crawford Street for 72
feet east [Added 10-20-2010]
No parking here to
corner
—
Johnson Avenue/South
15 feet west of Crawford Street
[Added 8-12-2004]
No parking here to
corner
Kellogg Avenue/East
From East Main Street north to
Neversink Avenue [Added
2-25-2002]
No thru traffic —
Kingston Avenue/East
From East Main Street to
Culvert Street
No parking —
From Culvert Street north to
the City line [Added
9-17-1999]
No parking this side —
80 feet north of Cahoonzie
Street [Added 7-22-2008]
No parking this
space
—
Kingston Avenue/West
§ 505-54 PORT JERVIS CODE § 505-54
492:636
Name of Highway/Side
Location Regulation Hours/Days
From Ryan Street to Hamilton
Street
No parking —
From Neversink Avenue south
for 342 feet [Amended
2-11-2003]
No parking this side —
From 342 feet south of
Neversink Avenue for 25 feet
south [Added 2-11-2003;
repealed 12-23-2013]
From 367 feet south of
Neversink Avenue south to
East Main Street [Added
2-11-2003]
No parking here to
corner
—
For 100 feet north of No. 16
[Repealed 8-15-2001]
King Street/North
From Pike Street east to First
Street [Added 5-14-2001]
No parking 11:00 p.m. to 7:00
a.m.
From Pike Street west for 50
feet
No parking —
King Street/South
From Pike Street east to First
Street [Added 5-14-2001]
No parking 11:00 p.m. to 7:00
a.m.
From 50 feet west of Pike
Street to Pike Street
No parking —
Mary Street/North [Added
12-22-2011]
For 30 feet west from
intersection of Ferguson
Avenue
No parking —
McAllister Street/East
From the Delaware River Dyke
to West Main Street
No parking —
From West Main Street to the
Conrail Railroad right-of-way
No parking —
McAllister Street/West
From West Main Street to the
Delaware River Dyke
No parking —
McArthur Circle/Both
§ 505-54 TREES § 505-54
492:637
Name of Highway/Side
Location Regulation Hours/Days
Entire length No parking —
Mechanic Street/West
From Erie Street to West Main
Street
No parking —
Mountain Avenue/North
From Orange Street to Hudson
Street
No parking —
Mountain Avenue/South
From Hudson Street to Orange
Street
No parking —
Mt. William
South to Clark Street [Added
4-1-2004]
No thru traffic —
Neversink Avenue/North
From 40 feet east of Kingston
Avenue to Kingston Avenue
No parking —
Neversink Avenue/South
From Kingston Avenue east for
40 feet
No parking —
From Kingston Avenue east to
Kellogg Avenue and to
Prospect Street [Added
2-25-2002]
No thru traffic —
New Street/North
From West Main Street to
Railroad Circle
No parking —
New Street/South
From 185 feet east of West
Main Street for 20 feet east
[Added 7-26-1993; amended
5-17-2000]
No parking here to
corner
—
North Broome Street/North
From 75 feet east of Pike
Street west to Pike Street
[Added 11-12-2002]
No parking here to
corner
From Sussex Street to Pike
Street [Repealed 4-27-1995]
§ 505-54 PORT JERVIS CODE § 505-54
492:638
Name of Highway/Side
Location Regulation Hours/Days
From 50 feet west of Sussex
Street for 20 feet west [Added
3-3-1995]
Handicapped
parking
—
North Maple Avenue/East
From No. 17 north to the
Conrail Railroad culvert
No parking —
North Maple Avenue/West
From the Conrail Railroad
culvert south to opposite No.
17
No parking —
For 20 feet north of East Main
Street
No parking —
From 20 feet north of East
Main Street for 20 feet north
[Added 4-27-1995]
15-minute parking
this space
—
North Street/West
From East Main Street for 220
feet south [Added 9-25-2000]
No parking this side —
(Old) West Main Street/West
from 100 feet north of West
Main Street south to West
Main Street [Added
3-28-2002]
No parking here to
corner
—
Orange Street/East
From 45 feet south of Brooklyn
Street to Brooklyn Street
[Added 9-7-1995; repealed
7-19-1996]
From Canal Street to Brooklyn
Street [Added 7-19-1996]
No parking this side —
From 100 feet south of Canal
Street to Canal Street
[Amended 4-27-1995]
No parking, fire
zone
—
For 30 feet north of
intersection with Crawford
Street [Added 8-6-2009]
No parking —
From East Main Street north
for 50 feet
Limited parking 90
minutes
—
§ 505-54 TREES § 505-54
492:639
Name of Highway/Side
Location Regulation Hours/Days
From 50 feet north of East
Main Street north for 100 feet
[Repealed 4-27-1995]
From 60 feet south of
Hornbeck Avenue to Hornbeck
Avenue [Added 9-12-1996]
30-minute parking
here to corner
8:00 a.m. to 6:00
p.m.
Orange Street/West
From Reservoir Avenue to
Brooklyn Street
No parking —
From north edge of parking lot
(1 West Main Street) for 15
feet north at 2 Orange Street
[Added 12-23-2013]
No parking this
space
—
Orchard Street/North
From Pennsylvania Avenue to
Church Street
No parking —
Owen Street/East [Added
9-6-2002]
From Hammond Street (south
side) for 89 feet north
No parking, fire
zone
Owen Street/West [Added
9-6-2002]
From 7 feet north of Hammond
Street (north side) for 55 feet
north
No parking fire
zone
—
Park Avenue/North [Added
9-7-1995]
From West Main Street to the
City line
No parking this side —
Patterson Street/North
From 25 feet east of North
Maple Street to North Maple
Street
No parking —
Patterson Street/South
From North Maple Street east
for 25 feet
No parking —
Pennsylvania Avenue/East
From Barcelow Street to East
Main Street
No parking —
§ 505-54 PORT JERVIS CODE § 505-54
492:640
Name of Highway/Side
Location Regulation Hours/Days
Pennsylvania Avenue/West
From East Main Street to Hill
Street [Repealed
10-27-2000]
Pike Street/East [Amended
4-26-1982 by L.L. No. 4-1982;
12-8-1992]
One space located 97 feet
north from intersection with
Ball Street [Added 4-7-2009]
Loading and
unloading only
—
From King Street for 25 feet
south [Amended 3-3-1995]
No parking —
From 25 feet south of King
Street for 20 feet south
[Added 3-3-1995]
15-minute parking
this space
—
From Front Street north for 25
feet [Added 5-7-1993;
amended 2-19-1999]
No parking this
space
—
From 25 feet north of Front
Street to 25 feet south of Ball
Street
Limited parking 90
minutes
Mon. through
Sat./8:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m., except
holidays
From 25 feet south of Ball
Street for 25 feet north
[Added 2-19-1999]
No parking here to
corner
—
From Ball Street north for 80
feet [Amended 7-12-2002]
No parking this side —
From 50 feet north of Ball
Street for 40 feet [Repealed
8-26-1994]
From 75 feet north of Ball
Street for 36 feet north
[Added 8-26-1994; repealed
11-7-1997]
From 80 feet north of Ball
Street for 110 feet north
[Amended 12-2-1994;
11-7-1997; 7-12-2002]
90-minute parking 8:00 a.m. to 6:00
p.m./Mon. through
Sat., except
holidays
From 110 feet north of Ball
Street for 25 feet north
[Added 7-12-2002]
No parking here to
corner
—
§ 505-54 TREES § 505-54
492:641
Name of Highway/Side
Location Regulation Hours/Days
From Hammond Street north
for 40 feet
No parking —
From 40 feet north of
Hammond Street for 20 feet
north
Handicapped
parking space
—
From 60 feet north of
Hammond Street for 20 feet
north
15-minute parking
space
—
From 80 feet north of
Hammond Street for 540 feet
north
Limited parking 90
minutes
8:00 a.m. to 6:00
p.m./Mon. through
Sat., except
holidays
Two spaces, north 20 feet from
intersection with King Street to
40 feet north on Pike Street
[Added 3-15-2012]
90-minute parking 8:00 a.m. to 6:00
p.m./Mon. through
Sat.
From 40 feet south of North
Broome Street to North
Broome Street
No parking here to
corner
—
From 20 feet north of North
Broome Street to 117 feet
south of East Main Street
[Amended 5-17-2000]
Limited parking 90
minutes
8:00 a.m. to 6:00
p.m./Mon. through
Sat., except
holidays
Pike Street/West [Amended 4-26-1982 by L.L. No. 4-1982]
From West Main Street south
for 75 feet
No parking —
From 75 feet south of West
Main Street to 30 feet north of
West Broome Street
[Amended 4-11-2000]
Limited parking 90
minutes
8:00 a.m. to 6:00
p.m./Mon. through
Sat., except
holidays
From 30 feet north of West
Broome Street south to West
Broome Street [Added
4-11-2000]
No parking here to
corner
—
From 15 feet south of West
Broome Street for 17 feet
[Added 12-22-2011]
Handicap parking
(one space)
—
From 15 feet south of West Broome Street to 55 feet north of Hammond
Street [Added 4-11-2000; repealed 12-22-2011]
§ 505-54 PORT JERVIS CODE § 505-54
492:642
Name of Highway/Side
Location Regulation Hours/Days
From 67 feet south of West
Broome Street to 55 feet north
of Hammond Street [Added
12-22-2011]
Limited parking 90
minutes
—
From 55 feet north of the
Hammond Street extension
south to King Street (including
Banach Circle and underpass)
[Amended 4-11-2000]
No parking —
From King Street south for 75
feet
No parking —
From Water Street to the
Delaware River Bridge [Added
5-17-1995]
No parking this side —
From 310 feet south of West
Broome Street south for 20
feet [Added 10-27-1993]
No parking this
space
—
Pine Street/North
From 20 feet west of Kingston
Avenue to 70 feet west of
Kingston Avenue [Added
4-1-2006; amended
9-27-2007]
15-minute parking —
Pine Street/South
From 20 feet west of Kingston
Avenue for 44 feet west
[Added 3-15-1994]
30-minute parking
(2 spaces)
—
From Kingston Avenue for 20
feet west [Added 3-15-1994]
No parking —
Prospect Street/East
From East Main Street north
for 100 feet
No parking —
From East Main Street north to
Neversink Avenue [Added
2-25-2002]
No thru traffic —
From 25 feet south of Gardner
Street to Gardner Street
No parking —
Prospect Street/West
From 200 feet north of East
Main Street to East Main
Street
No parking —
§ 505-54 TREES § 505-54
492:643
Name of Highway/Side
Location Regulation Hours/Days
Railroad Avenue/North
From First Street to Pike
Street
No parking —
Railroad Avenue/South
From Pike Street to First
Street
No parking —
River Road/South
From Ferry Street to Water
Street
No parking —
River Street/East
From 25 feet south of West
Main Street to West Main
Street
No parking —
Rumsey Street/North [Added
4-7-1995]
From Crawford Street to
Dubois Street
No parking this side —
Schultz Street/South [Added
10-31-1994]
From 25 feet east of Kingston
Avenue
No parking this
space
—
Seward Avenue/East
From 75 feet north of Front
Street north for 50 feet
Fire zone —
Seward Avenue/West
For 100 feet north of Front
Street
Fire zone —
Skinner Street/North
From East Main Street east for
200 feet
No parking —
Skinner Street/South [Added
11-9-1997]
From East Main Street for 20
feet east
No parking this
space
—
From 20 feet east of East Main
Street for 23 feet east
Handicap parking —
§ 505-54 PORT JERVIS CODE § 505-54
492:644
Name of Highway/Side
Location Regulation Hours/Days
From 43 feet east of East Main
Street for 150 feet east
[Amended 2-11-1998]
90-minute parking 8:00 a.m. to 6:00
p.m./Mon. through
Sat., except
holidays
From 300 feet east of East
Main Street for 20 feet east
No parking this
space
—
South Broome Street/South
[Repealed 4-27-1995]
Spring Street/East
From Hammond Street to
Franklin Street
No parking —
Spring Street/West
From Franklin Street to
Hammond Street
No parking —
Sullivan Avenue/East
For 25 feet south of Mary
Street north to Mary Street
[Amended 8-27-1999]
No parking here to
corner
—
From 119 feet south of Mary
Street for 109 feet south
[Added 3-28-2002]
No parking school
bus zone
7:00 a.m. to 6:00
p.m./Mon. through
Fri.
From 228 feet south of Mary
Street for 23 feet south
[Added 3-28-2002]
Handicapped
parking space
—
In front of No. 25-27 Sullivan
Avenue from 287 feet south of
Pine Street [Added
12-22-2011]
Handicap parking,
two spaces
8:00 a.m. to 2:00
p.m./Sun. only
Sussex Street/East
From 38 feet south of Ball
Street north to Ball Street
[Added 1-20-1995; amended
5-2-2003]
No parking here to
corner
—
From 35 feet south of Ball
Street for 40 feet south
[Added 1-20-1995]
30-minute parking —
From the Conrail Railroad
right-of-way for 25 feet north
[Added 6-11-1996]
No parking loading
zone
—
§ 505-54 TREES § 505-54
492:645
Name of Highway/Side
Location Regulation Hours/Days
From the Conrail Railroad
right-of-way to Front Street
[Repealed 5-17-1995 and
11-2-1995]
For 300 feet south of East
Broome Street [Repealed
4-27-1995 and 5-17-1995]
From East Broome Street north
to 57 Sussex Street [Amended
6-8-2001; 9-27-2002]
No parking Except Sat., Sun.,
holidays
Vicinity of 43 Sussex Street
[Added 6-20-2012]
No parking this
space
—
From 59 Sussex Street north to
East Main Street [Amended
6-8-2001]
No parking this side —
From 95 feet south of East
Broome Street for 20 feet
south [Added 3-3-1995;
amended 2-19-1999]
Handicapped
parking
—
From 15 feet south of Front
Street for 63 feet south
[Added 2-24-2000]
90-minute parking —
Sussex Street/West
From 25 feet north of Ball
Street south to Ball Street
[Added 3-3-1995; amended
5-2-2003]
No parking here to
corner
—
From Ball Street for 30 feet
south [Added 3-3-1995]
No parking this
space
—
From 25 feet north of Ball
Street for 25 feet north
[Added 8-11-1998]
30-minute parking 8:00 a.m. to 6:00
p.m./Mon. through
Fri.
From 60 feet south of Ball
Street for 22 feet south
[Added 6-4-1997]
Handicapped
parking
—
From East Main Street south
for 50 feet
No parking —
From 15 feet south of Front
Street for 65 feet south
[Added 2-24-2000]
90-minute parking —
§ 505-54 PORT JERVIS CODE § 505-54
492:646
Name of Highway/Side
Location Regulation Hours/Days
From 65 feet south of Front
Street for 25 feet south
[Added 2-24-2000; repealed
12-23-2013]
From Front Street to the
Conrail Railroad right-of-way
[Amended 11-2-1995;
repealed 6-11-1996]
Two spaces located from 103
feet north of Hammond Street
for 45 feet north, in front of 30
Sussex Street [Added
1-18-2012]
Limited parking 90
minutes
8:00 a.m. to 6:00
p.m, except Sun.
and holidays
From 20 feet south of
Hammond Street for 60 feet
south [Added 7-24-2000]
15-minute parking
(3 spaces)
—
From 80 feet south of
Hammond Street for 20 feet
south
Handicapped
parking
—
From 25 feet north of North
Broome Street for 20 feet
north [Added 3-3-1995;
amended 2-19-1999]
Handicapped
parking
—
From South Broome Street
south for 250 feet [Repealed
4-27-1995]
Union Street/South
From 255 feet east of Ferry
Street for 150 feet east
[Added 6-6-2003]
No parking this side —
Wagner Place/East
From 11 feet south of Jersey
Avenue for 22 feet south
[Added 9-18-1997]
No parking this
space
—
Wagner Place/West
From intersection with Jersey
Avenue, south, to dead end of
street [Added 12-15-2012]
No parking this side —
West Broome Street/North
[Added 12-22-2011]
§ 505-54 TREES § 505-54
492:647
Name of Highway/Side
Location Regulation Hours/Days
For 20 feet east from
intersection with Canal Street
No parking here to
corner
—
From 48 feet east of Canal
Street for 50 feet, two spaces
Limited parking 90
minutes
8:00 a.m. to 6:00
p.m./Mon. through
Sat., except
holidays
West Broome Street/South
[Added 4-21-1993]
From 25 feet west of Pike
Street
No parking —
From 25 feet west of Pike
Street for 20 feet west
[Amended 5-17-2000]
Handicapped
parking space
—
West King Street
From King Street and Lumber
Street west for 125 feet
[Added 2-25-2002]
Two-way traffic —
West Main Street/North
From 23 feet east of Canal
Street for 20 feet east [Added
5-7-1993; amended
3-3-1995; 2-14-1997]
90-minute parking;
no parking or
standing of
commercial vehicles
—
From 43 feet east of Canal
Street for 50 feet east [Added
3-3-1995; amended
2-14-1997]
90-minute parking;
no parking or
standing of
commercial vehicles
8:00 a.m. to 6:00
p.m./Mon. through
Sat., except
holidays
No parking or
standing
commercial vehicles
From Orange Street west for
75 feet
No parking —
From Hudson Street to Grand
View Avenue
No parking —
From No. 127 to 50 feet west
of Fossard Street
No parking —
From Coleman Street for 28
feet west [Added 9-21-1999]
No parking this
space
—
From 28 feet west of Coleman
Street to 18 feet east of
McAllister Street [Added
9-21-1999]
Parking between
signs Sat. and Sun.
only
—
§ 505-54 PORT JERVIS CODE § 505-54
492:648
Name of Highway/Side
Location Regulation Hours/Days
From 18 feet east of McAllister
Street west to McAllister
Street [Added 9-21-1999]
No parking here to
corner
—
From McAllister Street for 25
feet west [Added 9-21-1999]
No parking this
space
—
From 25 feet west of McAllister
Street west to Mechanic Street
[Added 9-21-1999; amended
12-20-2002]
No parking Except Sat., Sun.
and holidays
West Main Street/South
From Bridge Hill east to the
Conrail property line
No parking —
From 15 feet east of Canal
Street for 65 feet east [Added
11-10-1993; amended
4-4-2002]
30-minute parking 8:00 a.m. to 6:00
p.m./Mon. through
Sat., except
holidays
From Mechanic Street east to
128 West Main Street
[Amended 10-10-2002]
No parking —
From 25 feet west of Mechanic
Street east to Mechanic Street
[Added 12-20-2002]
No parking here to
corner
—
From the Conrail bridge to Mt.
William Street
No parking —
From Delaware Street east for
75 feet
No parking —
From 100 feet west of Pike
Street to Pike Street
No parking —
Woodlawn Avenue/East
From Pole No. 30002 to the
dead end
No parking —
Woodlawn Avenue/West
From the dead end to opposite
Pole No. 30002
No parking —
§ 505-55. Schedule Q: Public Parking Lots. [Amended 4-26-1982 by
L.L. No. 4-1982; 2-27-1991 by L.L. No. 3-1991; 11-9-1992; 3-5-1999;
1-19-2001; 2-2-2001; 6-6-2003; 9-30-2003; 4-1-2004; 8-22-2007;
7-14-2014 by L.L. No. 9-2014]
§ 505-54 TREES § 505-55
492:649
A. In accordance with the provisions of § 505-27, the areas described
below are public parking lots, and stopping, standing or parking of
vehicles in such lots shall be subject to the restrictions and regulations
indicated:
Name of Lot/Location Restrictions and Regulations
Christopher Marion Memorial
Park parking area/Easterly end
of East Main Street
90 minute parking between 6:00
a.m. and 11:00 p.m.
No overnight parking allowed.
D&H Canal Park lot 90 minute parking between 6:00
a.m. and 11:00 p.m.
No overnight parking allowed.
Excelsior Engine No. 5 Fire
Company parking lot 141-143
West Main Street
Authorized Fire Department
personnel only, while on official
duty.
No overnight parking allowed.
Firehouse complex parking lot at
Hammond Street and Spring
Street
Authorized Fire Department
personnel only, while on official
duty.
City employees are exempt while on
duty.
No overnight parking allowed.
Firehouse complex parking lot
on Orange Street
Authorized Fire Department
personnel only, and Canal Street
while on official duty.
No overnight parking allowed.
Howard Wheat Engine Fire
Company No. 4 parking lot on
Owen Street.
Authorized Fire Department
personnel only, while on official
duty.
No overnight parking allowed.
Municipal Building parking lot Police Department personnel and
City employees only (from the rear
corner of the building to a point
parallel to the curbing on the
easterly side of said building to the
Department of Public Works
Building. Balance of parking lot is
90 minute parking.
No overnight parking allowed.
§ 505-55 PORT JERVIS CODE § 505-55
492:650
Name of Lot/Location Restrictions and Regulations
Municipal parking area/adjacent
to Hammond Street near
Millennium Park.
90 minute parking.
No parking in excess of 90 minutes
without a parking permit.
Municipal parking area/West
side of Pike Street
No commuter train parking.
90 minute parking.
No overnight parking allowed.
Municipal parking lot/between
Ball Street and Front Street,
next to MINI MALL.
90 minute parking between 6:00
a.m. and 2:00 a.m.
No overnight parking allowed
without a permit from 2:00 a.m. to
6:00 a.m.
Municipal parking lot/South side
of Front Street near intersection
of Pike Street and Front Street
90 minute parking 8:00 a.m. to 6:00
p.m.
No overnight parking allowed.
Municipal parking lot/West of
McArthur Circle
No commuter train parking.
90 minute parking.
No overnight parking allowed.
Municipal parking lot/at
intersection of Water Street and
River Road
No parking commercial vehicles.
90 minute parking between 6:00
a.m. and 11:00 p.m.
No overnight parking allowed.
Roundhouse property 90 minute parking between 6:00
a.m. and 11:00 p.m.
No overnight parking allowed.
Tri-State Engine Fire Company
No. 6 parking lot at 1 Barclay
Street
Authorized Fire Department
personnel only, while on official
duty.
No overnight parking allowed.
West End Beach lot Parking by attendant permit, when
attendant is on duty.
At all other times, 90 minute
parking between 6:00 a.m. and
10:00 p.m.
No overnight parking allowed.
§ 505-55 TREES § 505-55
492:651
§ 505-56. Schedule R: Private Parking Areas and Driveways.
In accordance with the provisions of § 505-31, the operation and parking
of vehicles in the private parking areas and driveways described below is
subject to the regulations and restrictions indicated:
Name of Area/Location Restrictions and Regulations
K Mart Plaza parking lot No parking, south side of building, from
east end to west end, K Mart store to
branch office of County Trust Bank and
all stores in between; parking allowed
for pickup only in designated locations
§ 505-57. Schedule S: Safety Zones.
In accordance with the provisions of § 505-37, the locations described below
are designated as safety zones:
Name of Street Side Location
(Reserved)
Name of Lot/Location Restrictions and Regulations
West End Memorial Park/South
side of West Main Street
No overnight parking allowed.
90 minute parking.
B. During inclement weather, when there is a snowfall, all vehicles must
be removed from all municipally owned parking lots at 6:00 a.m. until
the lots are properly plowed.
C. City-issued parking permits are required for overnight parking in those
City-owned lots that permit same. Overnight parking permits are
required in those lots, year round. Overnight parking hours are 2:00
a.m. to 6:00 a.m.
D. A parking permit can be obtained in the City Clerk's office for overnight
parking in any approved lot, with the purchase of a permit. Annual Fee
is according to attached Fee Schedule, per vehicle, from date of
issue.177
177. Editor's Note: Said fees can be found in Ch. 280, Fees.
§ 505-55 PORT JERVIS CODE § 505-57
492:652
ARTICLE VIII
Supplemental Parking Regulations
[Added 4-26-1982 by L.L. No. 4-1982; amended 2-27-1991 by L.L.
No. 3-1991]
§ 505-58. Diagonal parking prohibited.
There shall be no diagonal parking permitted on any public street or
highway within the City of Port Jervis. Where parking is not otherwise
prohibited, all vehicles parked on public streets or highways within the City
shall be parked parallel to the curb and no more than 12 inches from the
curb. In the event that there is no curbing, parking shall be parallel to the
edge of pavement and no more than 12 inches therefrom. [Reference New
York State Vehicle and Traffic Law § 1203, Subdivision (a).]
§ 505-59. Private commercial parking lots.
In all cases of new construction, remodeling, change of use, site alteration
or other such changes, additions, etc., where any approvals are required
from the Planning Board and/or Building Official and where such
construction, remodeling, change of use or otherwise will provide for or
permit parking to abut directly onto a sidewalk or street or highway, all
parking spaces thus provided for shall be constructed and maintained with
stationary curbing eight inches high, positioned in such manner as to
prevent any portion of any parked vehicle from protruding into, onto or over
any portion of the sidewalk or street. In addition, said curbing shall be of
sufficient strength and structure to prohibit or prevent any vehicle striking
it from entering into or onto the sidewalk or street.
§ 505-58 TREES § 505-59
492:653

ARTICLE IX
Snowmobiles and All-Terrain Vehicles
[Added 12-28-2009 by L.L. No. 11-2009]
§ 505-60. Purpose.
The Common Council of the City of Port Jervis recognizes the potential
adverse impact caused by the misuse of all-terrain vehicles and
snowmobiles; and, therefore, deems it appropriate to control their use in
a manner compatible with the health, safety and general welfare of the
residents of the City and to property within the City as set forth herein.
§ 505-61. Definitions.
For the purposes of this article, the following terms are defined as follows:
ACCOMPANY — To be within a reasonable distance of the person
accompanied, as to be able to communicate by direct conversation (not
phone or other communications devise) and direct their actions.
ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLE or ATV — Any self-propelled vehicle manufactured
for operation primarily on off-highway trails or in off-highway competitions
and which is only incidentally operated on public highways, provided that
such vehicle does not exceed 60 inches in width or 800 pounds dry weight.
Included within such definition are vehicles commonly referred to as dirt
bikes, minibikes, go-carts, dune buggies, trail bikes and mopeds.
CITY — The City of Port Jervis, New York.
CITY PROPERTY — All land owned or leased by the City of Port Jervis,
including City highways and roads, trails and parklands, and any private
land over which the City of Port Jervis possesses an easement.
SHOULDER — That portion of a highway immediately adjacent to the side
of a roadway, customarily used for emergency travel or parking.
SNOWMOBILE — Any self-propelled vehicle designed for travel on snow or
ice, steered by skis or runners and supported in whole or in part by one or
more skis, belts or cleats.
§ 505-62. Registration; permit.
All all-terrain vehicles must be registered and permitted as required under
Article 48-B of the Vehicle and Traffic Law of the State of New York.
§ 505-63. Operation on city property prohibited.
It shall be unlawful to operate an ATV or snowmobile upon any City
property, as defined herein.
§ 505-64. Operation on streets/highways.
§ 505-60 TREES § 505-64
492:655
§ 505-65. Operation in City parks and other public lands, except
where posted for such use.
The use and operation of snowmobiles and all-terrain vehicles are
prohibited within any City park or playground and any public land within
the City, except where posted for such use, or by resolution of the Common
Council and then only in conformance with the terms and conditions stated
for such use.
§ 505-66. Conditions and restrictions of use.
A. Snowmobiles and all-terrain vehicles shall not be operated on state,
county or City streets/highways, including the shoulders thereof, in the
City of Port Jervis.
B. Emergencies. When authorized or directed by the Mayor in a declared
emergency, or emergency situation, a snowmobile or all-terrain vehicle
may be operated on the affected portions of City, county or state roads/
highway for the purpose of a special emergency.
C. Police and emergency personnel. The provisions of this chapter shall
not apply to the operation of a snowmobile or ATV by a police officer,
firefighter, or other such emergency personnel or government
employee in the conduct of his or her official duties.
A. A person shall be allowed to operate a snowmobile or ATV for sport or
recreational use only if such use is in excess of 1,000 feet from any
dwelling and occurs between the hours of 11:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. Any
other such operation for sport or recreational use except for the
purposes of loading and unloading shall be prohibited.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate, and any owner thereof to
permit to be operated, a snowmobile or ATV on any street or public land
or public place in the City where permitted, unless the owner or
operator of such machine is insured against public liability and carries
proof of such insurance. Such proof shall be promptly displayed by the
owner/operator upon request to any law enforcement officer or to any
person who has suffered or claims to have suffered either personal
injury or damage to property as a result of the operation of such
machine by said owner/operator. The failure to produce such proof shall
be presumptive evidence of operating the machine without insurance
against public liability.
C. The operator of an ATV or snowmobile shall wear a helmet upon his/her
head and goggles or face shields upon his/her face, such as approved by
the Department of Motor Vehicles of the State of New York.
D. No person shall operate an ATV or snowmobile on or in any open
waters, streams, or wetlands.
E. No person shall operate an ATV or snowmobile in violation of
regulations of the Department of Motor Vehicles of the State of New
§ 505-64 PORT JERVIS CODE § 505-66
492:656
§ 505-67. Penalties for offenses.
For any violation of the terms of this article, prohibited acts, and conditions
of use, the offender shall be liable for a penalty not to exceed $250 for each
separate item and incident in violation of this chapter.
§ 505-68. Impoundment; cause for removal; confiscation and
redemption.
§ 505-69. Compliance with state law.
Nothing herein shall prohibit or excuse the obligation of individuals to
comply with the provisions of the Vehicle and Traffic Law of the State of
New York regarding the vehicles and operation of same herein.
York. Should DMV require registration or licensing of such machine,
then it shall be unlawful to operate said machine without proper
licensing and registration.
F. The provisions of this article shall not apply to the operation of an ATV
for work purposes on private property, including but not limited to
snowplowing and landscaping. (Reference: Chapter 381, Noise.)
A. In addition to the penalties set forth in this article, a police officer or
peace officer may immediately impound or cause to be removed the
ATV or snowmobile if:
(1) The identity of the owner/operator is unknown to the officer.
(2) The operator is in violation of any portion of this article.
B. The period of impoundment for the ATV or snowmobile shall be for such
period of time as is necessary for police purposes, which shall include
the use of the machine for identification in any court action. Any ATV or
snowmobile released from impoundment shall be done so with the
approval of the Police Department in compliance with its procedures.
C. In the case of a second or subsequent violation by the same person, the
court may order the confiscation of said ATV or snowmobile in lieu of
any fine and/or imprisonment. Any ATV or snowmobile which is
confiscated pursuant to this section will be sold at public auction
according to the appropriate procedures and law affecting public
auctions by a municipality.
§ 505-66 TREES § 505-69
492:657
Chapter 508
VEHICLES, UNLICENSED, INOPERATIVE OR DISCARDED
GENERAL REFERENCES
Property maintenance — See Ch. 417.
Solid waste — See Ch. 457.
Towing — See Ch. 486.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 505.
§ 508-1. Storage of unlicensed, inoperative or discarded vehicles.
A. Except as hereinbefore provided, no owner or occupant of any parcel of
real property within the City of Port Jervis, including real property
occupied primarily for the sale and repair of automobiles or automotive
equipment, shall store or keep or permit the storage or keeping thereon
for a period of more than 30 days of one or more junk automobiles
unless they are stored or kept in an enclosed building having a roof or
in a place where they are not visible from any public highway or any
other property owned or occupied by a person other than the owner of
the premises on which they are stored or kept. With respect to any
specific junk motor vehicle, the owner or occupant of real property may
submit in writing to the Building Department a request that such owner
or occupant be granted a thirty-day extension of time in which to
dispose of the junk motor vehicle or otherwise comply with this chapter,
and upon good cause shown, the Building Department may, in its
discretion, grant such extension of time.
B. The outside storage of unlicensed, inoperative and/or discarded
vehicles on privately owned property within the City of Port Jervis is a
source of annoyance to residents and to owners and occupants of
adjoining and nearby properties. The outdoor storage of such vehicles
is unsightly and constitutes an attractive nuisance to children and a
peril to their safety.
(1) No such unlicensed, inoperative, and/or discarded vehicle shall be
parked or stored outdoors on any privately owned property, vacant
or otherwise, for a period of more than 30 days.
(2) No vehicle, camper, or trailer may be used for any residential
purpose or temporary habitation within the City of Port Jervis.
C. Any person committing an offense against any provision of this section
shall, upon conviction thereof, be guilty of a violation pursuant to the
Penal Law of the State of New York punishable by a fine not exceeding
$250 or by imprisonment for a term not exceeding 15 days, or both such
fine and imprisonment. The continuation of an offense against the
provisions of this section shall constitute, for each day the offense is
continued, a separate and distinct offense hereunder.
§ 505-69 PORT JERVIS CODE § 508-2
492:658
§ 508-2. Abatement of violations.
In the event the owner or occupant of any parcel of real property within
the City of Port Jervis violates or permits the violation of the provisions of
the foregoing section, the Building Official shall serve a notice in writing,
either personally or by registered mail, of such violation on the owner and
occupant thereof. Such notice shall direct the removal of such vehicles from
the premises within 10 days after the service of the notice. In the event the
terms of the notice are not complied with within said period, the City, acting
through its agents and employees, may enter upon the property where said
junk automobiles are so stored or kept and cause them to be removed and
destroyed. The expense incurred by the City in connection with the removal
and destruction of said junk automobiles shall be assessed against the land
upon which they were stored or kept and shall constitute a lien thereon to
be collected as provided by law.
Chapter 513
WATER
GENERAL REFERENCES
Plumbing — See Ch. 410. Water rules and regulations — See Ch. A615.
§ 508-2 TREES § 508-2
492:659

ARTICLE I
Emergency Use
[Adopted 12-27-1965 (Ch. 155, Art. I of the 1981 Code)]
§ 513-1. Legislative determinations.
The Common Council hereby finds, as a matter of legislative determination,
that an adequate supply of water for domestic, commercial, industrial and
public use in the City of Port Jervis is essential to the safety, health, welfare
and comfort of its people and that restrictive regulations for the purpose of
conserving by appropriate limitations the supply of water are required to
provide and maintain such supply.
§ 513-2. Authority of Mayor to proclaim emergency and promulgate
rules; applicability.
For the best interest of the public and for the preservation of the safety,
health, welfare and comfort of the people of the City of Port Jervis, it
is hereby ordered and directed that the Mayor is hereby authorized,
whenever, upon the recommendation made by the Director of Public Works,
the circumstances warrant, to proclaim an emergency and promulgate such
rules and regulations as may in his opinion be necessary to conserve the
supply of water. The provisions of this article shall apply to all persons,
firms, partnerships, associations, corporations, companies or organizations
of any kind using water both in and outside the City and regardless of
whether any such persons, firms, partnerships, associations, companies or
organizations shall have a contract for water service with the City.
§ 513-3. Scope of use restrictions and prohibitions. [Amended
4-25-2016 by L.L. No. 10-2016]
It is further ordered and directed that such rules and regulations may
include, but shall not necessarily be limited to, the restriction or prohibition
of the use of water for air-conditioning equipment, car washing, sprinkling
or irrigation of lawns, plants, shrubs, trees or gardens, swimming pools,
the escape of water through defective plumbing, which shall mean the
knowing permission for defective plumbing to remain out of repair, or any
other water-consuming operation. The Building Official or Deputy Building
Official may direct that water service be denied or terminated at any time
at a property where the certificate of occupancy for that property/structure
has been revoked or denied for a violation of any local, county, state or
federal statute or regulation.
§ 513-4. Notice of emergency proclamation.
The proclamation of the emergency as aforestated and the restrictions to be
imposed shall be conveyed to the public by radio, television and newspaper.
Announcement by the local radio station or television station and in one
daily newspaper published in the City of Port Jervis shall constitute notice
to the general public.
§ 513-1 TREES § 513-5
492:661
§ 513-5. Duration of emergency.
Said proclamation shall specify the duration of the limitation, prohibition or
restriction, if practical. Otherwise such limitation, prohibition or restriction
shall continue in full force and effect until the Mayor shall declare that the
emergency no longer exists.
§ 513-6. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 9-28-1981 by L.L. No.
4-1981]
Any person committing an offense against any provision of this Article shall
be punishable as provided in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article I.
§ 513-5 PORT JERVIS CODE § 513-6
492:662
Chapter 520
WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Zoning — See Ch. 535
§ 520-1. Purpose and legislative intent.
The Telecommunications Act of 1996 affirmed the City of Port Jervis's
authority concerning the placement, construction and modification of
wireless telecommunications facilities. The City Board finds that wireless
telecommunications facilities and related equipment may pose a unique
hazard to the health, safety, public welfare and environment of the City
and its inhabitants and may also have an adverse visual impact on the
community, its character and thus the quality of life in the City. The intent of
this chapter is to ensure that the placement, construction or modification of
wireless telecommunications facilities and related equipment is consistent
with the City's land use policies and Zoning Code to minimize the negative
and adverse visual impact of wireless telecommunications facilities; to
assure a comprehensive review of environmental impacts of such facilities;
to protect the health, safety and welfare of the City of Port Jervis; and
to encourage shared use of wireless telecommunications facilities. These
regulations are not intended to prohibit or have the effect of prohibiting
the provision of personal wireless services nor shall they be used to
unreasonably discriminate among providers of functionally equivalent
services consistent with current federal regulations.
§ 520-2. Title.
This chapter may be known and cited as the "Wireless Telecommunications
Facilities Siting Law for the City of Port Jervis," or may otherwise be known
as the "Wireless Facilities Law."
§ 520-3. Definitions; word usage.
A. For purposes of this chapter, and where not inconsistent with the
context of a particular section, the defined terms, phrases, words,
abbreviations and their derivations shall have the meanings given in
this section. When not inconsistent with the context, words in the
present tense include the future tense, words used in the plural number
include words in the singular number and words in the singular number
include the plural number. The word "shall" is always mandatory and
not merely directory.
B. Terms defined.
§ 513-6 WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS § 520-3
520:663
ACCESSORY FACILITY OR STRUCTURE — An accessory facility or
structure serving or being used in conjunction with a
telecommunications facility and located on the same property or lot as
the telecommunications tower, including but not limited to utility or
transmission equipment storage sheds or cabinets.
APPLICANT — Includes any individual, corporation, estate, trust,
partnership, joint-stock company, association of two or more persons,
limited-liability company or entity submitting an application to the City
of Port Jervis for a special permitted use for a telecommunications
facility.
APPLICATION — The form approved by the Council, together with all
necessary and appropriate documentation, that an applicant submits
in order to receive a special permitted use for a telecommunications
facility.
ANTENNA — A system of electrical conductors that transmit or receive
electromagnetic waves or radio frequency signals. Such waves shall
include, but not be limited to, radio, television, cellular, paging,
personal telecommunications services (PCS) and microwave
telecommunications.
BREAK POINT — The location on a telecommunications tower (tower)
which, in the event of a failure of the tower, would result in the tower
falling or collapsing within the boundaries of the property on which the
tower is placed.
CITY — The City of Port Jervis, New York.
COLLOCATION — The use of the same telecommunications tower or
structure to carry two or more antennas for the provision of wireless
services by two or more persons or entities.
COMMERCIAL IMPRACTICABILITY or COMMERCIALLY
IMPRACTICABLE — Shall have the meaning in this chapter and any
special permitted use granted hereunder as is defined and applied
under the United States Uniform Commercial Code (UCC).
COMPLETED APPLICATION — An application that contains all
information and/or data necessary to enable the Council to evaluate
the merits of the application and to make an informed decision with
respect to the effect and impact of the telecommunications tower on the
City in the context of the permitted land use for the particular location
requested.
EAF — The environmental assessment form approved by the New York
Department of Environmental Conservation.
FAA — The Federal Aviation Administration or its duly designated and
authorized successor agency.
FCC — The Federal Communications Commission or its duly designated
and authorized successor agency.
§ 520-3 PORT JERVIS CODE § 520-3
520:664
FREESTANDING TOWER — A tower that is not supported by guy wires
and ground anchors or other means of attached or external support.
HEIGHT — When referring to a tower or structure, the distance
measured from the preexisting grade level to the highest point on the
tower or structure, even if said highest point is an antenna.
NIER — Nonionizing electromagnetic radiation.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, estate, trust, partnership, jointstock
company, association of two or more persons having a joint
common interest or governmental entity.
PERSONAL WIRELESS FACILITY — See definition of
"telecommunications tower."
PERSONAL WIRELESS SERVICES or PWS or PERSONAL
TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICE or PCS (or any functionally
equivalent service or technology that may be developed in the future)
— Shall have the same meaning as defined and used in the 1996 Federal
Telecommunications Act.
PLANNING BOARD — The City of Port Jervis Planning Board is the
officially designated agency or body of the community to whom
applications for a special permitted use for a telecommunications
facility must be made and that is authorized to review, analyze, evaluate
and make decisions with respect to granting or revoking special
permitted use approvals for telecommunications facilities. The Planning
Board may, at its discretion, delegate or designate other official
agencies of the City to accept, review, analyze, evaluate and make
recommendations to the Planning Board with respect to the granting
or not granting, recertifying or not recertifying or revoking of special
permitted use approvals for telecommunications facilities.
SITE — See definition of "telecommunications tower."
SPECIAL PERMITTED USE — The official document or permit by which
an applicant is allowed to construct and use a telecommunications
tower, as granted or issued by the City.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS — The transmission and reception of audio,
video, data and other information by wire, radio frequency, light and
other electronic or electromagnetic systems.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS STRUCTURE — Any structure used in,
associated with or necessary for the provision of wireless services and
as described in the definition of wireless telecommunications facility.
TEMPORARY — In relation to all aspects and components of this
chapter, fewer than 90 days.
WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITY or TOWER or SITE
or PERSONAL WIRELESS FACILITY (or any functionally equivalent
service or technology that may be developed in the future) — A
structure or location designed or intended to be used or used to support
antennas. It includes, without limit, antennas applied to the facade of a
§ 520-3 WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS § 520-3
520:665
§ 520-4. Telecommunications facilities permitted.
Telecommunications facilities and towers shall be specially permitted within
the City subject to regulation pursuant to this chapter, site plan approval
and coordinated state environmental quality review (SEQR), pursuant to the
Environmental Conservation Law of New York.
§ 520-5. Special permitted use application and other requirements.
building or roof-mounted antennas, freestanding towers, guyed towers,
monopoles and similar structures that employ camouflage technology,
and includes, but is not limited to, structures such as a church steeple,
water tower, sign or other similar structures intended to mitigate the
visual impact of an antenna or the functional equivalent of such. It is
a facility or structure intended for transmitting and/or receiving radio,
television, cellular, paging, personal telecommunications services or
microwave telecommunications, but excludes those used exclusively
for private radio and television reception and private citizens' bands,
amateur radio and other similar telecommunications.
A. All applicants for a special permitted use for a wireless
telecommunications facility or any modification of such facility shall
comply with the requirements set forth in this section.
B. An application for a special permitted use for a wireless
telecommunications facility shall be signed on behalf of the applicant by
the person preparing the same and with knowledge of the contents and
representations made therein and attesting to the truth and
completeness of the information. The landowner, if different from the
applicant, shall also sign the application. At the discretion of the
Planning Board, any false or misleading statement in the application
may subject the applicant to denial of the application without further
consideration or opportunity for correction.
C. Applications not meeting the requirements stated herein or which are
otherwise incomplete may be rejected by the Planning Board.
D. The applicant shall demonstrate that:
(1) The applicant's proposed wireless telecommunications facility can
be maintained in a safe manner and in compliance with all
conditions of the special permitted use.
(2) The applicant is authorized to do business in New York State.
E. No wireless telecommunications facility or tower or other tall structure
shall be installed or constructed for the purpose of providing wireless
telecommunications service until a plan of the site is reviewed and
approved by the Planning Board. No construction may be undertaken in
furtherance of an application until SEQR review has been completed
and site plan approval and special permit approvals have been granted
by the Planning Board.
§ 520-3 PORT JERVIS CODE § 520-5
520:666
F. Application procedures.
(1) All applications for the construction or installation of a new
wireless telecommunications facility shall be prepared by a New-
York-licensed professional engineer and land surveyor and shall
address, either on the site plan or on a narrative report which may
accompany the site plan submission, the following:
(a) The need for the wireless telecommunications facility to
provide service primarily within the City.
(b) Name and address of person preparing the report.
(c) Name and address of the property owner, operator and
applicant, to include the legal form of the applicant.
(d) Postal address and Tax Map parcel number of the property.
(e) Zoning district or designation in which the property is situated.
(f) Size of the property stated both in square feet and lot line
dimensions and a diagram showing the location of all lot lines.
(g) Location of all residential structures within 750 feet.
(h) Location of all occupied structures within 750 feet.
(i) Location of all structures on the property which is the subject
of the application.
(j) Location, size and height of all proposed and existing antennas
and all appurtenant structures.
(k) Type, size and location of all proposed and existing
landscaping.
(l) The number, type and design of the wireless
telecommunications facility(s) antenna(s) proposed and the
basis for the calculations of the wireless telecommunications
facility's capacity to accommodate multiple users.
(m) The make, model and manufacturer of the wireless facility and
antenna(s).
(n) A description of the proposed wireless facility and antenna(s)
and all related fixtures, structures, appurtenances and
apparatuses, including height above preexisting grade,
materials, color and lighting.
(o) The frequency, modulation and class of service of radio or
other transmitting equipment.
(p) Transmission and maximum effective radiated power of the
antenna(s).
§ 520-5 WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS § 520-5
520:667
(q) Direction of maximum lobes and associated radiation of the
antenna(s).
(r) Applicant's proposed wireless facility maintenance and
inspection procedures and related system of records.
(s) Certification that NIER levels at the proposed site are within
the threshold levels adopted by the FCC.
(t) Certification that the proposed antenna(s) will not cause
interference with existing telecommunications devices. The
certifying engineer need not be approved by the City.
(u) A copy of the FCC license applicable for the use of the wireless
telecommunications facility.
(v) Certification that topographic and geologic conditions, which
are to be confirmed by field tests, are sufficient to assure the
stability of the proposed wireless telecommunications tower.
(w) Propagation studies of the proposed site and all adjoining
proposed or in-service or existing sites.
(x) Certification that the wireless telecommunications facility and
attachments both are designed and constructed ("as built") to
meet all county, state and federal structural requirements for
loads, including wind and ice.
(2) The applicant shall disclose, in writing, any agreement in existence
prior to submission of the application that would limit or preclude
the ability of the applicant to share any new wireless
telecommunications facility that it constructs.
(3) In the case of a new wireless telecommunications facility, the
applicant shall be required to submit a report demonstrating its
efforts to secure shared use of existing wireless
telecommunications facility(s). Copies of written requests and
responses for shared use shall be provided to the Planning Board.
(4) Prior to issuance of a certificate of compliance or certificate of
occupancy, the applicant shall post with the City a cash bond or
surety for the cost of removal of the tower in the event that it
should be abandoned or become a hazard or otherwise be subject
to removal pursuant to a valid exercise of the police power of the
City.
(5) The applicant shall submit a completed long form EAF and a
completed visual EAF addendum. The visual EAF addendum shall
be in the form of a visual impact assessment which may include:
(a) A zone of visibility map, indicating the full range and line of
sight within which the proposed facility will be visible.
§ 520-5 PORT JERVIS CODE § 520-5
520:668
(b) Pictorial representations of "before" and "after" views from key
viewpoints to be determined by the Planning Board, including
but not limited to state highways and other major roads; state
and local parks; other public lands; historic districts; preserves
and historic sites normally open to the public; and from any
other location where the site is visible.
(c) An assessment of the visual impact of the facility base, guy
wires and accessory buildings from abutting and adjacent
properties and streets.
(d) A discussion of the feasibility of disguising the proposed facility
utilizing stealth technology to blend with the surrounding
vista.
(6) The applicant shall provide a plan for mitigation of the visual
impacts which shall include a screening plan and such other
methods as the applicant may employ to diminish any adverse
visual impact attributable to the proposal.
G. Construction.
(1) Unless otherwise directed by the Planning Board all utilities
serving any wireless telecommunications facility site shall be
installed underground and in compliance with all laws, rules and
regulations of the City, including specifically, but not limited to, the
National Electrical Safety Code and the National Electrical Code,
where appropriate. Noise suppression materials shall be utilized in
the design and construction of the tower and any appurtenances.
(2) Both the wireless telecommunications facility and any and all
accessory or associated facilities shall to the maximum extent
employ building materials, colors and textures which are
compatible with the natural surroundings of the site.
(3) An access road and parking to assure adequate emergency and
service access shall be provided, should such be deemed necessary
by the City Board. Existing roads, whether public or private, shall
be utilized to the extent possible.
(4) All wireless telecommunications facilities shall be constructed,
operated, maintained, repaired, modified or restored in strict
compliance with all current technical, safety and safety-related
codes adopted by the City, county, state or United States, including
but not limited to the most recent editions of the National Electrical
Safety Code and the National Electrical Code, as well as accepted
and responsibly workmanlike industry practices and recommended
practices of the National Association of Tower Erectors. The codes
referred to are codes that include, but are not limited to,
construction, building, electrical, fire, safety, health and land use
codes. In the event of a conflict between or among any of the
preceding, the more stringent shall apply.
§ 520-5 WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS § 520-5
520:669
§ 520-6. Location of facilities.
H. Each applicant shall obtain all other permits and licenses required by
applicable law, rule or regulation and must maintain the same, in full
force and effect, for as long as required by the City or other
governmental entity or agency having jurisdiction over the applicant.
I. All new towers shall demonstrate the feasibility of accommodation of
future demand. The scope of this examination shall be determined by
the Planning Board. The wireless telecommunications facility shall be
structurally designed to accommodate at least two additional antenna
arrays equal to those of the applicant and located as close to the
applicant's antenna as possible without causing interference. This
requirement may be waived, provided that the applicant demonstrates
that the provision of future shared usage of the wireless
telecommunications facility is not technologically feasible or is
commercially impracticable and creates an unnecessary and
unreasonable burden, based upon:
(1) The number of FCC licenses available for the area.
(2) The kind of wireless telecommunications facility site and structure
proposed.
(3) The number of existing and potential licenses without wireless
telecommunications facility spaces/sites.
(4) Available space on existing and approved telecommunications
towers.
A. Priority of location.
(1) Applicants for wireless telecommunications facilities shall locate,
site and erect said wireless telecommunications facilities, including
towers or other tall structures, in accordance with the following
priorities, Subsection A(1)(a) being the highest priority and
Subsection A(1)(e) being the lowest priority:
(a) On existing tall telecommunications structures or
telecommunications towers.
(b) Collocation on a site with existing telecommunications towers
or structures.
(c) In commercially zoned areas along any state highways within
the City of Port Jervis.
(d) In nonresidential areas.
(e) On other property in the City.
(2) If the proposed property site is not the highest priority listed above,
an explanation shall be provided.
§ 520-5 PORT JERVIS CODE § 520-6
520:670
§ 520-7. Shared use of towers.
§ 520-8. Height of facilities.
(3) Sites with superior priority may not be bypassed absent a
demonstration that such site is unavailable. Each applicant shall
address collocation as an option, and if such option is not proposed,
the applicant must explain. Agreements between providers limiting
or prohibiting collocation shall not be a valid basis for any claim of
commercial impracticability or hardship.
(4) Notwithstanding the above, the Planning Board may approve any
site located within an area in the above list of priorities, provided
that it finds that such approval is in the best interest of the health,
safety and welfare of the City.
B. The applicant shall submit a written report demonstrating the
applicant's review of the above locations in order of priority and
demonstrating the technological reason for the site selection. If the site
selected is not the highest priority, then a detailed written explanation
as to why sites of a higher priority were not selected shall be included
with the application.
C. The applicant shall identify the locations of any additional sites that the
applicant has or is or will be considering, reviewing or planning for
wireless telecommunications facilities in the vicinity of the City.
A. Location of antennas on preexisting structures shall be considered and
preferred. Shared use of existing telecommunications towers or other
existing structures shall be preferred by the City. Where such shared
use is unavailable, the applicant shall submit a comprehensive report
inventorying existing towers and other appropriate structures within
four miles of any proposed new tower site; and the applicant shall
provide analysis of the feasibility of shared use of any facility so
identified.
B. An applicant intending to share use of an existing telecommunications
tower or other tall structure shall be required to document the
feasibility of same.
C. In the event that an application to share the use of an existing
telecommunications tower does not increase the height of the
telecommunications tower, the Planning Board may waive any portion
of this chapter deemed by the Board to be redundant by virtue of prior
review.
A. The applicant shall submit documentation justifying to the Planning
Board the total height of any wireless telecommunications facility and/
or antenna and the basis therefor.
B. Wireless telecommunications facilities shall be no higher than the
minimum height necessary. Unless waived by the Planning Board upon
§ 520-6 WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS § 520-8
520:671
§ 520-9. Visibility of facilities; lighting, maintenance.
§ 520-10. Security of facilities.
All wireless telecommunications facilities and antennas shall be located,
fenced or otherwise secured in a manner which prevents unauthorized
access, specifically:
§ 520-11. Signage.
Signage shall be governed by the regulation of the particular district within
which the facility is to be located.
good cause shown, the maximum height shall be 100 feet, based on
three collocated antenna arrays and ambient tree height of 70 feet.
C. The maximum height of any wireless telecommunications facility and
attached antennas constructed after the effective date of this chapter
shall not exceed that which shall permit operation without artificial
lighting of any kind in accordance with municipal, county, state and/or
any federal law and/or regulation.
A. Wireless telecommunications facilities shall not be artificially lighted or
marked, except as required by law.
B. Unless otherwise directed by the Planning Board, towers and facilities
shall contain a galvanized finish or be painted with a rust-preventive
paint of an appropriate color to harmonize with the surroundings, as
approved by the Planning Board. To the extent available, the facility
shall employ available technology to obscure the facility from public
view.
C. The Planning Board may impose such conditions for maintenance as are
deemed necessary to preserve the appearance of the structure.
D. If lighting is required, the applicant shall provide a detailed plan for
sufficient lighting, of as unobtrusive and inoffensive an effect as is
permissible under state and federal regulations, and an artist's
rendering or other visual representation showing the effect of light
emanating from the site onto neighboring habitable structures within
1,500 feet of property lines of the parcel on which the wireless
telecommunications facility is located.
A. All antennas, towers and other supporting structures, including guy
wires, shall be made inaccessible to individuals and constructed or
shielded in such a manner that they cannot be climbed or run into.
B. Transmitters and telecommunications control points must be installed
such that they are readily accessible only to persons authorized to
operate or service them.
§ 520-8 PORT JERVIS CODE § 520-12
520:672
§ 520-12. Lot size and setbacks.
In addition to the bulk requirements of the City Zoning Law, any proposed
telecommunications towers and associated equipment shall satisfy the
following additional requirements:
§ 520-13. Retention of expert assistance and reimbursement by
applicant.
§ 520-14. Permit required; exceptions; new construction; existing
facilities.
A. Be additionally set back from abutting parcels, recorded rights-of-way
and road and street lines a distance sufficient to contain on site all
icefall or debris from a tower or tower failure and to preserve the
privacy and sanctity of any adjoining properties. In order to better
protect the health, safety and welfare of the general public and to avoid
the potential for injury due to falling ice or debris, all towers shall be
not less than 350 feet from the nearest property boundary of any
school, park, day-care center, public playground or similar occupancy.
B. Have a minimum setback from any property line a distance equal to the
height of the facility, plus 10 feet, or the existing setback requirement of
the underlying zoning district, whichever is greater. All accessory
structures shall be located so as to comply with the minimum setback
requirements for the property on which they are situated.
A. In addition to the provisions of 6 NYCRR § 617.17(c), the Planning
Board may engage such consultants as it may deem necessary to assist
the Board in reviewing and evaluating the application and any requests
for recertification.
B. An applicant shall deposit with the City funds sufficient to reimburse
the City for all reasonable costs of consultant and expert evaluation and
consultation to the Planning Board in connection with the review of any
application.
A. In addition to the requirements of City Code § 535-61 governing site
plans, no person shall be permitted to site, place, build, construct or
modify or prepare any site for the placement or use of a wireless
telecommunications facility as of the effective date of this chapter
without having first obtained a special permitted use for a wireless
telecommunications facility.
B. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this section, no special
permitted use shall be required for those exceptions noted in the
definition of wireless telecommunications facility, such as those used
exclusively for fire, police and other dispatch telecommunications, or
exclusively for private radio and television reception and private
citizens' bands, amateur radio and other similar telecommunications.
§ 520-12 WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS § 520-14
520:673
§ 520-15. Public hearing required.
The Planning Board shall hold a public hearing prior to the grant of a special
permit. Such public hearing may, in the judgment of the Planning Board,
be held jointly with either the public hearing required pursuant to City
Code § 535-61H and all provisions relating thereto, including notice and
publication.
§ 520-16. Action on application for special permitted use.
§ 520-17. Term of permit; extension; renewal; expiration.
C. New construction, including routine maintenance on an existing
wireless telecommunications facility, shall comply with the
requirements of this chapter.
D. All wireless telecommunications facilities existing on or before the
effective date of this chapter shall be allowed to continue as they
presently exist; provided, however, that any modification to existing
facilities must comply with this chapter.
A. The Planning Board will undertake a review of an application pursuant
to this chapter in a timely fashion and shall act within a reasonable
period of time, given the relative complexity of the application and the
circumstances, with due regard for the public's interest and need to be
involved and the applicant's desire for a timely resolution.
B. Except for necessary building permits, and subsequent certificates of
compliance, no additional permits or approvals from the City, other
than the special permitted use granted under this chapter, shall be
required for telecommunications facilities covered by this chapter.
C. After the public hearing and after formally considering the application,
the Planning Board may approve and issue or deny a special permitted
use and/or site plan. Its decision shall be in writing and shall be based
on substantial evidence in the record. The burden of proof for the grant
of the permit shall always be upon the applicant.
(1) If the Planning Board approves the special permitted use for a
wireless telecommunications facility, then the applicant shall be
notified of such approval, in writing.
(2) If the Planning Board denies the special permitted use for a
wireless telecommunications facility, then the applicant shall be
notified of such denial, in writing.
D. The City's decision on an application for a special permitted use for a
wireless telecommunications facility shall be supported by substantial
evidence contained in a written record.
§ 520-14 PORT JERVIS CODE § 520-17
520:674
A. The special permit granted pursuant to this chapter shall be valid for a
period of five years, measured from the date of final action by the
Planning Board.
B. Prior to the expiration of a special permit granted pursuant to this
chapter, a holder may seek extension/renewal for a period not to exceed
five years.
(1) The holder of a special permitted use for such tower shall submit a
written request for extension/renewal. In the written request for
recertification, the holder of such special permitted use shall
submit a renewal application in a form to be established by the
Planning Board, which form shall require the following information
in support thereof:
(a) The name of the holder of the special permitted use for the
wireless telecommunications facility.
(b) If applicable, the number or title of the special permitted use.
(c) The date of the original granting of the special permitted use.
(d) Any physical changes to the site covered by the permit.
(e) A summary of the maintenance record of the facility during the
term of the existing permit, which shall include any and all
structural changes.
(f) Any requests for waivers or relief of any kind whatsoever from
the requirements of this chapter and any requirements for a
special permitted use.
(2) If, after such review, the Planning Board determines that the
permitted wireless telecommunications facility is in compliance
with the special permitted use and all applicable codes, laws and
rules, then the Planning Board shall issue an extension/renewal of
the special permitted use for the wireless telecommunications
facility, which may include any new provisions or conditions that
are mutually agreed upon, or required by codes, law or regulation.
C. If the Planning Board does not complete its review, as noted in
Subsection B of this section, prior to the five-year anniversary date of
the special permitted use, or subsequent fifth anniversaries, then the
applicant for the permitted wireless telecommunications facility shall
receive an extension of the special permitted use for up to six months,
in order for the Planning Board to complete its review.
D. If the holder of a special permitted use for a wireless
telecommunications facility does not submit a request recertification of
such special permitted use within the time frame noted in Subsection A
of this section, then and in that event the special permitted use and any
authorizations granted thereunder shall expire and the rights granted
thereunder shall cease to exist on the date of the fifth anniversary of the
§ 520-17 WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS § 520-17
520:675
§ 520-18. Extent and parameters of special permitted use.
The extent and parameters of a special permitted use for a wireless
telecommunications facility shall be as follows:
§ 520-19. Application fee.178
§ 520-20. Performance security.
The applicant and the owner of record of any proposed wireless
telecommunications facility property site shall be jointly required to execute
and file with the City a bond or other form of security acceptable to the City,
as to type of security and the form and manner of execution, in an amount
and with such sureties as are deemed sufficient by the Planning Board to
assure the faithful performance of the terms and conditions of this chapter
and conditions of any special permitted use issued pursuant to this chapter.
The full amount of the bond or security shall remain in full force and effect
throughout the term of the special permitted use and/or until the removal of
the wireless telecommunications facility and any necessary site restoration
is completed. The failure to pay any annual premium for the renewal of any
such security shall be a violation of the provisions of the special permitted
original granting of the special permitted use, or subsequent fifth
anniversaries, unless the holder of the special permitted use adequately
demonstrates to the Planning Board that extenuating circumstances
prevented a timely submission.
A. Such special permitted use shall be nonexclusive.
B. Such special permitted use shall not be assignable or transferable
without the consent of the City Planning Board and City Board.
C. Such special permitted use may be revoked, canceled or terminated for
a violation of the conditions and provisions of the special permitted use
for a wireless telecommunications facility or for a material violation of
this chapter.
D. Any action to revoke a special permit shall comply with City Code
§ 535-61O.
A. At the time the person submits an application for a special permitted
use for a new wireless telecommunications facility, such person shall
pay an application fee to the City of Port Jervis as provided in Chapter
280, Fees, or such other fee as the City Board may establish at the
annual reorganization meeting of the City Board.
B. The application fee for extension/renewal shall be as provided in
Chapter 280, Fees, or such other fee as the City Board may establish at
the annual reorganization meeting of the City Board.
178. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 520-17 PORT JERVIS CODE § 520-20
520:676
use and shall entitle the Planning Board to revoke the special permitted use
after prior written notice to the applicant and holder of the permit.
§ 520-21. Authority to inspect wireless telecommunications
facilities.
The City may from time to time cause the inspection of facilities constructed
pursuant to a permit granted pursuant to this chapter in accordance with
state and local law and building codes to ensure the continued compliance
with law and conditions of the special permit, if any.
§ 520-22. Annual NIER certification.
The holder of the special permitted use shall, annually, certify to the City
that NIER levels at the site are within the threshold levels adopted by the
FCC. The certifying engineer need not be approved by the City.
§ 520-23. Liability insurance.
A. Amount and type of coverage.
(1) A holder of a special permitted use for a wireless
telecommunications facility shall secure and at all times maintain
public liability insurance, property damage insurance and umbrella
insurance coverage for the duration of the special permitted use in
amounts as set forth below:
(a) Commercial general liability: $1,000,000 per occurrence;
$2,000,000 aggregate.
(b) Automobile coverage: $1,000,000 per occurrence; $2,000,000
aggregate.
(2) The commercial general liability insurance policy shall specifically
include the City and its officials, employees and agents as
additional insureds.
B. The insurance policies shall be issued by an agent or representative of
an insurance company licensed to do business in the state.
C. The insurance policies shall contain an endorsement obligating the
insurance company to furnish the City with at least 30 days' written
notice in advance of the cancellation of the insurance.
D. Renewal or replacement policies or certificates shall be delivered to the
City at least 15 days before the expiration of the insurance which such
policies are to renew or replace.
E. Prior to the issuance of a building permit for construction the holder of
the special permitted use shall deliver to the City a copy of each of the
policies or certificates representing the insurance in the required
amounts.
§ 520-20 WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS § 520-24
520:677
§ 520-24. Indemnification.
Any special permitted use issued pursuant to this chapter shall contain a
provision with respect to indemnification. Such provision shall require the
holder of the special permitted use, to the extent permitted by the law,
to at all times defend, indemnify, protect, save, hold harmless and exempt
the City, officials of the City, its officers, agents, servants and employees
from any and all penalties, damage or charges arising out of any and all
claims, suits, demands, causes of action or award of damages, whether
compensatory or punitive, or expenses arising therefrom, either at law or in
equity, which might arise out of, or are caused by, the construction, erection,
modification, location, products performance, operation, maintenance,
repair, installation, replacement, removal or restoration of a wireless
telecommunications facility within the City. With respect to the penalties,
damages or charges referenced herein, reasonable attorneys' fees,
consultants' fees and expert witness fees are included in those costs that
are recoverable by the City.
§ 520-25. Penalties for offenses.
§ 520-26. Notice of violation or noncompliance; revocation of
permit.
A. Civil sanctions. Any person who violates any of the provisions of this
chapter shall be liable for a civil penalty not to exceed $3,000 for every
such violation.
B. Criminal sanctions. Any person, firm or corporation who or which
willfully violates any of the provisions of this chapter or permits
promulgated thereunder, excluding provisions set forth in the rules and
regulations promulgated thereunder, upon conviction thereof of the
first offense, shall be guilty of a violation punishable by a fine of not less
than $500 and not more than $1,000, and for a second offense and each
subsequent offense shall be guilty of a violation punishable by a fine of
not less than $1,000 nor more than $2,000 or a term of imprisonment of
not more than 15 days, or both.179
C. Notwithstanding anything in this chapter, the holder of the special
permitted use for a wireless telecommunications facility may not use
the payment of fines, liquidated damages or other penalties to evade or
avoid compliance with this chapter or any section of this chapter. An
attempt to do so shall subject the holder of the special permitted use to
termination and revocation of the special permitted use. The City may
also seek injunctive relief to prevent the continued violation of this
chapter.
A. If a wireless telecommunications facility is repaired, rebuilt, placed,
moved, relocated, modified or maintained in a way that is inconsistent
179. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 520-24 PORT JERVIS CODE § 520-26
520:678
§ 520-27. Removal of facilities.
or not in compliance with the provisions of this chapter or of the
special permitted use, then the City shall notify the holder of the special
permitted use, in writing, of such violation. Such notice shall specify
the nature of the violation or noncompliance and that the violations
must be corrected within seven days of the date of the postmark of
the notice, or of the date of personal service of the notice, whichever
is earlier. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this subsection
or any other section of this chapter, if the violation causes, creates
or presents an imminent danger or threat to the health or safety of
lives or property, the Planning Board may, at its sole discretion, order
the violation remedied forthwith or may take such actions as may be
authorized pursuant to the City Law and or Executive Law of the State
of New York.
B. Failure to comply with the terms hereof may give rise to revocation of
the special permit and/or site plan approval.
A. In the event that a facility shall be found in any of the following
conditions, it shall be subject to removal pursuant to the authority of
the City pursuant to the City Law and the Executive Law:
(1) A wireless telecommunications facility which has been abandoned
(i.e., not used as a wireless telecommunications facility) for a
period exceeding 90 days or a total of 180 days in any threehundred-
sixty-five-day period, except for periods caused by force
majeure or acts of God.
(2) A permitted wireless telecommunications facility which falls into
such a state of disrepair that it creates a health or safety hazard.
(3) A wireless telecommunications facility which has been located,
constructed or modified without first obtaining the required special
permitted use or any other necessary authorization.
B. The holder of the special permitted use, or its successors or assigns,
shall dismantle and remove such wireless telecommunications facility,
and all associated structures and facilities, from the site and restore the
site to as close to its original condition as is possible, such restoration
being limited only by physical or commercial impracticability, within 90
days of receipt of written notice from the City.
C. If the City removes, or causes to be removed, a wireless
telecommunications facility, and the owner of the wireless
telecommunications facility does not claim the property and remove the
facility from the site to a lawful property or remove the facility from the
site to a lawful location within 10 days, then the City may take steps to
declare the facility abandoned and sell it and its components.
§ 520-26 WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS § 520-28
520:679
§ 520-28. Applicability of application requirements and permit
conditions.
§ 520-29. Adherence to state and/or federal rules and regulations.
§ 520-30. Conflict with other laws.
Where this chapter differs or conflicts with other laws, rules and
regulations, unless the right to do so is preempted or prohibited by the
county, state or federal government, the more restrictive or protective of
the City and the public shall apply.
A. Any applicant can request the waiver of application requirements that
are inapplicable to its permit application. Such request shall be in
writing. Requests should be discussed at the preapplication meeting.
The applicant shall have the burden of supporting such requests.
Determinations as to applicability of application requirements shall be
made by the City.
B. In determining permit conditions, the Planning Board can waive
inapplicable permit requirements, consistent with the policy goals and
priorities of this chapter. The applicant shall have the burden of
supporting such requests. Determinations as to applicability of permit
condition requirements shall be made by the Planning Board.
A. To the extent that the holder of a special permitted use for a wireless
telecommunications facility has not received relief, or is otherwise
exempt, from appropriate state and/or federal agency rules or
regulations, then the holder of such a special permitted use shall
adhere to and comply with all applicable rules, regulations, standards
and provisions of any state or federal agency, including but not limited
to the FAA and the FCC. Specifically included in this requirement are
any rules and regulations regarding height, lighting, security, electrical
and RF emission standards.
B. To the extent that applicable rules, regulations, standards and
provisions of any state or federal agency, including but not limited to
the FAA and the FCC, and specifically including any rules and
regulations regarding height, lighting and security, are changed and/or
are modified during the duration of a special permitted use for a
wireless telecommunications facility, then the holder of such a special
permitted use shall conform the permitted wireless telecommunications
facility to the applicable changed and/or modified rule, regulation,
standard or provision within a maximum of 24 months of the effective
date of the applicable changed and/or modified rule, regulation,
standard or provision, or sooner as may be required by the issuing
entity.
§ 520-28 PORT JERVIS CODE § 520-31
520:680
§ 520-31. Severability.
If any phrase, sentence, part, section, subsection or other portion of this
chapter or any application thereof to any person or circumstance is
declared void, unconstitutional or invalid for any reason, then such word,
phrase, sentence, part, section, subsection or other portion, or the
proscribed application thereof, shall be severable, and the remaining
provisions of this chapter, and all applications thereof, not having been
declared void, unconstitutional or invalid, shall remain in full force and
effect.
§ 520-32. Enforcement.180
This chapter shall be enforced by the Building Official in the same manner
as provided in the City Code of the City of Port Jervis, state building and fire
codes and the City Law and the Executive Law of the State of New York.
§ 520-33. Authority.
This chapter is enacted pursuant to the Municipal Home Rule Law. This
chapter shall supersede the provisions of the City Law to the extent that it
is inconsistent with the same, and to the extent permitted by the New York
State Constitution, the Municipal Home Rule Law or any other applicable
statute.
Chapter 535
ZONING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Planning Board — See Ch. 126.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 288.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 470.
Wireless telecommunications — See Ch. 520.
180. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 520-31 WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS § 520-33
520:681

ARTICLE I
Enactment and Intent
§ 535-1. Enactment.
A comprehensive zoning plan for the City of Port Jervis is established and
set forth in the text, map and schedules that constitute this chapter. This
chapter shall be known and cited in the long and short form below:
§ 535-2. Intent and purpose.
It is the legislative intent of this chapter to provide for the orderly and
desirable development and use of land. This chapter provides specifications,
procedures and a precise plan designed to guide new development while
improving, conserving or facilitating desirable change in existing portions
of the City. As provided in the laws of the State of New York, this chapter
is to serve the purpose of protecting and promoting the general welfare,
which is intended to include the following:
A. Long: "A law regulating and restricting the location, construction and
use of buildings and structures and the use of land in the City of Port
Jervis, County of Orange, State of New York."
B. Short: "The Zoning Law of the City of Port Jervis."
A. The facilitation of the efficient and adequate provisions of public
facilities and services;
B. The assurance of adequate sites for residence, industry and commerce;
C. The provisions of privacy for families;
D. The prevention and reduction of traffic congestion, so as to promote
efficient and safe circulation of vehicles and pedestrians;
E. The maximum protection of residential areas;
F. The gradual elimination of nonconforming uses;
G. The enhancement of the appearance of the City of Port Jervis as whole;
H. The encouragement of flexibility in the design and development of land
in such a way as to promote the most appropriate use of lands, to
facilitate the adequate and economical provision of streets and utilities,
and to preserve the natural and scenic qualities of open lands; and
I. The protection of the environment of the City as a whole.
§ 535-1 WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS § 535-2
520:683

ARTICLE II
Interpretation; Definitions
§ 535-3. Interpretation; conflicts.
§ 535-4. Word usage and definitions.
A. Interpretation. In their interpretation and application, the provisions of
this chapter shall be held to be the minimum requirements adopted for
the promotion of the public health, safety, comfort, convenience, and
general welfare. Except where specifically provided to the contrary, it is
not intended by this chapter to repeal, abrogate, annul or in any way to
impair or interfere with any rules, regulations, or permits previously
adopted or issued pursuant to law relating to the use of buildings,
structures, shelter or premises, nor is it intended by this chapter to
interfere with or abrogate or annul any easements, covenants or other
agreements between parties; provided, however, that where this
chapter imposes a greater restriction upon the use of a building or
premises or requires larger open spaces than are imposed or required
by any other statute, ordinance, rule, regulation, or permit, or by any
easement or agreement, the provisions of this chapter shall control.
B. Conflict. In the event of conflict in the terminology of any section or part
thereof of this chapter, the more restrictive provisions shall control.
C. Control. In addition, if at any time subsequent to the effective date of
this chapter it shall be determined that any other ordinance of the City
of Port Jervis or any part thereof shall be inconsistent with or in conflict
with any provision of this chapter, this chapter shall control and any
such inconsistent or conflicting provision of any other City ordinance
shall be deemed to be repealed as of the effective date of this chapter.
A. Word usage.
(1) Unless otherwise listed below, the numbers, abbreviations, terms
and words used herein shall have the meanings of common usage
as set forth in the latest edition of Webster's New Collegiate
Dictionary. Terms of law shall have the meanings as set forth in the
latest edition of Black's Law Dictionary.
(2) Unless the context clearly indicates to the contrary, words used in
the present tense include the future tense; words used in the
singular include the plural; words used in the plural include the
singular; the word "herein" means in this chapter; the word
"requirements" means the minimum requirements necessary for
the attainment of the purposes set forth in Article I; and the words
"this chapter" shall mean this chapter and the schedules and maps
included herein as enacted or subsequently amended.
(3) The word "person" as used in this chapter shall be defined to
include, but not be limited to, an individual, a partnership, a joint
§ 535-3 WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS § 535-4
520:685
venture, a corporation, an unincorporated association, a firm or
any other form or entity, contractors, subcontractors, or
journeymen.
(4) "Used" or "occupied," as applied to any land or building, shall be
construed to include the words "intended," "arranged" or "designed
to be used or occupied."
(5) "Shall" is always mandatory, except when applied to public officials,
in which event "shall" is directory. Time requirements shall,
nevertheless, be considered mandatory.
B. Definitions. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the
meaning indicated:
ACCESSORY — The term applied to a building, structure or use which
is clearly incidental or subordinate and customarily in connection with
the principal building, structure or use and which is located on the
same lot with the principal building, structure or use. Any accessory
building or structure attached to a principal building or structure is
deemed to be part of such principal building or structure in applying
the bulk requirements to such building or structure. No use shall be
considered accessory where such use requires a greater area of a lot or
larger setbacks or yards or for which greater restrictions than for the
principal use on the lot are imposed by this chapter.181
ADULT CARE FACILITIES — Nonprofit residential communities of
adults 55 years of age and older, ranging from independent living to
intensive care. (This definition includes, but is not limited to, senior
citizen housing.)182
ALLEY — A public thoroughfare not over 20 feet wide which affords
only a secondary means of access to abutting property.
ALTER — To change, enlarge, or rearrange the structural parts or the
existing facilities of a structure, or to move a building from one location
or position to another.
AREA, BUILDING — The total of area, taken on a horizontal plane at the
main grade level, of the principal building and all accessory buildings,
exclusive of uncovered porches, terraces, and steps.
AREA, GROSS — The measure of land in a horizontal plane,
uncorrected or adjusted for legal circumstances, surface conditions, or
slope.
ART GALLERY — A space in which works of art are bought, sold,
loaned, appraised and/or exhibited to the general public.[Added
5-27-2014 by L.L. No. 3-2014]
181. Editor's Note: The definition of "adult bookstore" which immediately followed this
definition was deleted 4-12-2004 by L.L. No. 1-2004. See now § 535-13.
182. Editor's Note: The definition of "adult motion-picture theater" which immediately followed
this definition was deleted 2-26-2007 by L.L. No. 2-2007. See now § 535-13, Adult-oriented
businesses.
§ 535-4 PORT JERVIS CODE § 535-4
520:686
AUTOMOBILE WRECKING — The dismantling or wrecking of used
motor vehicles or trailers or the storage, sale or dumping of dismantled,
partially dismantled, obsolete or wrecked vehicles or their parts.
BASE FLOOD — See "one-hundred-year flood."
BASEMENT — That portion of a building which is partly underground
but which has at least 50% of its interior height, measured from floor
to ceiling, above the average finished grade of the ground adjoining the
building.
BED-AND-BREAKFAST — A home occupation involving the rental of
up to four rooms as transient accommodations with no full-service
restaurant facilities and with no more than one nonresident employee.
BEDROOM — Any habitable space in excess of 75 square feet, other
than a living room, dining room, bathroom, hallway or kitchen.
BILLBOARD — A sign which directs attention to a business, commodity,
service, entertainment or attraction conducted, sold, offered or existing
elsewhere than on the same lot where such sign is displayed or not for
the principal use of such lot.
BOARDINGHOUSE — Any dwelling in which more than three persons,
either individually or as families, are housed or lodged for hire with or
without meals. A rooming house or a furnished rooming house shall be
deemed a boardinghouse.
BODY SHOP — See "motor vehicle repair shop."
BREW PUB — A bar or restaurant that includes the brewing of malt
beverages for consumption on premises. The area for bottling and
kegging shall not exceed 30% of the gross floor area of the bar or
restaurant structure.[Added 2-8-2016 by L.L. No. 4-2016]
BREWERY — A facility for the production, packaging and retail or
wholesale sale of beverages with alcoholic and/or nonalcoholic
content.[Added 2-8-2016 by L.L. No. 4-2016]
BUFFER — An area of specified dimension extending from the property
line toward a required setback line. The buffer shall not be used or
otherwise encroached upon by any activities on the lot.
BUILDING — Any structure having a roof supported by columns and/or
by walls or self-supporting, including a factory-manufactured structure,
and intended for the shelter, housing, or enclosure of persons, animals,
or chattel.
BUILDING, ACCESSORY — A subordinate building, the use of which is
customarily incidental to that of the main building on the same lot.
BUILDING, DETACHED — A building surrounded by open space on the
same lot.
BUILDING, FRONT LINE OF — The line of that face of the building
nearest the front line of the lot. This face includes sun parlors and
§ 535-4 WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS § 535-4
520:687
covered porches, whether enclosed or unenclosed, but does not include
steps.
BUILDING HEIGHT — The vertical distance measured from the
average elevation of the proposed finished grade at the front of the
building to the highest point of the roof for flat roofs and mansard roofs
and to the mean height between eaves and ridge for gable, hip, and
gambrel roofs.
BUILDING LENGTH — The least horizontal distance between the
furthermost walls of the building, including any carports and porches.
BUILDING, MAIN — A building in which is conducted the main or
principal use of the lot on which it is located.
BUILDING PERMIT — A formal issuance by the Building Official of a
right to proceed with construction of a structure, or a renovation of
an existing structure, upon a finding of conformance with all building
codes and land use regulations in effect by all applicable
jurisdictions.[Amended 2-26-2007 by L.L. No. 2-2007]
BULK — A term used to describe the size, volume, area, and shape of
buildings and structures and the physical relationship of their exterior
walls or their location to lot lines, other buildings and structures, or
other walls of the same building, and all open spaces required in
connection with a building, other structure, or tract of land.
BUSINESS SERVICE — An establishment primarily engaged in
rendering services to businesses on a fee or contract basis, such as
advertising and mailing, building maintenance, unemployment service,
office equipment rental and leasing, commercial research, development
and testing, photo finishing, and personal supply services.
CAR WASH — A building, the use of which is devoted to the washing of
automobiles. (See also "motor vehicle laundry.")
CENTER LINE — Imaginary line on the precise center of a street,
driveway, roadway, or similar feature.
CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY/COMPLIANCE — Official certification
that a building or structure conforms to this chapter and the New York
State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code and may be occupied
or used.
CLUB, MEMBERSHIP — An organization catering exclusively to
members and their guests, which is not conducted primarily for gain,
provided that there are not conducted any vending stands,
merchandising or commercial activities except as required generally
for the membership and purposes of such club. Accessory uses and/or
structures may include such subordinate purposes as administration,
operation, accommodations, and the sale of food and drink primarily to
members and their guests.
§ 535-4 PORT JERVIS CODE § 535-4
520:688
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN — A comprehensive plan for the development
of the City, prepared by the Planning Board pursuant to the General
City Law, which indicates the general location recommended for
various public works and reservation, and for the general physical
development of the City, and includes any part of such plan separately
adopted and any amendment to such plan or parts thereof.[Amended
2-26-2007 by L.L. No. 2-2007]
CONDOMINIUM — A mode of ownership wherein each dwelling unit
may be owned in fee simple separately and individually from all others
but where all such owners have an indivisible interest in the common
areas. Thus, they share ownership and attendant responsibility for
the provision, maintenance and/or repair of common internal facilities,
utilities, services, exterior building surfaces, land, landscaping and
other outdoor facilities.
CONTRACTOR'S STORAGE YARD — A building or area of land where
persons, firms or corporations engaged in the construction business, or
a related field, store building materials, equipment and supplies used
exclusively in that contracting business. Retail or wholesale sale of any
contractor's materials or supplies is prohibited.
CONVENIENCE RETAIL STORE — A retail store containing less than
2,000 square feet of gross floor area that is designed and stocked
primarily to sell food, beverages, and household supplies to customers
who purchase only a relatively few items, and shall include specialty
food stores including, but not limited to, bakeries, green grocers,
cheeses, health foods, candles, gourmet foods, and
delicatessens.[Amended 9-24-2018 by L.L. No. 9-2018]
COURTYARD — An open space in an apartment, multifamily or
townhouse development or a commercial, institutional or industrial
structure which is enclosed on at least three sides by exterior walls of
a building.
COVERAGE, BUILDING — The percentage of the area of the lot covered
by a building or buildings.
COVERAGE, DEVELOPMENT — The percentage of the area of a lot
covered by buildings, indoor and outdoor parking areas, accessory
structures and any impervious materials, including natural impervious
areas.
CURB LEVEL — The officially adopted grade of the curb in front of the
midpoint of the lot.
RECREATIONAL — Includes recreational facilities such as tennis
courts, swimming pools, golf courses, canoe launching areas,
fishing areas, and other athletic purposes.
(1)
NONRECREATIONAL — Includes premises and buildings for
social, cultural, political or fraternal purposes.
(2)
§ 535-4 WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS § 535-4
520:689
CUSTOMARY RESIDENTIAL ACCESSORY USES — Garden house,
playhouse, toolhouse, greenhouse, swimming pool, satellite dish
antenna and private garage; the keeping of domestic animals as pets;
and the raising of field and garden crops, vineyards, and orchard
farming, provided that such crops or produce is for the sole and
exclusive use of the occupant or owner of the premises and not for
resale.[Amended 2-26-2007 by L.L. No. 2-2007]
DAY-CARE CENTER — A place, building or structure designed to
provide temporary daytime supervision and care for five or more
children under the age of 10 years old.[Added 9-8-2003 by L.L. No.
2-2003]
DISTILLERY — A facility where distilled liquors or spirits are produced,
manufactured or sold, which holds manufacturing, retail or wholesale
licenses required by New York State.[Added 2-8-2016 by L.L. No.
4-2016]
DRIVE-IN RESTAURANT — A building or portion thereof where food
and/or beverages are sold in a form ready for consumption and where
all or a significant portion of the consumption takes place or is
designated to take place outside the confines of the building, often in a
motor vehicle parked on the site.
DUMP — A lot of land or part thereof used primarily for the disposal
by abandonment, dumping, burial, burning, or any other means and for
whatever purpose of garbage, sewage, trash, refuse, junk, discarded
machinery, vehicles or parts thereof, or waste material of any kind.
DUMPSTER — Any large receptacle used or maintained by any person
or commercial establishment for the collection of garbage, refuse,
rubbish or waste. This includes commercial, industrial, or construction
receptacles.[Added 10-28-2013 by L.L. No. 8-2013]
DUST — Solid particulate matter capable of being air- or gas-borne.
DWELLING GROUP — A group of two or more one-family, two-family
or multiple dwellings occupying a lot in one ownership and having any
land or facilities in common.
DWELLING, MULTIPLE — A detached building, or portion thereof,
containing three or more dwelling units. [Amended 4-8-2013 by L.L.
No. 3-2013]
DWELLING, ONE-FAMILY DETACHED — A detached building having
two side yards, erected on a permanent foundation, with/without
basement, equipped for year-round occupancy, and containing no more
than one dwelling unit.[Amended 4-8-2013 by L.L. No. 3-2013]
DWELLING, ROW — Dwelling units, the walls on one or more sides of
which are in common with the walls of an adjoining dwelling unit(s) and
are party or lot line walls (also known as "townhouses" or "attached
dwellings").[Amended 4-8-2013 by L.L. No. 3-2013]
§ 535-4 PORT JERVIS CODE § 535-4
520:690
DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY DETACHED — A detached building
containing not more than two dwelling units on a single lot of
record[Amended 4-8-2013 by L.L. No. 3-2013]
DWELLING UNIT — One or more rooms with provisions for living,
cooking, sanitary, and sleeping facilities arranged for the use of one
family and not having more than one kitchen or kitchenette. The term
"dwelling unit" shall not be deemed to include a hotel, motel,
automobile court, tourist home, furnished rooming house, dormitory,
boarding home, convalescent home, rest home, nursing home, or other
accomodations used for transient occupancy.[Amended 4-8-2013 by
L.L. No. 3-2013]
EFFICIENCY APARTMENT — A one-room dwelling unit with private
bath and complete kitchen facilities, comprising not less than 600
square feet nor more than 750 square feet.
FAMILY — [Amended 3-25-2013 by L.L. No. 2-2013]
Occupancy.
(a) One, two, or three persons occupying a dwelling unit; or
Four or more persons occupying a dwelling unit and living
together as a traditional family or the functional equivalent of
a traditional family.
(b)
(1)
It shall be presumptive evidence that four or more persons living
in a single dwelling unit who are not related by blood or marriage
or legal adoption do not constitute the functional equivalent of a
traditional family, except as defined below.
(2)
In determining whether individuals are living together as the
functional equivalent of a traditional family, the following criteria
must be present:
The group is one which in theory, size, appearance, structure
and function resembles a traditional family unit.
(a)
The occupants must share the entire dwelling unit and live
and cook together as a single housekeeping unit. A unit in
which the various occupants act as separate roomers may not
be deemed to be occupied by the functional equivalent of a
traditional family.
(b)
The group shares expenses for food, rent or ownership costs,
utilities or other household expenses.
(c)
The group is permanent and stable. Evidence of such
permanency and stability may include:
The presence of minor dependent children regularly
residing in the household who are enrolled in local
schools;
[1]
(d)
(3)
§ 535-4 WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS § 535-4
520:691
FILED MAP — Any map, survey, or plat filed in the County Clerk's office
of Orange County.
FILLING STATION — See "motor vehicle service station."
FLOOD — A general and temporary condition of partial or complete
inundation of normally dry land areas from:
FLOOD-PRONE AREA — Any land area susceptible to being inundated
by water from any source. See also "flood."
FLOOR AREA, GROSS — The sum of the gross horizontal area of every
floor of a building, measured from the exterior faces of exterior walls
or from the center line of party walls separating the two buildings,
including:
FLOOR AREA RATIO — The gross floor area in square feet of all
buildings on a lot divided by the gross area of such lot in square feet.
FRONTAGE — The street length of a parcel of property fronting on one
side of a street between the two nearest intersecting streets or other
natural barriers.
FRONT WALL — The front wall of a building is the wall nearest to and
facing the street on which the lot fronts.
Members of the household have the same address for
purposes of voter registration, driver’s license, motor
vehicle registration and filing of taxes;
[2]
[3] Members of the household are employed in the area;
The household has been living together as a unit for a
year or more whether in the current dwelling unit or other
dwelling units;
[4]
Common ownership of furniture and appliances among the
members of the household; and
[5]
[6] The group is not transient or temporary in nature.
Any other factor reasonably related to whether or not the
group is the functional equivalent of a family.
(e)
(1) The overflow of inland waters.
The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters
from any source.
(2)
(1) Basement space.
Attic space, whether or not a floor has been laid, over which there
is structural headroom of six feet three inches or more.
(2)
(3) Roofed porches, breezeways, indoor parking and garages.
(4) Cellar space with more than six feet three inches in height.
§ 535-4 PORT JERVIS CODE § 535-4
520:692
FUNDED COMMUNITY TRUST — The holding of title to all common
open space and recreational facilities in a clustered, planned unit or
open space development upon deed from its builder/developer to a bank
or other fiduciary which, for a fee, acts as trustee for the benefit of all
owners and occupants, such arrangement as detailed in the Urban Land
Institute Technical Bulletin No. 62.
FUNERAL HOME — The establishment of a funeral director and/or
undertaker, which may or may not include facilities for the conduct of
funerals, and the outdoor display of monuments for sale.
GARAGE, PRIVATE — A garage used for storage purposes only and
having a capacity of not more than four automobiles or not more
than two automobiles per family, housed in the building to which such
garage is accessory, whichever is greater. Space therein may be used
for not more than one commercial vehicle, and space may be rented for
not more than two vehicles of other than occupants of the building to
which such garage is accessory.
GARAGE, PUBLIC — Any garage other than a private garage, available
to the public, operated for gain, and which is used for the storage of
automobiles or other motor vehicles.
GASOLINE STATION — See "motor vehicle service station."
GRADE, ESTABLISHED STREET — The permanently established
elevation of the center line of a street in front of the midpoint of the lot.
GRADE, FINISHED — The finished grade of any point along the wall
of a building shall be the elevation of the completed surfaces of lawns,
walks, and roads adjoining the wall at that point.
HABITABLE ROOM —
HISTORIC STRUCTURE — Any structure listed on the Department of
the Interior's National Register of Historic Structures or the New York
A living room, as specified in § 4 of the New York State Multiple
Dwelling Law, within a dwelling unit, except that for the purpose
of determining lot area requirements, "habitable room" shall not
include any of the following:
(a) Kitchen.
Foyer, bathroom, toilet, public or private hall, corridor or
passageway.
(b)
Dining alcove, dinette or other dining space (without limit as
to size) when not separated by walls and doors from other
habitable rooms or cooking spaces.
(c)
(1)
As a guide, an efficiency apartment contains one habitable room;
a one-bedroom apartment, two-habitable rooms; a two-bedroom
apartment, three habitable rooms; and a three-bedroom apartment,
four habitable rooms.
(2)
§ 535-4 WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS § 535-4
520:693
State Register of Historic Places or any structure designated by an
agency of the City or the county or an organization recognized for such
purposes by the City or the county. Such structure shall be deemed to
have particular value because of its character, association, age and/or
quality.
HOME OCCUPATION —
An occupation or profession which:
(a) Is customarily carried on in a dwelling unit;
Is carried on by a member of a family residing in the dwelling
unit;
(b)
Is clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the dwelling
unit for residential purposes; and
(c)
Conforms to the following additional conditions:
The occupation or profession shall be carried on wholly
within the principal building, except that the occupation
or profession may be carried on in an existing accessory
building with the permission of the Planning Board and
with such stipulations as the Planning Board may set.
[1]
Not more than one person outside the family shall be
employed in the home occupation.
[2]
There shall be no exterior display, no exterior sign (except
as permitted by § 535-42), no exterior storage of materials,
no exterior parking of trucks or other commercial vehicles
used in connection with the occupation, and no other
exterior indication of the home occupation or variation
from the residential character of the principal building.
[3]
No offensive noise, vibration, smoke, dust, odors, heat or
glare shall be produced or allowed on the premises.
[4]
(d)
(1)
In particular, "home occupation" includes but is not limited to the
following: dressmaking, child care, and professional office of an
author, clergy, and teacher, with musical instruction limited to a
single pupil at a time.
(2)
However, "home occupation" shall not be interpreted to include
any of the following: professional office of a physician, dentist,
osteopath, chiropractor, lawyer, or optometrist, office of an
engineer, accountant, architect, real estate or insurance broker
or adjuster, clinics, hospitals, barbershops and beauty parlors,
commercial stable and kennels, restaurants, tearooms, nursery
schools, tourists homes, animal hospitals, or any similar uses.
(3)
§ 535-4 PORT JERVIS CODE § 535-4
520:694
HOME PROFESSIONAL OFFICE — An accessory office of a person
located within his/her residence devoted to a professional service
occupation, in which knowledge in some department of science or
learning is applied to the affairs of others, either advising or guiding
them, or otherwise serving their interest or welfare through the
practice of a profession founded on such knowledge. Said office activity
shall be incidental and secondary to the use of the residence for
dwelling purpose, shall not change the character thereof and shall
not have any evidence of such accessory use other than a permitted
announcement sign. Said activity shall not occupy more than 1/2 of
the ground floor area of the residence or its equivalent elsewhere in
the residence if so used. In said activity, no more than two persons,
including members of the family residing on the premises, shall be
employed.
HOSPITAL — A facility or institution engaged primarily in providing
services by or under the supervision of a physician or, in the case of
a dental clinic or dental dispensary, of a dentist, for the prevention,
diagnosis, or treatment of human disease, pain, injury, deformity or
physical condition, including but not limited to a general hospital,
public health center, diagnostic center, treatment center, dental clinic,
dental dispensary, rehabilitation center other than a facility used solely
for vocational rehabilitation, nursing home, tuberculosis hospital,
chronic disease hospital, maternity hospital, lying-in asylum, outpatient
department, outpatient lodge, dispensary and a laboratory or central
service facility serving one or more such institutions, but the term
"hospital" shall not include an institution, sanitarium or other facility
engaged principally in providing services for the prevention, diagnosis
or treatment of mental disability and which is subject to the powers
of visitation, inspection and investigation of the Department of Mental
Hygiene, except for those distinct parts of such a facility which provide
hospital service.
HOSPITAL, ANIMAL — An establishment for the medical and surgical
care of sick or injured animals.
HOSPITAL, GENERAL — A hospital engaged in providing medical or
medical and surgical services primarily to inpatients by or under the
supervision of a physician on a twenty-four-hour basis with provisions
for admission or treatment of persons in need of emergency care and
with an organized medical staff and nursing service, including facilities
providing services relating to particular diseases, injuries, conditions or
deformities. The term "general hospital" shall not include a residential
health care facility, public health center, diagnostic center, treatment
center, outpatient lodge, dispensary and laboratory or central service
facility serving more than one institution.
The use of any property for a home occupation shall require the
authorization of the Planning Board, which may require such
additional stipulations as deemed in the public interest.
(4)
§ 535-4 WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS § 535-4
520:695
HOTEL — A building containing rooms intended or designed to be used
or which are occupied for sleeping purposes by guests and where meals
and other services are provided within the building or in an accessory
building.
HOUSEHOLDER — An individual who resides in a dwelling unit and
who owns, rents or otherwise has legal possession of such unit for a
continuous period of time.
INDUSTRIAL USE — See "manufacturing."
JUNKYARD — An area of land with or without buildings used for or
occupied by a deposit, collection or storage, outside a completely
enclosed building, of used or discarded materials, such as wastepaper,
rags, or scrap material, tires, or used building materials, house
furnishings, machinery, or parts thereof, with or without dismantling,
processing, salvage, sale or use or disposition of the same. One cubic
yard or more of refuse located on a property for more than 30 days shall
also be deemed to be a junkyard.
JUNKYARD, MOTOR VEHICLE — An area of land with or without
buildings used for or occupied by a deposit, collection or storage,
outside a completely enclosed building, of used or discarded motor
vehicles, or parts thereof, with or without the dismantling, wrecking,
salvage, sale or other use or disposition of the same. A deposit,
collection or storage on a lot of two or more motor vehicles no longer
in condition for legal use on the public highways, or parts thereof, for
one week or more in a residential district or for three weeks or more in
a nonresidential district shall constitute a motor vehicle junkyard.
KENNEL — A use or building in which the principal activity is the
keeping, raising, boarding, grooming, or breeding of dogs and/or cats.
For the purpose of this chapter, any such activity shall not be
considered a kennel where accessory to a principal residential use,
provided that not more than three animals exceeding six months of age
are kept for noncommercial purposes.
KITCHEN — Space, 60 square feet or more in floor area, with the
minimum width of five feet, used in cooking or preparation of food and
deemed habitable space.[Added 4-8-2013 by L.L. No. 3-2013]
KITCHENETTE — Space, less than 60 square feet in floor area, used
for cooking or preparation of food and not deemed habitable space.
[Added 4-8-2013 by L.L. No. 3-2013]
RESIDENTIAL — A facility characterized by the single-room
occupancy of individuals making such accommodations their
principal (or only) place of residence.
(1)
TRANSIENT — A facility catering to the overnight need for
accommodations of those in transit or for a short-term business or
personal stay.
(2)
§ 535-4 PORT JERVIS CODE § 535-4
520:696
LAUNDERETTE/LAUNDROMAT — A business premises equipped with
individual clothes washing or dry-cleaning machines for the use of retail
customers, exclusive of laundry facilities provided as an accessory use
in an apartment house or other multifamily structure.
LIGHT MANUFACTURING — Industrial uses such as manufacturing,
processing and assemblage that are of a nonpolluting nature,
particularly in regard to reservoir and groundwater resources and in
regard to ambient air quality.
LODGING HOUSE — A building in which three or more rooms are
rented and in which no table board is furnished.
LOT — A tract, plot, or portion of a subdivision or other parcel of land
intended as a unit for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of
transfer of ownership or for building development.
LOT AREA — The total horizontal area included within the property
lines of a lot, except that for any minimum lot area specified in this
chapter, the area shall be adjusted as set forth in Articles VI and IX.
LOT, CORNER — A lot at the junction of, or abutting on, two or more
intersecting streets where the interior angle of intersection does not
exceed 135°. A lot abutting a curved street shall be deemed a corner
lot if the tangents to the curve at the points of intersection of the side
lot lines with the street lines intersect at an interior angle of less than
135°.
LOT COVERAGE — That percentage of the plat or lot area covered by
the building area.
LOT, INTERIOR — A lot other than a corner lot.
LOT LINE — Any line dividing one lot from another.
LOT LINE, FRONT — The lot line which abuts or runs along the
designated street line. In the case of a lot situated to the rear of another
lot, its front lot line shall be the rear lot line of the front lot for purposes
of measuring the front setback.
LOT LINE, REAR — The lot line generally opposite the street line. If the
rear lot line is less than 10 feet in length or if the lot comes to a point
CONFORMING — A lot having not less than the minimum area and
dimensions required by this chapter for a lot in the district in which
such land is situated and having its principal frontage on a street or
on such other means of access as may be determined in accordance
with the provisions of state law to be adequate as a condition of the
issuance of a building permit for a building on such land.
(1)
NONCONFORMING — A parcel of land owned individually and
separately, and separated in ownership from any adjoining tracts of
land, which has a total area and/or dimensions less than prescribed
by this chapter for a lot in the district in which such land is
situated.
(2)
§ 535-4 WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS § 535-4
520:697
in the rear, the rear lot line shall be deemed to be a line parallel to the
front lot line not less than 10 feet long lying farthest from the front lot
line.
LOT, THROUGH — An interior lot having frontage on two parallel or
approximately parallel streets.
LOT WIDTH — The distance measured along a line drawn parallel to
the front lot line at a distance equal to the minimum front setback
requirement.
MANUFACTURING — Includes fabricating, assembling, converting,
altering, finishing, cleaning, or any other processing, handling or
storage of products.
MICROBREWERY — A facility for the production, packaging and
sampling of beverages with alcoholic and/or nonalcoholic content for
retail or wholesale distribution.[Added 2-8-2016 by L.L. No. 4-2016]
MICRODISTILLERY — A facility for the production, packaging and
sampling of beverages with alcoholic and/or nonalcoholic content for
retail or wholesale distribution.[Added 2-8-2016 by L.L. No. 4-2016]
MOBILE HOME — A transportable one-family dwelling equipped for
year-round occupancy and containing the same water supply, waste
disposal, heating and electrical conveniences as immobile housing and
which must conform to the New York State Building Code pertaining
to such structures. The term "mobile home" shall include vehicles
mounted on temporary or permanent foundations with or without
wheels, collar or skids in place. Any transportable dwelling in excess of
26 feet in length shall be deemed to be a mobile home.
MOBILE HOME COURT — An area of land under single ownership
which has been planned and improved for the placement of two or more
mobile homes for nontransient dwelling purposes and approved as such
by the Planning Board subsequent to the introduction of a zoning law
in the City of Port Jervis. The selling or servicing of trailers or mobile
homes in a mobile home court is prohibited.
MOTEL or MOTOR COURT — A building containing overnight
accommodations intended or designed to be used or which are occupied
for sleeping purposes by guests or transients and where meals may be
served and which caters to the motoring public. The ordinary length of
stay is overnight but may extend as long as one week under unusual
circumstances.
MOTOR VEHICLE, BOAT AND TRAILER SALES — A building and/
or area arranged, intended or designed to be used for the rental,
lease, sale and/or resale of motor vehicles, new or used, or boats
or trailers. A selection of motor vehicles, boats or trailers may be
displayed within a totally enclosed building but still others require an
outdoor area for their storage. In conjunction therewith a repair shop
may be operated in the rear or to the side of the motor vehicle, boat
and trailer salesroom, provided that the garage doors providing access
§ 535-4 PORT JERVIS CODE § 535-4
520:698
to the repair shop shall be located to the rear or to the side of the motor
vehicle, boat or trailer salesroom.
MOTOR VEHICLE LAUNDRY — A building, portion of a building and/
or area arranged, intended or designed to be used for the washing,
spraying, waxing, polishing and/or drying of motor vehicles and/or the
vacuuming or dry-cleaning of the same.
MOTOR VEHICLE REPAIR SHOP — A building, or portion of a building,
arranged, intended or designed to be used for making repairs to motor
vehicles, their mechanical systems and their body structure (including
painting). This category is intended to include, but is not limited to,
"jiffy lubes" and such repair shops as specialize in transmissions,
mufflers, tires, etc., but that do not dispense gasoline fuel.
MOTOR VEHICLE SERVICE STATION — Any area of land, including
structures thereon, that is used for the sale of gasoline or any other
motor vehicle fuel and oil and other lubricating substances, including
any sale of motor vehicle minor accessories, and which may or may not
include facilities for lubricating or otherwise servicing motor vehicles,
but not including the painting thereof by any means.
MULTIFAMILY/MULTIFAMILY USE — See "dwelling, multiple."
MUSEUM — A building serving as a repository for a collection of
natural, scientific or literary curiosities, objects of interest or works of
art, and arranged, intended and designed to be used by members of
the public for viewing, with or without an admission charge.[Added
5-27-2014 by L.L. No. 3-2014]
NONCONFORMING USE — Any use of a building or structure, lot
or land, or part thereof, lawfully existing at the effective date of this
chapter or any amendments thereto affecting such use, which does not
conform to the use requirements of this chapter for the district in which
it is located.
NURSERY — A place where trees, shrubs, vines and/or flower and
vegetable plants are propagated or grown for a period of at least
six months and/or where flowers and vegetables of an annual variety
are germinated before being offered for sale and transplanting. (Such
definition shall not encompass those retail establishments that buy
the majority of their horticulture stock wholesale, not propagating it
themselves.)
NURSERY SCHOOL — A place, building or structure designed to
provide care or instruction for five or more children under six years of
age.[Added 9-8-2003 by L.L. No. 2-2003]
NURSING HOME — A facility providing therein nursing care to the
sick, invalid, infirm, disabled or convalescent persons in addition to
lodging and board or health-related service, or any combination of the
foregoing, and in addition thereto providing nursing care and healthrelated
service, or either of them, to persons who are not occupants of
the facility.
§ 535-4 WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS § 535-4
520:699
OFFICE, PROFESSIONAL AND BUSINESS — A place or establishment
used for the organizational or administrative aspects of a trade, or
used in the conduct of a profession or business, and not involving the
manufacture, storage, display or direct retail sale of goods. This may
include, but is not limited to, offices of salesmen, sales representatives,
architects, engineers, physicians, dentists, attorneys, insurance
brokers, real estate brokers and persons with similar occupations.
OFFICIAL MAP — A map adopted by the Common Council showing
streets, highways and parks, both existing and proposed, under the
authority of, and for the purposes established in, §§ 26, 29, 35-a and 36
of the General City Law.
ONE-HUNDRED-YEAR FLOOD — The highest level of flood that, on the
average, is likely to occur once every 100 years, or has a one-percent
chance of occurring each year, as established by the most recent edition
of maps prepared for the Federal Emergency Management Agency
(FEMA).
OPEN SPACE — An unoccupied space open to the sky on the same lot
with a building.
PARKING AREA — A lot or part thereof used for the storage or parking
of motor vehicles, with or without the payment of rent or charges in
money and/or other consideration.
PARKING LOT — A lot or part thereof used for the storage of motor
vehicles which contains space rented to the general public by the hour,
day, week, month or year. A commercial parking lot or storage garage
shall not include sale of fuel or repair of motor vehicles.
PARKING SPACE — An off-street area available for parking one motor
vehicle and having an area of not less than 200 square feet, exclusive
of passageways and driveways appurtenant thereto and giving access
thereto, and having direct access to a street or alley.
PARTICULATE MATTER — Any finely divided liquid or solid matter,
including smoke, capable of being air- or gas-borne.
PERSONAL SERVICES — Commercial or business services provided
to individuals or to other businesses, intended herein to include the
cleaning of clothes, dropoff and pickup stations for laundry and drycleaning,
repair of shoes or other personal effects, hair grooming,
physical therapy and health aid, and printing, copying, design, typing
and computer services, as well as studios for the production of arts
and crafts. Such definition shall exclude automotive services, retail and
general business and industrial uses.
PRESCHOOL — A place, building or structure designed to provide care
or instruction for five or more children ranging in age from infancy to
the age of six years of age preceding attendance at elementary school,
including kindergarten.[Added 9-8-2003 by L.L. No. 2-2003]
§ 535-4 PORT JERVIS CODE § 535-4
520:700
PRINTING —
RECREATION — Golf courses, indoor cinemas, indoor health and
exercise facilities, tennis courts (indoor and outdoor), indoor swimming
pools, racquetball, squash and the like, excluding facilities intended
primarily for spectator activities, such as stadiums and arenas, shooting
ranges and amusement parks, automotive tracks and other similar uses
or structures maintained for the amusement, patronage or recreation
of the public.
RESEARCH, DESIGN AND DEVELOPMENT LABORATORY — A
building for experimentation in pure or applied research, design,
development and production of prototype machines or of new products,
and uses accessory thereto, wherein products are not manufactured
for wholesale or retail sale, wherein commercial servicing or repair of
commercial products is not performed, and wherein there is no outside
display of any material or products.
RESIDENTIAL HEALTH CARE FACILITY — A nursing home or a facility
providing health-related service exclusively to those admitted as
residents.
RESTAURANT — A business enterprise engaged in preparing and
serving food and beverages selected from a full menu by patrons seated
at a table or counter, served by a waiter or waitress and consumed on
the premises, with takeout food as an accessory use, but excluding fastfood
establishments.
RESTAURANT, FAST-FOOD — A business enterprise primarily engaged
in the sale of quickly prepared food and beverages selected by patrons
from a limited line of prepared specialized items, such as hamburgers,
chicken, pizza, tacos, and hot dogs, for takeout and/or on-premises
consumption (in the latter case, where orders are placed at a counter
as opposed to table service via a waiter/waitress), in a facility where
the floor area available for dining is less than 1/2 of the gross floor
area and a major portion of the sales to the public is at a drive-in or
stand-up-type counter. The term "fast-food restaurant" shall not include
bakeries, delicatessens, or similar types of retail establishments. See
also "restaurant."
COMMERCIAL — An establishment primarily engaged in the
reproduction of lettering and graphic designs in large quantities
and primarily for business, professional, governmental,
institutional and industrial customers.
(1)
JOB — An establishment primarily engaged in the reproduction of
small quantities of quickly accomplished customized work for a
localized clientele of business and professional customers, as well
as photocopying services for walk-in customers.
(2)
NEWSPAPER — An establishment primarily engaged in the
reproduction of public news media, as well as advertising media.
(3)
§ 535-4 WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS § 535-4
520:701
RETAIL ESTABLISHMENTS — Stores and shops where goods are sold
primarily at retail. Such sales are primarily made directly to the
ultimate consumer and includes (but not limited to) goods such as
food and beverages; florists; shoes and clothing; hardware, paint and
wallpaper; carpeting; hobby and crafts; books; furniture; antiques; art
supplies; music; pharmacies; jewelry; photographic supplies; pet
supplies; gifts; stationery; sporting goods; fabrics; optical goods; and
appliances, but excluding lumber yards, restaurants, and fast food.
Outside storage or display of goods for such is permitted only with site
plan approval by the Planning Board.
SANITARIUM or SANATORIUM — A private hospital, whether or not
such facility is operated for profit.
SCHOOL, PRIVATE — A kindergarten, primary or secondary school,
junior college, college or university not operated by a public school
district but furnishing a comprehensive curriculum of academic
instruction similar to that of a public school, licensed by the State of
New York Education Department.
SCHOOL, PUBLIC — Any educational institution operated by a public
school district under the laws of the State of New York or any junior
college, college or university operated under or by any municipal or
quasi-municipal subdivision or agency.
SCREEN or SCREENING —
SELF-STORAGE WAREHOUSE — A compartmentalized warehouse in
which the renter of a self-contained storage unit has direct access to
that space.
SETBACK, EXISTING OR ESTABLISHED — The median setback (front,
rear or side) of all existing structures located on the same side of the
street and within the same block and same zoning district.
SETBACK, FRONT — The required minimum distance from the building
or use to the front lot line.
A strip at least 10 feet wide, densely planted (or having equivalent
natural growth) with shrubs or trees at least four feet high at the
time of planting, of a type that will form a year-round dense screen
at least six feet high within three years;
(1)
An opaque wall or barrier or uniformly painted opaque fence at
least six feet high; or
(2)
Any other islands, barriers, emplacements, walls, fences, trees,
plantings, shrubbery or other artificial or natural dividing strip
or marker of any kind, wherever located on the site, conditioned
or required in any building permit, certificate of occupancy/
compliance, site development plan, subdivision approval, special
permit, variance, zone change or other requirement of any board,
agency, commission or official of the City of Port Jervis pursuant to
this chapter.
(3)
§ 535-4 PORT JERVIS CODE § 535-4
520:702
SETBACK, REAR — The required minimum distance from the building
or use to the rear lot line.
SETBACK, SIDE — The required minimum distance from the building
or use to any lot line other than to the front or rear lot line.183
SHOPPING CENTER — A structure or structures and customary
parking and loading areas providing for a variety of retail commercial
establishments managed as a unit and having the following
characteristics:
SIGN — See Article X, Signs.[Amended 2-26-2007 by L.L. No.
2-2007184]
SMOKE — Any emission into the open air from combustion from any
source, except emissions of uncontaminated water vapor.185
STEEP SLOPES — Areas with an average slope in excess of 20% or
more over a horizontal distance of 100 feet.
STORAGE — The holding or safekeeping of goods in a warehouse
or other depository to await the happening of some future event or
contingency which will call for the removal of the goods.
STORY — That portion of a building included between the surface of
any floor and the surface of the floor above it, or if there is no floor
above it, then the space between the floor and the top of the ceiling
beams next above it. A basement shall be counted as a story if the
ceiling is more than four feet above the level from which the height of
the building is measured, if it is used for dwelling purposes by other
than a janitor or night watchman. In a nonresidential building, each
basement in excess of eight feet in height shall be counted as a story.
STORY, HEIGHT OF — The vertical distance from the top surface of
the floor to the top surface of the floor next above. The height of the
topmost story is the distance from the top surface of the floor to the top
surface of the ceiling joists.
A unified architectural treatment and identifiable theme relating
each of the commercial establishments within.
(1)
A common interrelated parking and site circulation system with
consolidated access to public roads.
(2)
183. Editor's Note: The definition of "sexual conduct" which immediately followed this
definition was deleted 2-26-2007 by L.L. No. 2-2007. See now § 535-13, Adults-oriented
businesses.
184. Editor’s Note: The following definitions, which immediately followed this definition, were
deleted 2-26-2007 by L.L. No. 2-2007: “sign area”; “sign, display”; “sign, ground or
freestanding”; “sign, freestanding”; “sign, interior”; “sign, marquee”; “sign, mural”;
“sign, overhanging”; “sign, real estate”; “sign, roof”; “sign, temporary”; and “sign, wall.”
185. Editor’s Note: The definition of “specialty food store,” which immediately followed this
definition, was deleted 9-24-2018 by L.L. No. 9-2018. The definitions of “specified
anatomical areas” and “specified sexual activity” were deleted 2-26-2007 by L.L. No.
2-2007. See now § 535-13.
§ 535-4 WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS § 535-4
520:703
STREET — An existing state, county, or City highway or a way shown
on a subdivision plat approved by the City Planning Board, as provided
by the General City Law.
STREET GRADE — The officially established grade of the street upon
which a lot fronts. If there is no officially established grade, the existing
grade of the street shall be taken as the street grade.
STREET LINE — The dividing line between a street and a lot.
STRUCTURE — Any building within the normal meaning and, in
addition, any other thing constructed on a lot, the use of which requires
location on the ground or attachment to something having location on
the ground, and which exceeds four feet in height at its highest point
when measured perpendicular from the ground at that point.
SUBDIVISION — Any land, vacant or improved, which is divided or
proposed to be divided into two or more lots, parcels, sites, units, plots
or interests for the purpose of offer, sale, lease, or development, either
on the installment plan or upon any and all other plans, terms, and
conditions, including resubdivision. "Subdivision" includes the division
or development of residential and nonresidential zoned land, whether
by deed, metes and bounds description, devise, intestacy, lease, map,
plat, or other recorded instrument.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Any repair, reconstruction, or
improvement of a structure, the cost of which exceeds 50% of the value
of the structure either before the improvement or repair is started
or, if the structure has been damaged and is being restored, before
the damage occurred. For the purpose of this definition, "substantial
improvement" is considered to occur when the first alteration of any
wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of the building commences,
whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the
structure. The term does not, however, include either any project for
improvement of a structure to comply with existing state or local
health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which are necessary
solely to assure safe living conditions or any alteration of a structure
listed on the National Register of Historic Places, the State-Wide
Inventory of Historic and Cultural Resources, or the City Inventory of
Historic Structures.
SWIMMING POOL — A man-made body of water at least two feet deep
and having a total area of more than 200 square feet, to be used for
swimming and bathing, in or above the ground outside any building.
TASTING ROOM — A facility, or portion of a facility, accessory to a
brewery, brew pub, microbrewery, distillery, microdistillery or winery,
where guests may sample the manufacturer's products and purchase
same.[Added 2-8-2016 by L.L. No. 4-2016]
THEATER, MOTION-PICTURE — A building or a part of a building
devoted to the showing of motion pictures on a paid admission basis.
§ 535-4 PORT JERVIS CODE § 535-4
520:704
TOURIST HOME — A dwelling in which overnight accommodations are
provided or offered for transient guests for compensation.
TOXIC OR NOXIOUS MATTER — Any solid, liquid, or gaseous matter,
including but not limited to gases, vapors, dust, fumes, and mists,
containing properties which by chemical means are inherently harmful
and likely to destroy life or impair health or likely to cause injury to the
well-being of persons and living matter or damage to property.
TRADE SHOP — A workshop of any person employed in a skilled trade,
in which the items fabricated and created on the premises are also sold
from the premises with other retail items. This definition shall include,
but shall not be limited to woodworking, carpentry, upholstery, printing
and copying, and machine printing.[Amended 1-22-2018 by L.L. No.
1-2018]
TRAILER —
TRANSPORTATION CENTER — Includes (but not limited to) bus and
train stations, whether publicly or privately sponsored.
USABLE OPEN SPACE — An unenclosed portion of the ground of a lot
which is not devoted to driveways or parking spaces, which is free of
structures of any kind, of which not more than 25% is roofed for shelter
purposes only, the minimum dimension of which is 40 feet and which is
available and accessible to all occupants of the building or buildings on
said lot for purposes of active or passive outdoor recreation.
USE — The specific purpose for which land, water, or a building or
structure is designed, arranged, or intended, or for which it is or may
be occupied or maintained. The term "permitted use" or its equivalent
shall not be deemed to include any nonconforming use.
USE, ACCESSORY — A use customarily incidental and subordinate to
the primary use on a lot, whether such accessory use is conducted in a
principal or accessory building on the lot.
USE, PRINCIPAL — The primary or predominant use for which a lot or
building is used.
UTILITY, PRIVATE — Those normal and customary services to a
building or group of buildings within a corporate park or subdivision
TRAILER, CAMPING — A folding structure, mounted on wheels and
designed for travel, recreation and vacation use.
(1)
TRAILER, TRAVEL — A vehicular, portable structure built on a
chassis, designed as a temporary one-family dwelling for travel,
recreation and vacation, having a body length not exceeding 26
feet.
(2)
OFFICE — A vehicular, portable structure built on a chassis,
designed as a temporary facility for such uses as banking, on-site
construction supervision, etc.
(3)
§ 535-4 WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS § 535-4
520:705
necessary to provide heat, electric power, water, sanitary waste
disposal, and/or fire protection.
UTILITY, PUBLIC — Any person, firm, corporation, or municipal agency
duly authorized to furnish to the public, under public regulation,
electricity, gas, water, sewage treatment, steam, cable television,
telephone or telegraph.
VARIANCE — Action of the Zoning Board of Appeals, pursuant to the
General City Law, to vary or modify the application of any of the
regulations or provisions of this chapter.
WAREHOUSE — A building, or part of a building, for storing of goods,
wares, and merchandise, whether for the owner or for others, and
whether it is a public or private warehouse.
WAY — A street or alley or other thoroughfare or easement
permanently established for passage of persons or vehicles.
WINE BAR — A business enterprise engaged in the primary service
of the sale of on-premises consumption of wine and beer. This does
not include the service of liquor. Such is to be distinguished from a
restaurant in that a restaurant's primary purpose is the preparing and
service of food and beverages while a wine bar may also serve food
and other beverages but it need not be its primary purpose.[Added
5-27-2014 by L.L. No. 3-2014]
WINERY — A facility where vinous liquors are produced, manufactured
or sold in accordance with retail and/or wholesale licenses required by
New York State.[Added 2-8-2016 by L.L. No. 4-2016]
YARD —
YARD STORAGE — An area used in conjunction with a permitted
principal use for placement of equipment, materials and supplies used
in the principal use. The area occupied by the storage yard must comply
with setback requirements and cannot be considered part of the open
space of a site.
ZONING MAP — A map adopted by the Common Council, pursuant to
the requirements of the General City Law, which depicts the City and
the boundaries of the zoning districts regulated in this chapter.
FRONT — The unoccupied space fully open to the sky within and
extending the full width of the lot from the street line to a line
drawn parallel thereto.
(1)
REAR — The unoccupied space fully open to the sky within and
extending the full width of the lot from the rear lot line to a line
drawn parallel thereto.
(2)
SIDE — The unoccupied space fully open to the sky within the lot,
extending in full distance from the front yard to the rear yard and
measured from the side lot line to a line drawn parallel thereto.
(3)
§ 535-4 PORT JERVIS CODE § 535-4
520:706
ARTICLE III
Zones Established; Zoning Map
§ 535-5. Districts established.
The zoning districts listed below are hereby established and the City of Port
Jervis is divided into the districts listed.
Symbol Title
R-1 Low-Density Residence District
R-2 Medium-Density Residence District
R-3 Mountain Residence District
R-O Residence-Office District
CBD Central Business District
SC Service Commercial District
LI Light Industry District
§ 535-6. Zoning Map.
The boundaries of the zones are hereby established as shown on the Zoning
Map, City of Port Jervis, adopted March 13, 1989, which accompanies
this chapter, and which, with all explanatory matter thereon, is hereby
adopted and made a part of this chapter. Said map, indicating the latest
amendments, shall be kept up-to-date in the office of the Building Official
and the City Clerk-Treasurer for the use and benefit of the public.
§ 535-7. Annexed property.
Any property which may hereafter be annexed to the City of Port Jervis
shall automatically be zoned Low-Density Residence District (R-1), unless
specifically zoned otherwise by an action of the Common Council.
§ 535-8. Interpretation of district boundaries.
In determining the boundaries of districts on the map, the following rules
shall apply:
A. Center lines. Unless otherwise shown, the zone boundaries shall be
construed to coincide with the center lines of street, alleys, parkways,
waterways, railroad rights-of-way or such lines extended.
B. Property lines. Where such boundaries are indicated as approximately
following the property lines of parks or other publicly owned land, such
lines shall be construed to be such boundaries.
C. Parallel to streets. Unless otherwise shown, all zone boundaries
running parallel to streets shall be construed to be 120 feet from the
center line of the street.
§ 535-5 WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS § 535-8
520:707
§ 535-9. Effect of establishment of zones.
D. Division of a lot. In all cases where a zone boundary divides a lot in one
ownership at the time of the adoption of this chapter and more than
50% of the area of such lot lies in the less restricted zone, the
regulations prescribed by this chapter of the less restrictive zone shall
apply to such portion of the more restricted portion of said lot as lies
within 30 feet of such zone boundary. For purposes of this subsection,
the more restricted zone shall be deemed that district which is subject
to regulations which prohibit the particular use intended to be made of
said lot or which require higher standards with respect to setback,
coverage, yards, screening, landscaping and similar requirements.
E. Close to lot line. In all cases where a zone boundary line is located not
farther than 15 feet away from a lot line of record, such boundary line
shall be construed to coincide with such lot line.
F. Use of scale. In all other cases where dimensions are not shown on the
map, the location of boundaries shown on the map shall be determined
by the use of the scale appearing thereon.
A. Conformity. No land, water, building or other structure shall be used
and no building or other structure shall be constructed or
reconstructed unless it shall conform to this chapter. No lot or land
shall be subdivided, sold, encumbered or conveyed so as to:
(1) Make said lot or land nonconforming or more nonconforming to
this chapter;
(2) Make any use, building or other structure nonconforming or more
nonconforming;
(3) Reduce any setback, open space or off-street parking or loading
spaces to less than is required by this chapter; or
(4) Make any nonconformity more nonconforming.
B. Required yard and open space. No yard or open space required in
connection with any structure or use shall be considered as providing a
required yard or open space for any other structure on the same or any
other lot.
C. No subdivision unless both lots conforming. No lot shall be formed from
a part of a lot already occupied by a structure unless such structure, all
setbacks and open spaces connected therewith and the remaining lot
comply with all requirements prescribed by this chapter for the district
in which said lot is located. No permit shall be issued for the erection of
a structure on any new lot thus created unless such structure and lot
comply with all provisions of this chapter.
D. Compliance with previous ordinance. Nothing contained in this chapter
shall require any change in the plans, construction or designated use of
§ 535-8 PORT JERVIS CODE § 535-9
520:708
a structure complying with the existing law, a permit for which shall
have been duly issued and the construction of which shall have been
started before the date of first publication of notice of the public
hearing on this chapter, and the ground-story framework of which,
including the second tier of beams, shall have been completed within
six months of the date of the permit, and which entire structure shall
have been completed in accordance with such filed plans within one
year from the date of passage of this chapter.
§ 535-9 WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS § 535-9
520:709

ARTICLE IV
General Provisions
§ 535-10. Permits and certificates.
No building or other structures shall be constructed, reconstructed,
enlarged, extended, moved or structurally altered until an application for a
building permit has been submitted to and approved by the Building Official
and a building permit has been issued by that official. No land, building,
or other structure shall be used or occupied, or changed in use, until an
application for a certificate of occupancy/compliance has been submitted to
and approved by the Building Official and until a certificate of occupancy/
compliance has been issued by that official certifying conformity with this
chapter. All applications shall be submitted and approved in accordance
with this chapter and all building permits and certificates of occupancy/
compliance shall be issued in accordance with this chapter.
§ 535-11. Performance standards.
The following performance standards shall apply to all nonresidential uses
of land, buildings and other structures and shall be of continuing
application:
A. Dust, dirt, fly ash and smoke. No dust, dirt, fly ash or smoke shall be
emitted into the air from any lot so as to endanger the public health and
safety, to impair safety on or the value and enjoyment of other property,
or to constitute a critical source of air pollution.
B. Odors. No offensive odors shall be emitted into the air from any lot so as
to impair the value and enjoyment of any other lot.
C. Gases and fumes. No noxious, toxic, or corrosive fumes or gases shall
be emitted into the air from any lot so as to endanger the public health
and safety or to impair safety on or the value and enjoyment of any
other lot.
D. Noise. With the exception of time signals and noise necessarily involved
with the construction or demolition of buildings and other structures,
no noise which is objectionable due to volume, intermittence, beat,
frequency or shrillness shall be transmitted outside the lot where it
originates.186
E. Vibration. With the exception of vibration necessarily involved in the
construction or demolition of buildings, no vibration shall be
transmitted outside the lot where it originates.
F. Wastes. No offensive wastes shall be discharged or dumped into any
river, stream, watercourse, storm drain, pond, lake or swamp.
186. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 381, Noise.
§ 535-10 WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS § 535-11
520:711
§ 535-12. Prohibited uses.
No land, building or other structure shall be used for any of the following
purposes:
G. Glare and heat. No offensive glare from lighting shall be transmitted so
as to endanger the public health and safety nor shall it be transmitted
into or within any residence district so as to impair the value and
enjoyment of any lot therein. No radiant heat shall be perceptible
outside the lot where it originates.
H. Danger. No material which is dangerous due to explosion, extreme fire
hazard or radioactivity shall be used, stored, manufactured, processed
or assembled except in accordance with applicable codes and
regulations of the State of New York.
A. Noxious, offensive or objectionable. Any use which is noxious, offensive,
or objectionable by reason of the emission of smoke, dust, gas, odor, or
other form of air pollution, or by reason of the deposit, discharge, or
dispersal of liquid or solid wastes, in any form, in a manner or amount
so as to cause permanent damage to the soil and stream or to adversely
affect the surrounding area, or by reason of the creation of noise,
vibration, electromagnetic or other disturbance, or by reason of
illumination by artificial light or light reflection beyond the limits of the
lot on or from which such light or light reflection emanates, or which
involves any dangerous fire, explosive, radioactive, or other hazard, or
which can cause injury, annoyance, or disturbance to any of the
surrounding properties or to their owners and occupants, and any other
process or use which is unwholesome and noisome and may be
dangerous or prejudicial to health, safety, or the general welfare, and
which does not conform to the performance standards specified in
§ 535-11.
B. Artificial lighting. Artificial lighting facilities of any kind with light
sources visible beyond the lot lines.
C. Mobile home. Use of a mobile home or a camping trailer as a dwelling;
mobile home courts and recreational vehicle campgrounds.
D. Amusement parks. Amusement parks, circuses, Ferris wheels or similar
amusement devices and outdoor games for profit, except those
sponsored by local nonprofit organizations and then only for periods of
not more than seven days by license issued by the Common Council.
E. Auto-wrecking yards/motor vehicle junkyards. Auto-wrecking yards; the
outside storage of inoperative, unlicensed automotive vehicles and the
outside storage of all automotive parts.
F. Explosives. Manufacture, sale or storage of explosives and fireworks,
except under license from the State of New York and in a manner and
place conforming to the laws of the State of New York and the American
§ 535-11 PORT JERVIS CODE § 535-12
520:712
Table of Distances and provided that no more than 5,000 pounds is
stored in any one magazine.
G. Incineration. Incineration or reduction of waste materials, except in a
plant owned and operated by the City or county.
H. Disposal.
(1) Disposal of septic or sewage waste.
(2) Junkyards, sanitary landfills, or dumps, except those established as
an official City or county dump or duly licensed as a dump by the
Common Council.
I. Stockyards; slaughtering of animals.
J. Boardinghouses, residential hotels, lodging houses, rooming houses
and tourist homes.
K. Nuclear reaction. Atomic research or radioactive materials; the
generation of power in any form from nuclear reactions.
L. Cemetery or crematory (but those that exist may continue to do so and
even expand).
M. Liquid petroleum gas distributing stations.
N. Saw or planing mill.
O. Kennels.
P. Particular manufacturing processes involving primary production of the
following products from raw materials:
(1) Insecticides and/or pesticides.
(2) Rendering plants for fat or animal products.
(3) Ammonia, chlorine or bleaching powder manufacture.
(4) Boiler making.
(5) Cooperage.
(6) Distillation of coal, wood or bones.
(7) Dry-dyeing establishments.
(8) Fertilizer manufacture.
(9) Gas, manufactured or bottled, sale or storage of.
(10) Glue, size and gelatin manufacture.
(11) Oilcloth or linoleum manufacture.
(12) Paint, oil, varnish or turpentine manufacture.
§ 535-12 WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS § 535-12
520:713
§ 535-13. Adult-oriented businesses. [Amended 4-12-2004 by L.L.
No. 1-2004]
(13) Petroleum refining or storage.
(14) Pyroxylin manufacture.
(15)Rawhide or skins, storage, curing or tanning.
(16) Soap manufacture.
(17) Starch, glucose or dextrine manufacture.
(18) Sulfurous, sulfuric, nitric or hydrochloric acid manufacture.
(19) Tallow, grease or lard manufacture or refining.
(20) Tar distillation or manufacture.
(21) Tar roofing or tar waterproofing manufacture.
Q. Other uses. Any other use, whether specified above or not, that is of
such a nature as to be detrimental to neighboring properties by reason
of emission of odor, dust, refuse matter, garbage, smoke, vibration, gas
radiation, noise or any other factor that is dangerous to the comfort,
peace, enjoyment, health or safety of the area or the community.
R. Outdoor solid-fuel-burning boiler or furnace accessory structure
appliance, designed and intended, through the burning of solid fuels,
for the purpose of heating a principal structure, any other site, or
structure on premises. [Added 11-27-2006 by L.L. No. 6-2006]
A. Findings. The Common Council of the City of Port Jervis is familiar with
the City, the location of adult-oriented business within the City and the
issues raised by such business in the City and throughout the country.
Based on the Council's local knowledge, the input of City residents and
business owners obtained during a public meeting held on _________,
2004, and evidence and studies concerning the impacts or "secondary
effects" of adult-oriented businesses on the surrounding community, as
presented in judicial decisions such as, but not limited to, City of Erie v.
Pap's A.M. tdba "Kandyland," 529 U.S. 277 (2000); Barnes v. Glen
Theater, Inc., 501 U.S. 560 (1991); City of Renton v. Playtime Theaters,
Inc., 475 U.S. 41 (1986); Young v. American Mini Theaters, Inc., 427
U.S. 50 (1976); Stringfellow's of New York. Ltd, v. City of New York, 671
N.Y.S.2d 406 (1998); Town of Islip v. Caviglia, 73 N.Y. 2d 544 (1989); and
Singer v. Town of East Hartford, 736 F.Supp. 430 (D. Conn. 1989), aff'd
901 F.2d 297 (2d Cir. 1990) (affirming judgment on basis of District
Court opinion), and on studies conducted by other communities,
including but not limited to New York City, New York (1994); Seattle,
Washington (1993); Seattle, Washington (1989); Village of Scotia, New
York (1999); Town and Village of Ellicotville, New York (1998); Town of
Islip, New York (1980); and Indianapolis, Indiana (1984), and from
publications such as "Report to the American Center for Law and
§ 535-12 PORT JERVIS CODE § 535-13
520:714
Justice on the Secondary Impacts of Sex Oriented Businesses,"
produced by Peter Hecht, Ph.D. of the Environmental Research Group,
and "Adult Uses and the First Amendment: Zoning and Non-Zoning
Controls on the Use of Land for Adult Businesses," by Steve McMillen
of Pace University Law School, and also on the findings from the Report
of the Attorney General's Working Group on the Regulation of Sexually
Oriented Businesses (1989, State of Minnesota), the Council finds that:
(1) Adult-oriented businesses are unavoidably associated with
unlawful, unhealthy and detrimental activities ancillary to the
constitutionally protected speech activities of such businesses.
(2) Employees of adult-oriented businesses engage in or may be
requested to engage in sexual behavior as a result of the type of
business by which they are employed.
(3) People present in the vicinity of an adult-oriented business are
often assumed by third parties to be engaged in, or amenable to,
the types of unlawful, unhealthy and detrimental activities ancillary
to such businesses. As a result, such persons are subjected to
unwanted advances or attention by persons frequenting such adultoriented
business.
(4) People who choose not to frequent adult-oriented businesses tend
to avoid areas in which such businesses locate. As a result, areas in
which adult-oriented businesses locate often become "dead zones,"
i.e., areas in which owners of non-adult-oriented businesses tend to
choose not to locate in the first instance, or choose to migrate away
from, because of diminished pedestrian traffic due to the presence
of adult-oriented businesses.
(5) Because non-adult-oriented businesses tend not to locate near, or
migrate away from, adult-oriented businesses, the presence of one
such business tends to attract other adult-oriented businesses into
the dead zone, thereby increasing the pace and intensity of the
unlawful, unhealthy and detrimental activities unavoidably
associated with such businesses and contributing to the blighting
of the area surrounding such businesses. The smaller the
municipality, including the City, the larger the effects of a dead
zone because the zone encompasses a larger proportion of the
municipality's businesses than a similar zone would in a larger City.
(6) Due to the small geographical area of the City of Port Jervis, the
probability increases that adult-oriented businesses will have
substantial effects upon residential areas within the City. Further,
smaller municipalities, including the City, are more likely to have
fewer days and hours of commercial activity than a larger City. This
increases the likelihood that an adult-oriented business will have a
larger effect on the area in which it is located during the off hours
of non-adult-oriented businesses.
§ 535-13 WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS § 535-13
520:715
(7) Sexual acts, including masturbation, occur at adult-oriented
businesses, especially those which provide enclosed rooms, booths
or other cubicles for viewing of films, videos or live sex shows,
thereby creating unhealthy and unsanitary conditions within the
premises of such businesses.
(8) The constitutionally protected speech activities presented at adultoriented
businesses often encourages sexual activities, thereby
creating unhealthy and unsanitary conditions.
(9) Some patrons frequent adult-oriented businesses for the purpose of
engaging in specified sexual activities within the premises of such
businesses, thereby creating unhealthy and unsanitary conditions
within the premises of such businesses.
(10) Communicable diseases may be spread by specified sexual
activities, including but not limited to transmission of the human
immunodeficiency virus (HIV) and the contraction of the acquired
immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS), Hepatitis B and venereal
diseases.
(11) Venereal diseases, HIV, AIDS and Hepatitis B, as well as other
communicable diseases spread by specified sexual activities, are
serious health concerns in the local community.
(12) Sanitary conditions in some adult-oriented businesses are
unhealthy, in part, because the activities conducted there are
unhealthy, and, in part, because of the unregulated nature of the
activities engaged in by some patrons of such businesses and the
failure of some business owners and operators to self-regulate
those activities and maintain the business premises.
(13) Numerous studies and reports have determined that semen and
other bodily fluids are found in certain areas of adult-oriented
businesses, particularly where persons view, in enclosed rooms,
booths or other cubicles, adult materials or entertainments
characterized by an emphasis on nudity or specified sexual
activities or specified anatomical areas.
(14) Prohibiting the viewing, in enclosed rooms, booths or other
cubicles, of adult materials or entertainments characterized by an
emphasis on nudity or specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas is the least restrictive means available
effectuating the legitimate and content-neutral legislative goal of
preventing adult-oriented businesses from being operated and
used in a unhealthy, unsafe and unsanitary manner facilitating the
transmission of communicable diseases or otherwise degrading the
public welfare, health, comfort and safety. Further, such a
prohibition imposes a relatively minor imposition on the operating
prerogatives of the owners of adult-oriented businesses compared
to other means such as: mandating adult-oriented businesses
inspect such cubicles and directing the frequency and form of such
§ 535-13 PORT JERVIS CODE § 535-13
520:716
inspections, requiring adult-oriented businesses to hire employees
whose duties are dedicated to monitoring such cubicles and
conducting increased numbers of police and public health and
safety inspections of such businesses.
(15) Adult-oriented businesses have operational characteristics which
should be reasonably regulated in order to protect the substantial
governmental concerns raised by the various findings herein while
permitting patrons and owners of such businesses to engage in
constitutionally protected speech activities.
(16) The presence of adult-oriented businesses is associated with
declining property values.
(17) The presence of adult-oriented businesses is associated with
increased crime rates against both property and persons.
(18) Children and teenagers are more likely to be exposed to graphic
sexual images because of the presence of adult-oriented
businesses.
(19) Because persons patronizing adult-oriented businesses often travel
a significant distance to such businesses, these persons tend not to
share with City residents the concerns for the quality of life in the
City. Consequently, persons from outside the City patronizing such
businesses tend to place an inordinate strain on City services and
facilities, such as parking, usage of City streets, and trash
collection and removal.
(20) The presence of adult-oriented businesses tends to alter the
character of the community in which they are located and quality of
life for the residents of such community. The City is presently in the
process of undergoing a transformation altering both the character
and quality of life in the City. The alterations to character and
quality of life associated with the presence of adult-oriented
businesses are at odds with the goals of the transformation the City
is undergoing, and, consequently, the failure to properly regulate
adult-oriented businesses could undermine this process.
(21) The City's intent in regulating adult-oriented businesses is not to
restrict constitutionally protected speech activities but rather to
provide constitutionally sufficient alternate avenues for persons to
engage in such activities in a manner consistent with the
constitutions of the United States and New York State while
addressing the unlawful, unhealthy and detrimental activities
ancillary to such speech and ameliorating these secondary effects
on the peace, good order, commercial viability and safety of City
residents and non-adult-oriented businesses.
(22) The general welfare, health, comfort and safety of the citizens of
the City will be promoted by the enactment of this section.
§ 535-13 WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS § 535-13
520:717
B. Purpose.
(1) The primary purposes of this section are as follows:
(a) To preserve the character and quality of the life of the City's
neighborhoods and business and maintain the viability of the
City's ongoing process of transformation;
(b) To control the documented adverse secondary effects that are
ancillary to adult-oriented businesses as set forth in Subsection
A, including decreased property values; attraction of
transients; parking and traffic problems; increased crimes
against persons and property; loss of business for surrounding
non-adult-oriented businesses; and deterioration of
neighborhoods;
(c) To maintain property values;
(d) To prevent crime;
(e) To safeguard the continued commercial viability of currently
existing non-adult-oriented businesses;
(f) To ensure the continued commercial viability of the City as a
location for new non-adult-oriented businesses;
(g) To restrict minors' inadvertent exposure to graphic sexual
images;
(h) To preserve and protect public hygiene, health and sanitation;
and
(i) To maintain the general welfare, health, comfort and safety of
City residents and businesses.
(2) So as to effectuate these purposes, and based upon the findings set
forth in Subsection A, such uses shall be subject to the standards
and regulations set forth in this section.
C. Definitions. As used in this section, the enumerated terms shall be
defined as follows:
ADULT MATERIALS —
Includes books, magazines, or other printed matter, including
product packaging and wrapping, pamphlets, newspapers, comic
books, articles, computer images, motion pictures, films,
photographs, digital video discs, videocassettes, slides or other
visual images, mechanical devices, instruments, clothing or any
other items which are distinguished or characterized by an
emphasis on the depiction or description of nudity or specified
sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
(1)
§ 535-13 PORT JERVIS CODE § 535-13
520:718
ADULT-ORIENTED BUSINESS — Includes:
ENTERTAINMENT — Includes:
FINANCIAL EXPENDITURES — The capital outlay made by an owner of
an adult-oriented business to establish such business, exclusive of the
fair market value of the building, structure, or property in or on which
such business is located and exclusive of any improvements unrelated
to the nonconformity of such business with the requirements of this
section.
NON-ADULT MATERIALS — Includes all items not within the definition
of "adult materials" under this subsection.
Exceptions. An item otherwise falling within the definition of adult
materials under Subsection (1) shall not be considered to be within
the definition of adult materials if:
The item is printed matter that does not contain at least one
visual depiction of nudity or specified sexual activities or
specified anatomical areas; or
(a)
The item is printed matter containing at least one visual
depiction of nudity or specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas and:
The item, when viewed as a whole, presents such depiction
for educational or scholarly purposes; and
[1]
The item is offered for sale by an establishment in which
no more than 10% of the interior square footage of the
establishment accessible to patrons is devoted to the sale,
rental, lease, trade, gift or display of adult materials.
[2]
(b)
(2)
Any establishment operated for economic gain or other
consideration using a building, structure, or property to offer adult
materials for sale, rental, lease, trade, gift or display; or
(1)
Any nightclub, bar, tavern, restaurant, eating and drinking
establishment, arcade, theater, motel, hotel, or any other
establishment operated for economic gain or other consideration
featuring entertainment characterized by an emphasis on the
depiction, description or presentation of nudity or specified sexual
activities or specified anatomical areas.
(2)
(1) Live performances;
Films, motion pictures, videocassettes, digital video discs, slides or
other visual image; or
(2)
Employees who, as part of their employment duties, are required
to wear costumes or uniforms or engage in live performances in
addition to their nonperformance employment duties.
(3)
§ 535-13 WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS § 535-13
520:719
NUDITY — Describes a person displaying one or more specified
anatomical areas.
SENSITIVE SITE — Includes residential facilities or institutions (but
not individual residences), health care facilities, churches, synagogues,
mosques or other places of worship, schools, child or day nursery
facilities, public or semipublic parks or recreational facilities, or any
adult-oriented businesses.
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS — Includes:
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES — Includes:
ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS — The Zoning Board of Appeals of the
City of Port Jervis. 187
Less than completely or opaquely concealed:
(a) Human genitals;
(b) Pubic region;
(c) Buttock;
(d) Anus; or
Female breast below a point immediately above the top of the
areola; or
(e)
(1)
Human male genitals in a discernible turgid state, even if
completely and opaquely covered.
(2)
Actual or simulated fondling or other erotic touching of human
genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus, or female breast;
(1)
Actual of simulated acts of human masturbation, sexual
intercourse, contact between the mouth and genitals, contact
between the mouth and anus, or contact between the mouth and
breast;
(2)
(3) Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal;
(4) Human excretory functions; or
(5) Actual or simulated sexual acts between humans and animals.
D. Location of adult-oriented business. An adult-oriented business shall be
permitted, in accordance with the requirements of this section, only in
the Central Business District of the City of Port Jervis, as such Central
Business District is established under § 535-5 and delineated by the
boundaries shown on the Official Zoning Map of the City established
under § 535-6.
187. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 535-13 PORT JERVIS CODE § 535-13
520:720
E. Separation, lot, bulk and parking requirements.
(1) Minimum separation required from sensitive sites. No adultoriented
business shall be located within 500 feet of any sensitive
site.
(2) Measurement.
(a) General provision. For the purposes of this section, the
distance between an adult-oriented business and a sensitive
site shall be measured by following a straight line from the
most proximate points between the lot line of such business
and the lot line of such site or second such business.
(b) Multi-tenant facility. Where a multi-tenant facility such as a
shopping center is involved, measurement shall be made from
the most proximate point along the boundary of the leasehold
interest of such business or such site rather than the lot line of
the facility containing such business or such site.
(3) Minimum separation required from residential districts.
(a) No adult-oriented business shall be located within 300 feet of
any area zoned for residential use, as measured in a straight
line from the most proximate points between the lot line of the
adult-oriented business and the residential zoning district
boundary line.
(b) For purposes of this section, any railroad line that passes
between the lot line of an adult-oriented business and any
residential zoning district boundary line shall constitute a
sufficient buffer between said adult-oriented business and said
residential district. Such adult-oriented business shall be
deemed to meet the minimum separation required from
residential districts pursuant to Subsection E(3)(a).
(4) Buildings containing residential uses. No adult-oriented business
shall be established or permitted in any building of which any part
is used for residential purposes. No residential use shall be
established in a building of which any part is used as an adultoriented
business.
(5) Lot, bulk and parking regulations. Adult-oriented businesses shall
conform to applicable Central Business District lot, bulk and
parking regulations set forth in this chapter, as such regulations
may be enacted or amended from time to time.
F. Signs and displays.
(1) General provision. No more than one exterior sign or display not to
exceed a surface area of 20 square feet for each side, or a similar
interior sign or display visible from the outside of an adult-oriented
§ 535-13 WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS § 535-13
520:721
business, shall be permitted which identifies or portrays the adultoriented
business.
(2) Additional restrictions.
(a) Signs and displays shall not depict or describe specified sexual
activities or specified anatomical areas.
(b) Signs and displays may be illuminated or composed of lighted
material such as neon but shall not feature flashing
illumination.
(3) Additional regulations applicable. In addition to the provisions of
this section, signs and displays identifying or portraying an adultoriented
business shall be subject to all regulations applicable to
signs and displays within the City of Port Jervis in addition to the
requirements of this section.188
G. Interior and exterior lighting. During the period that an adult-oriented
business is occupied, it shall be illuminated by sufficient natural or
nonflashing artificial light to permit safe ingress and egress to and from
the premises.
H. Live performance security. Each adult-oriented business offering
entertainment consisting of live performances shall maintain adequate
security during hours of operation to ensure the public peace and order.
The provisions of this subsection shall require each adult-oriented
business offering live performances to employ not less than one
uniformed security guard per every 50 or fewer patrons on the
premises. For any number of patrons over 50, each adult-oriented
business offering live performances shall employ not less than two
uniformed security guards. All uniformed security guards shall be
employed in accordance with the New York State Security Guard Act of
1992, as may be amended from time to time.189
I. Nonconforming buildings or lots. No nonconforming building or lot
shall be used for an adult-oriented business. No existing building, lot or
use shall be added to, enlarged, expanded in size or converted for
purposes of conducting an adult-oriented business so as to render such
building, lot or use nonconforming.
J. Termination and amortization of nonconforming adult-oriented
businesses.
(1) Termination of nonconforming adult-oriented businesses. Any
establishment in existence prior to the effective date of this section
which has made financial expenditures for the purpose of operating
an adult-oriented business, falls within the definition of an adultoriented
business, and is not in conformity with the requirements
188. Editor's Note: See Art. X, Signs, of this chapter.
189. Editor's Note: See Art. 7-A of the General Business Law, § 89-e et seq.
§ 535-13 PORT JERVIS CODE § 535-13
520:722
of this section shall either conform to the requirements of this
section or terminate its operation as an adult-oriented business
within two years following the effective date of this section. Such
nonconforming uses shall not be increased, enlarged, extended, or
altered within the two-year period or any extension thereof, except
that the use may be changed to a conforming use.
(2) Zoning Board of Appeals jurisdiction. The Zoning Board of Appeals
of the City of Port Jervis shall have the power to hear and decide
applications submitted to the Board for the continuation of a
nonconforming adult-oriented business made pursuant to this
Subsection J. The Board shall hear and decide such applications
using the same procedures by which it hears applications for use
and area variances pursuant to General City Law § 81-a and
§ 535-86 of this chapter and subject to the same time constraints
for rendering a decision. Submissions of such applications to the
Board shall be subject to payment of the same fees and costs as are
required by the City from time to time for variance applications.
(3) Amortization of certain nonconforming adult-oriented businesses.
Notwithstanding Subsection J(1), the Board may permit an adultoriented
business subject to termination to continue for a limited
period of time beyond the two-year period established in
Subsection J(1), provided that:
(a) An application is made by the owner of such adult-oriented
business to the Board at least 120 days prior to the date on
which such business must terminate; and
(b) The Board shall find, in connection with such adult-oriented
business, that:
[1] The owner of such a business had made substantial
financial expenditures related to such business;
[2] The owner has not recovered substantially all of such
financial expenditures; and
[3] The period for which such business may be permitted to
continue is the minimum period sufficient for the owner of
such business to recover substantially all of such financial
expenditures.
K. Prohibited activities. The following shall not be permitted on the
premises of any adult-oriented business or other public place within the
City of Port Jervis:
(1) Appearance by a person knowingly or intentionally engaging in
specified sexual activities;
(2) The knowing and intentional appearance of a person in a state of
nudity; or
§ 535-13 WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS § 535-13
520:723
(3) The use of sound-amplification equipment to amplify a description
or discussion of specified anatomical areas or specified sexual
activities if:
(a) Such description or discussion is audible beyond the exterior of
the structure from which the description or discussion
originates; or
(b) Such description or discussion is amplified in a public place.
L. Exception for certain establishments.
(1) Exception. This section shall not be applicable to an establishment
otherwise within the definition of an adult-oriented business if not
more than 10% of the interior square footage of the establishment
accessible to patrons is devoted to the:
(a) Sale, rental, lease, trade, gift or display of adult materials; or
(b) Featuring of entertainment characterized by an emphasis on
nudity or specified sexual activities or specified anatomical
areas.
(2) Limitations on exemption. Notwithstanding Subsection L(1), this
section shall be applicable to an establishment within the definition
of an adult-oriented business if:
(a) In the establishment adult materials or entertainments
characterized by an emphasis on nudity or specified sexual
activities or specified anatomical areas are displayed and
featured in a manner that permits minors to access or view
such materials or entertainments;
(b) The interior configuration and layout of the establishment
requires patrons to pass through an area of the establishment
with adult materials or entertainments characterized by an
emphasis on nudity or specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas in order to access an area of the
establishment without such materials and entertainments;
(c) The establishment maintains one or more rooms, booths or
other cubicles where entertainments characterized by an
emphasis on nudity or specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas are available to patrons;
(d) The establishment uses a method of operation requiring patron
transactions with respect to non-adult materials to be made in
an area of the store which includes adult materials or
entertainments characterized by an emphasis on nudity or
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas;
§ 535-13 PORT JERVIS CODE § 535-13
520:724
(e) The establishment uses a method of operation under which
non-adult materials are offered for sale only and adult
materials are offered for sale or rental;
(f) The establishment offers a greater number of different titles of
adult materials than the number of different titles of non-adult
materials;
(g) The establishment uses a method of operation excluding or
restricting minors from the establishment as a whole or from
any section of the establishment with non-adult materials;
(h) The establishment displays a sign advertising the availability of
adult materials or entertainments characterized by an
emphasis on nudity or specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas which is disproportionate in size relative to a
sign advertising the availability of non-adult materials, when
compared with the proportions of adult materials or
entertainments characterized by an emphasis on nudity or
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas offered
by the establishment, or the proportion of the interior square
footage of the establishment accessible to patrons containing
adult materials or featuring the presentation of an
entertainment characterized by an emphasis on nudity or
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas; or
(i) The establishment features a window display in which the
number of items or area of the display of adult materials is
disproportionate in size relative to the number of items or area
of display of non-adult materials, when compared with the
proportion of adult materials and non-adult materials offered
for sale, rental, lease, trade, gift or display in the
establishment, or the proportion of the interior square footage
of the establishment accessible to patrons containing adult
materials.
M. Interior configuration and layout.
(1) General provision. An adult-oriented business shall not offer adult
materials or entertainments characterized by an emphasis on
nudity or specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas
for viewing in rooms, booths or other cubicles if the interior square
footage of any one such room, booth or other cubicle is insufficient
to accommodate the total number of persons who may lawfully
occupy the premises of such business at one time.
(2) Exception. Notwithstanding Subsection M(1), an adult-oriented
business may offer adult materials or entertainments characterized
by an emphasis on nudity or specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas for viewing in one or more rooms, booths or other
cubicles insufficient to accommodate the total number of persons
§ 535-13 WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS § 535-13
520:725
§ 535-13.1. Orange County Greenway Compact. [Added 7-27-2015
by L.L. No. 4-2015]
By Local Law No. 4 of the year 2015 the City of Port Jervis has adopted
the Orange County Greenway Compact, as amended from time to time, as
a statement of land use policies, principles and guides. In its discretionary
actions under this zoning law, the reviewing agency should take into
consideration said statement of policies, principles and guides.
who may lawfully occupy the premises of such business at one time,
provided that:
(a) The interior of each such room, booth or other cubicle is visible
without obstruction by merchandise, display racks or other
materials at all times from at least 50% of the interior square
footage of the establishment accessible to patrons;
(b) Each such room, booth or other cubicle is equipped with
overhead lighting fixtures of sufficient intensity to illuminate
every place to which patrons are permitted access at an
illumination of not less than five footcandles as measured at
floor level and such illumination is maintained at all times
patrons are present on the premises;
(c) There is no opening of any kind between such rooms, booths or
other cubicles; and
(d) No such room, booth or other cubicle is equipped with a
nontransparent door, curtain or any similar device which may
be used to block the view into each such room, booth or other
cubicle.
§ 535-13 PORT JERVIS CODE § 535-13.1
520:726
ARTICLE V
Use Requirements
§ 535-14. Establishment.
The general requirements affecting the use of buildings and structures and
land use for each of the zoning districts established by Article III are hereby
established and set forth by this article.
§ 535-15. Utilization of Table of Use Requirements.190
A. Columns. The Use Table is divided into columns, with each column
headed by a capital letter for reference. Separate pages divide the
requirements for one district from those of another.
B. Permitted, conditional and accessory uses. In the Use Table, all uses
listed in Column C are permitted by right and subject to the bulk and
supplemental requirements as applicable. All uses listed in Column E
are permitted only on approval of the Planning Board and are
conditioned to special requirements that may be imposed to ensure
compatibility with neighboring uses. All uses listed in Column A are
accessory to principal uses (whether permitted by right or by special
condition) and are permitted only in conjunction with the principal use
identified in Column B.
C. Reference to Bulk Table. The uses identified in Columns C and E are
followed by Columns D and F respectively, in which there appears a
letter designating a use group for reference to the Table of Bulk
Requirements. Accessory uses do not have respective bulk
requirements, and the requirements pertaining to the principal use
shall apply.
D. Prohibited uses. Any use not identified in the Use Table shall be deemed
prohibited.
E. Generic descriptions. Where conditional uses are identified by generic
word or description, the Planning Board shall determine whether a
specific use shall be construed to be part of such generic class. In
making such determination, the Planning Board shall consider to what
extent the proposed use is similar to the class of use indicated in the
Use Table.
190. Editor's Note: The Table of Use Requirements is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 535-14 WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS § 535-15
520:727

ARTICLE VI
Bulk Requirements
§ 535-16. Establishment.
The general requirements relating to the arrangement of buildings,
structures and uses occupying a lot for the zoning districts established in
Article III are hereby established. The accompanying table titled "Table of
Bulk Requirements" shall be part of this chapter, is referred to herein as
the "Bulk Table" and shall set forth the minimum bulk requirements of this
chapter.191
§ 535-17. Utilization of Table of Bulk Requirements.
A. Proper reading. The Bulk Table is divided into columns, each column
headed by a capital letter for reference. The Bulk Table is divided by
single horizontal lines into groups, each group being identified by a
lowercase letter corresponding to the letter symbol appearing in the
Use Table adjacent to each use or combination of uses (Columns D and
F). Each of the uses within each group is regulated by the bulk
regulations for the indicated use group.
B. Supplemental requirements. Other articles herein contain
supplemental requirements applying to bulk, setback and coverage of
specified uses.
191. Editor's Note: The Table of Bulk Requirements is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 535-16 WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS § 535-17
520:729

ARTICLE VII
Supplementary Yard and Setback Regulations
§ 535-18. General requirements.
No principal structure shall be located any closer to any street or property
line than in conformity with the required minimum setbacks displayed in the
Bulk Table.192
§ 535-19. Accessory structures.
Accessory structures and uses are permitted within the required setbacks
other than the front setback, except as specifically authorized herein.
Accessory buildings shall not exceed 15 feet in height. Such buildings (with
the exception of garages) shall not be located less then 10 feet from the
principal building.
§ 535-20. Front setback exceptions.
§ 535-21. Side and rear setback exceptions; fences.
A. Present established building lines. Wherever there is an established
building line which is greater or less than the minimum setback lines
called for in any district in this chapter, all buildings newly erected or
reconstructed shall be set back so that the front of said buildings shall
be in line with the setback lines of the existing buildings on the street in
the block.
B. Average setback of existing dwellings. No proposed one-family or twofamily
dwelling need have a setback greater than the average setback
of the existing dwellings located within 200 feet on each side of said
proposed dwelling, on the same side of the street and within the same
block and the same zone.
A. Unroofed constructions. An unroofed surface or patio which is not more
than one foot above ground level, or an arbor, open trellis, or flagpole, is
permitted closer to a lot line than the required setback. Paved areas
(other than such walks and driveways as are needed for access to the
buildings on the lot) shall not project within 15 feet of a street line or
four feet of any other lot line. An open fire escape, deck or unroofed
porch or terrace which is more than one foot above ground level may
project not more than six feet into a required rear setback.
B. Entries and porticos. A roofed-over but completely unenclosed
projection in the nature of an entry or portico, not more than eight feet
wide and extending not more than six feet out from the wall of the
building, shall be exempt from the front setback requirement when the
building otherwise complies with all other front setback restrictions of
this chapter.
192. Editor's Note: The Bulk Table is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 535-18 WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS § 535-21
520:731
§ 535-22. Measurement of front setbacks.
C. Permitted obstructions. Cornices or cantilevered roofs may project not
more than three feet into a required setback. Belt courses, windowsills,
and other ornamental features may project not more than six inches
into a required setback.
D. Awning, canopy, cornice or eaves. An awning or movable canopy may
project not more than six feet into a required setback; cornices or eaves
may project not more than 18 inches into a required setback.
E. Fences.
(1) A fence or garden wall no more than four feet in height is permitted
along any lot line and in any front and side yard, and one no more
than six feet in height along that part of any lot line behind the
front yard, as well as in any rear yard. The height of the fence or
wall shall be measured above the finished grade.
(2) In any commercial or industrial district, a fence, wall or evergreen
hedge of a height not less than six feet nor more than 10 feet may
be required by the City Planning Board to screen the view of an
adjoining or neighborhood residence property. The design and
location of such screen shall be approved by the City Planning
Board.
(3) Except in industrial districts, no sharp points or barbed wire shall
be used in any fence, and no electrically charged or shock fence
shall be erected or maintained, but these may be permitted in an
industrial district only if the sharp points, barbed wire or charged
or shock strands are at least seven feet above the ground level.
(4) No solid or tight fence shall be constructed of secondhand or used
lumber.
(5) No fences shall be used for advertising, billboard or poster
purposes.
(6) All fences shall be properly constructed and erected and
maintained in a manner so as not to fall into disrepair, and, if not so
maintained, may be declared to be a nuisance and a nonconforming
use.
(7) All such fences or garden walls in existence without permission of
the City Planning Board at the date of this chapter shall, at the
expiration of one year from such date, become a prohibited and
nonconforming use and shall be discontinued.
A. Measurement. All required front setback depths shall be measured
from the designated street line, front lot line or existing street line,
whichever is a greater distance from the center line on the public street
abutting the lot in question.
§ 535-21 PORT JERVIS CODE § 535-22
520:732
§ 535-23. Corner lots.
B. Front setbacks on narrow streets. On streets with less than a 50 foot
right-of-way, the front setback shall be measured from the center line of
the existing right-of-way, and 25 feet shall be added to the required
minimum front setback.
C. Lots on other than a public street. Where lots are subdivided on other
than a public street, the designated street line, for the purposes of front
setback measurement, shall be parallel to, and 25 feet distant from, the
center line of any access easement or right-of-way.
D. Structures permitted in front yards. The placing of ornamental
fountains, gatehouses and other structures for security or traffic
control purposes, of a nonhabitable type, may be permitted between the
street line and the required minimum front setback line, upon approval
of the Planning Board and the Design Review Board.
E. Through lots. On a through lot, front setbacks are required from all
street lines.
A. Yards; setback requirements. On a corner lot, front yards are required
on both street frontages, and one yard other than the front yards shall
be deemed to be a rear yard and the other (or others) a side yard(s). The
minimum setback requirements for each shall be complied with.
B. Obstruction to vision at street intersections. At all street intersections
in all residence districts, and in all other districts requiring a front
setback of 15 feet or more, no obstructions to vision (such as shrubbery,
hedge, or other natural growth, a fence or wall) exceeding 30 inches in
height above curb level shall be erected or maintained on any lot within
the triangle formed by the street lines of such lot and a line drawn
between points along such street lines 30 feet distant from their point
of intersection (see Sketch B below), nor shall the limbs or foliage on
any tree obstruct vision or be permitted to grow nearer to the ground
than eight feet where such limbs or foliage overhangs or is over or upon
land within the triangular area as shown in Sketch B.
§ 535-22 WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS § 535-23
520:733
§ 535-24. Existing small lots in all residence zones.
A lot owned individually and separately and separated in ownership from
any adjoining tracts of land on the effective date of this chapter which has
a total area or width less than as prescribed herein may be used for a onefamily
residence, provided that such lot shall be developed in conformity
with all applicable zone regulations, other than the minimum lot area and
lot width requirements, and with the minimum side setbacks set forth
below:
For One-Family
Residence in
For Lots With
Width
(feet)
Minimum Side
Setback
(feet)
Total Both Side
Setbacks
(feet)
R-1 Zone 50 to 90 6 20
R-2 Zone 50 to 90 4 15
§ 535-23 PORT JERVIS CODE § 535-24
520:734
ARTICLE VIII
Supplementary Building Requirements
§ 535-25. Permitted height exceptions.
The height limitations of this chapter shall not apply to:
§ 535-26. Courts.
§ 535-27. Spacing.
A. Roof projections. Bell towers, steeples, rooftop bulkheads, water
towers, fire towers, hose towers, cooling towers, or air-conditioning or
heating equipment, provided that such features shall not occupy, in the
aggregate, more than 10% of the area of the roof of a building and are
set back from the edge of the roof at least one foot for each one foot by
which such features exceed the maximum height otherwise specified
for the district in which they are located. All mechanical equipment
located on the tops of buildings shall be visually screened, subject to
Planning Board approval.
B. Wall extensions. Parapet walls or cornices which do not exceed the
maximum height requirement for the district in which they are located
by more than four feet.
C. Solar energy systems. Solar energy systems, provided that such
systems shall be erected only to the height necessary to accomplish the
purposes they are intended to serve.
A. Inner courts. An inner court is permitted if constructed in accordance
with the New York State Building Code in effect at the time of the
passage of this chapter, or any supplement thereto or amendment
thereof.
B. Outer courts. An outer court is permitted if constructed in accordance
with the New York State Building Code in effect at the time of the
passage of this chapter, or any supplement thereto or amendment
thereof.
A. Principal buildings. The distance between two principal buildings on
the same lot shall be no less than the height of the taller building.
B. Principal and accessory buildings. The distance between a principal
building and an accessory building shall be no less than the height of
the accessory building but in no event shall be less than 15 feet.
C. Distance from windows. Notwithstanding any other provision and
except as provided hereinafter, no residential building on any lot shall
intrude into the area enclosed by an arc of a circle with a radius of 60
feet extending 70° on each side of a line perpendicular to the center of
any legally required window (other than a bathroom or kitchen window)
and the exterior radii of such arc. All measurements shall be performed
§ 535-25 WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS § 535-27
520:735
§ 535-28. Waiver of setbacks.
No side setback or rear setback shall be required where such portion of
the lot abuts the right-of-way of a railroad, limited access highway or utility
transmission line at least 50 feet in width.
§ 535-29. Pole buildings and metal-paneled buildings.
Pole buildings and metal-paneled buildings shall be restricted to the Service
Commercial Zoning District (SC) and the Light Industry Zoning District (LI),
being prohibited in all other zoning districts.
§ 535-30. Animals. [Amended 9-23-2013 by L.L. No. 7-2013]
Keeping of any animals other than a domestic animal as defined under
§ 215-8, Definitions, of the Code of the City of Port Jervis, or its successor,
by the occupant(s), shall be prohibited.
in horizontal projection at the sill level of the subject window. This
limitation shall not apply to any wall of the same building which
intersects the plane of the wall in which the subject window is located
at an exterior angle of more than 80°. A minimum distance of 60 feet
shall be maintained between the subject window and any wall parallel
thereto, whether such wall is part of the same or of another building on
the lot.
D. Diagramming. Proper diagramming shall be included on all site plans
for clarification of distance.
§ 535-27 PORT JERVIS CODE § 535-30
520:736
ARTICLE IX
Supplementary Regulations
§ 535-31. Supplementary regulations applying to all residential
districts.
A. Accessory buildings. An accessory building may be located closer to a
lot line than the required side or rear setback line, provided that:
(1) Such buildings shall not exceed 15 feet in height.
(2) Such buildings shall be set back 10 feet from any lot line.
(3) All such buildings in the aggregate shall not occupy more than 30%
of the area of the rear and side yards.
B. Height limits. An accessory building on that portion of a lot meeting all
required setbacks may extend to the height limits set for principal
buildings.
C. Forward projection. No accessory building shall project nearer to the
street on which the principal building fronts than such principal
building.
D. Length of building. No buildings shall exceed a length of 125 feet, but
where two or more principal buildings are sited on one lot, the length of
such buildings shall vary significantly. Furthermore, variation shall be
provided in the projections of the facade and in roof ridges (their
length, elevation and orientation).
E. Lot widths. Any other requirement notwithstanding, no lot width shall
be less than 35 feet, measured along the street line.
F. Exceptions to lot depth requirements. The required lot depth at any
point may be decreased by 25% if the average lot depth conforms to the
minimum requirement.
G. Roomers or lodgers in residential areas. Nothing herein shall prevent
the taking of boarders or lodgers by a resident owner who occupies the
balance of the house, or the renting of rooms by a resident owner who
occupies the balance of the house, in Districts R-1, R-2 and R-O,
provided that the taking on of boarders and lodgers and renting of
rooms is incidental only to the family use of such residences, and
provided also that the number of such boarders or lodgers shall not
exceed two persons and the number of rooms rented shall not exceed
two rooms; except that the City Planning Board may grant a revocable
permit for a greater number of boarders or lodgers or the renting of
rooms in all districts if the premises are owner/landlord occupied and if
the Planning Board determines it to be in the public interest in the
course of its site plan review, and then only on such conditions and
regulations as the Planning Board deems necessary to protect
neighboring properties.
§ 535-31 WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS § 535-32
520:737
§ 535-32. Supplementary regulations applying to nonresidential
districts.
§ 535-33. Supplementary regulations applying to all districts.
A. Access. Whenever feasible, access to nonresidential lots having
frontage on more than one street shall be from a nonresidential street.
B. Hazardous materials.
(1) Any industry regulated by the federal Superfund Agency
Reorganization Act (SARA) shall supply to the Energy and
Environment Committee of the Common Council and to the Fire
Chief:
(a) The MSDS sheets for the regulated substances utilized;
(b) The approximate amounts of each regulated substance
maintained in inventory;
(c) The types of containers used in the storage of regulated
substances; and
(d) The layout of the building showing where the regulated
substances are stored.
(2) Any change in the information submitted in conformance with the
above requirements shall necessitate a new submittal of
information regarding the nature and extent of that which has been
changed.
A. Self-service structures and booths.
(1) Outside vending machines, self-service or coin-operated telephone
booths, or any other similar structure, apparatus or device shall not
be permitted in any zoning district except by special permission
and at the discretion of the City Planning Board, and subject to
such conditions, restrictions and safeguards as may be deemed
necessary by said City Planning Board.
(2) Such self-service structures and booths in existence without
permission of the City Planning Board at the date of this chapter
shall, at the expiration of one year from such date, become a
prohibited and nonconforming use and shall be discontinued.
B. Temporary business movable structures.
(1) No temporary, movable or portable structures used in connection
with any gainful occupation or business, whether such structures
are for sale, storage, or display purposes, shall be permitted in any
zoning district except by special permission and at the discretion of
the City Planning Board and subject to such conditions, restrictions
§ 535-32 PORT JERVIS CODE § 535-33
520:738
§ 535-34. Senior Citizen Affordable Housing District.
and safeguards as may be deemed necessary by said City Planning
Board.
(2) All such temporary movable structures in existence without
permission of the City Planning Board at the date of this chapter
shall, at the expiration of one year from such date, become a
prohibited and nonconforming use and shall be discontinued.
C. Exterior lighting.
(1) No spotlight, floodlights, ground lights, roof lights, pole lights, wall
lights or any other lights for exterior illumination for business or
industrial areas shall be used unless reflectors shall be provided
with proper glass lenses concentrating the illumination upon the
business area so as to prevent direct glare upon the street or
adjacent property.
(2) Lights used to illuminate any swimming pool or other outdoor
activity or area in any residence district shall be so arranged and
shaded as to reflect away from adjoining premises.
A. Purpose.
(1) The City of Port Jervis hereby finds and declares that there is a
need in the City of Port Jervis for housing developments located and
designated to meet the special needs and habits of adults 55 years
of age and older. Such housing can contribute to the dignity,
independence and meaningful activity of our active adults.
(2) The City of Port Jervis has determined that an appropriate means to
fulfill these needs is to establish senior citizen affordable housing
(SCAH) by zoning amendment, consisting of housing for adults over
the age of 55 years that may or may not be directly supported or
subsidized by a governmental agency, in accordance with the
particular criteria established herein.
(3) The purpose of the Senior Citizen Affordable Housing District
(SCAH) is to enable the City of Port Jervis to permit, on a case-bycase
basis, housing that satisfies the need for such developments in
locations where it will not detract from surrounding land uses. Any
use, other than the uses specifically enumerated herein, shall be
prohibited in a Senior Citizen Affordable Housing District (SCAH).
B. Zoning. The SCAH option shall be available anywhere within the City of
Port Jervis.
C. Application procedure.
(1) Application for the establishment of a Senior Citizen Affordable
Housing District shall be made to the Common Council. Such
application shall include a sketch plan of the property on which the
§ 535-33 WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS § 535-34
520:739
district is to be located, including approximate location of proposed
buildings and other structures, parking areas, pedestrian
circulation, roads, open space, recreation areas and other proposed
facilities.
(2) Once the Common Council has, in its sole discretion, accepted an
application for a Senior Citizen Affordable Housing Floating
District and has approved the same for a particular property, the
applicant shall apply to the Planning Board for site plan approval in
accordance with procedures set forth in this chapter for said plan
approval.193 If a period of more than one year elapses between the
Common Council's approval of the SCAH District and the
submission of a site plan application, the SCAH District designation
shall lapse, and the property shall revert to its prior zoning
classification.
(3) In addition to all other customary fees, a fee as provided in Chapter
280, Fees, shall accompany an application for Senior Citizen
Affordable Housing District. In addition, the applicant shall pay
reasonable expenses incurred by the City in review of said
application and shall deposit in an escrow account with the City
necessary funds to cover fees for technical assistance to the City,
such as, but not limited to, City Planner and City Attorney.194
D. Development standards.
(1) It shall be the duty of the owner or his agent to file a certification
with the Building Official indicating a compliance with this
section's requirements relating to the number of occupants and the
age of the occupants in each dwelling unit. Such certification shall
be filled no later than January 15 of each year. Failure to file
certification as required shall be deemed a violation of this section
subject to penalties set forth in § 535-75 of this chapter.
(2) No dwelling unit shall contain more than one bedroom.
(3) The occupancy of senior citizen affordable housing shall be limited
to two persons who qualify as senior citizens under present, future
or amended definitions of the governmental agency providing
subsidiary or support to the project (Federal Department of
Housing and Urban Development, New York State Division of
Housing and Community Renewal or similar or successor agencies
of the federal or state government) or to families the head of which
so qualifies. The occupancy of a dwelling unit by a family the head
of which is younger than a senior citizen shall be permitted if it is
established that the presence of such person is essential for
physical care of an eligible occupant. In the absence of any
definition, the minimum age for eligibility shall be 55 years.
193. Editor's Note: See § 535-61, Site development plan rules and regulations.
194. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 535-34 PORT JERVIS CODE § 535-34
520:740
(4) Within the senior citizen district, certain related ancillary facilities
may be permitted, either in a separate building or in combination
with dwelling units, such as cafeterias, self-service laundries,
lounges, game rooms or workshops, to the extent that they meet
the needs of the occupants of the development. Such facilities shall
be subordinate to the residential character of the development and
shall be located out of public view with no outside advertising. Such
facilities shall be approved by the Planning Board. Approval of a
conditional use and site development plan for dwelling units in a
senior citizen affordable housing development in no way
constitutes approval for installation of any type of related facility.
(5) Bulk standards.
(a) The gross site density shall not exceed 24 dwelling units per
acre.
(b) The maximum building height shall be 35 feet or 2 1/2 stories,
whichever is less.
(c) The minimum distance between detached buildings shall be 40
feet.
(d) The required side, front and/or rear yard may be decreased to
five feet by the Planning Board.
(e) The maximum size of a senior citizen dwelling unit for one
bedroom shall be 700 square feet.
(f) Lot coverage shall not exceed 35%.
(g) The Common Council, upon the recommendation of the
Planning Board, may authorize the Planning Board to modify
those sections of this chapter relative to lot dimensions,
building setbacks, and density in the site plan of properties
when necessary to comply with the provisions in this section
and to promote the intent of this section.
(6) Suitably equipped and adequately maintained recreation and open
space shall be provided. Group sitting areas shall be well defined
by walls, fences, hedges or other plantings designated to impart a
sense of containment and/or security and to provide group privacy.
(7) There shall be provided a safe and convenient system of drives,
service access road and walks with due consideration given in
planning such facilities to such items as handrails and ramps. Such
facilities shall be adequately lighted, and said lighting shall not be
directed on adjacent streets or properties.
(8) Central refuse collection areas shall be located for the convenience
of all units. There shall be supplied an adequate number and type of
covered receptacles and these shall be provided with proper
screening and maintenance.
§ 535-34 WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS § 535-34
520:741
(9) Where a dwelling unit is to be rented, the lease for said unit shall
not exceed two years. As long as an occupant remains eligible and
has complied with the terms of the lease, the occupant shall be
offered a two-year renewal of the lease. If an occupant's annual
income shall exceed the eligible income level by more than 20%,
and there is an eligible applicant for the unit, the occupant may
complete the then-current lease term only.
(10) Occupant selection standards. The following standards shall be
used to determine occupancy:
(a) Veterans of the United States Armed Forces 55 years of age or
older.
(b) Households whose head of household and spouse are 55 years
of age or older.
(c) Households whose head of household or spouse is 55 years of
age or older.
(11) Deed restrictions.
(a) Ownership. The title to affordable senior citizen housing shall
be restricted so that, in the event of resale by the owner or any
successor, the project shall remain as affordable senior citizen
housing for a period of 30 years from the date of the original
certificate of occupancy.
(b) Rental. The title to a development containing affordable senior
citizen housing rental units shall be restricted so that, in the
event of resale by the owner, the purchaser shall be obligated
to maintain the provisions of the rent regulation agreements in
accordance with Subsection D(9) and (12) of this section.
(12) Rent regulation and lease renewal; continued eligibility. An
occupant of a senior citizen affordable housing rental unit remains
eligible for the renewal of a lease if the occupant's aggregate
income at the time of the lease renewal does not exceed four times
the current rental ceiling rate for the occupant's unit or as
described or set forth by state and/or federal law.
(13) Improvements restriction. The owner of an affordable senior
citizen housing unit shall not make any internal or external
structural improvements and/or changes to a unit without first
obtaining the appropriate approvals and permits necessary.
(14) Parking requirements: 0.5 per dwelling unit. Parking spaces,
except for handicapped, shall be nine feet by 18 feet.
E. Duration of approval. A site development plan of a senior citizen
affordable housing development approved in accordance with these
regulations shall remain valid for a period of two years following the
approval of the site plan by the Planning Board and all other necessary
§ 535-34 PORT JERVIS CODE § 535-34
520:742
§ 535-35. Supplementary regulations applying to Mountain
Residence District only.
governmental approvals as shall be needed to start construction. If, at
the end of that two-year period, no application for a building permit has
been filed, then the plan shall be considered as having lapsed and shall
be of no effect. However, one two-year extension may be granted by
the Planning Board for the site plan if the developer shows reasonable
grounds for delay in the start of construction. Further, once a building
permit is issued, if a substantial portion of the construction anticipated
under said building permit authorization is not commenced within one
year of the issuance of the permit, the permit shall be void ab initio.
A. Purposes. It is the intent of the City of Port Jervis to achieve on the
several large, undeveloped parcels of land remaining within the City
limits a quality of design and development which:
(1) Permits flexibility of design and development in such a way as to
promote superior land planning and greater economy, efficiency
and convenience in the arrangement of land uses and their
supporting infrastructure, facilitate adequate and economic
provision of streets and utilities, preserve open space and the
natural and scenic qualities of open lands, protect floodplains and
other natural features, and otherwise encourage the most
appropriate use of land.
(2) Promotes a development in harmony with the objectives of the
City's Comprehensive Plan.195
B. Kinds of dwelling units permitted. Single-family homes (either detached
or attached) and multifamily dwellings shall be permitted (preferably in
combination) within the Mountain Residence District. In the case of
attached and/or multifamily structures, no more than five dwelling units
shall be accommodated within any one structure.
C. Development standards and controls. Except as specified herein, all
development standards and controls normally applicable to other
residential subdivisions and uses shall also be applicable to Mountain
Residence District development. Nothing contained in this chapter shall
relieve the owner or the owner's agent or the developer of a proposed
Mountain Residence District development from receiving subdivision
plat approval in accordance with the City Subdivision Regulations. In
approving the final plat for a Mountain Residence District development,
the Planning Board may modify the acreage requirement for recreation
areas of the City Subdivision Regulations, provided that the common
land dedicated in Subsection C(6) of this section meets all other
requirements of the City Subdivision Regulations.
195. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 535-34 WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS § 535-35
520:743
(1) Density. The maximum number of dwelling units that may be
permitted shall be determined in the following manner:
(a) Compute total site acreage from a survey of the property
prepared by a licensed surveyor.
(b) Deduct from the gross acreage [Subsection C(1)(a) above] the
acreage represented by lands under water, within a floodway,
within a New York State designated wetland, within easements
or rights-of-way for overhead or underground utilities, with
slopes (unexcavated) of over 20% (as based on a two-foot
contour survey prepared by a licensed surveyor) or within a
designated street line of any road.
(c) Multiply the net acreage [Subsection C(1)(b) above] by 10. The
resulting whole number (unrounded) represents the maximum
number of dwelling units that will be permitted on the site.
(2) Minimum lot size. To allow for maximum flexibility in design and
land use, no minimum lot size shall be required in the R-3 District.
(3) Frontage. The site must have a minimum street frontage of 100 feet
and two means of access for more than 15 dwelling units, and
access to the parcel must not create any traffic hazards.
(4) Maximum coverage. The permitted gross building coverage on any
Mountain Residence District development site shall not exceed
20% of the gross land area.
(5) Setbacks, screening and buffering of the site's surrounding
property. In reviewing the site plan, the Planning Board shall
consider the setback and proposed screening of parking and active
recreation areas from adjacent property lines and may require
setbacks up to twice the normally applicable setback requirement
for one-family dwellings in the nearest zoning district to which the
Mountain Residence District development is located. Buffer and
screening areas shall be landscaped, left in their natural state, or
provided with additional evergreen foliage as required by the
Planning Board.
(6) Open space and recreation areas. At least 30% of the gross acreage
of any development shall be composed of land which is used for
recreation purposes and/or preserved as open space.
(7) Layout design considerations.
(a) Environmentally sensitive land. The Planning Board will seek
the preservation of steep slopes, wetlands, floodplains, water
bodies, and other environmentally sensitive or unique open
space or natural features.
(b) In large-scale subdivisions, the Planning Board shall consider
the layout of small residential groupings within the
§ 535-35 PORT JERVIS CODE § 535-35
520:744
development, each having some open space immediately
surrounding it, as a goal of proper site planning so that a large,
massive concentration of units, with little or no differentiation,
can be avoided, and so that the character of the development
will match the character of the neighborhood in which it is
located.
(c) In each development, a pedestrian circulation system shall be
designed and installed, in addition to the vehicular circulation
system, which is sufficient for the needs of residents. Such a
system may be composed of a combination of paved and
unpaved walkways and bikeways of appropriate width, design,
and location to serve their intended function.
(8) Utilities and services.
(a) The development must be served by central water supply and
central sewage treatment systems as approved by the
appropriate governmental agency or agencies having
jurisdiction thereof.
(b) Roof-mounted cooling systems shall be completely screened
from view.
(c) Surface water retention facilities shall be developed so that the
rate of stormwater runoff after construction is no greater than
the rate of runoff prior to development.
(d) On-site lighting shall be directed downward and shall not
reflect on adjacent properties.
(9) Energy efficiency. The plan for development shall be designed and
arranged in such a way as to promote energy efficiency and assure
solar access for a majority of all dwelling units and any closely
situated structures on adjacent parcels.
(10) Fire protection. Adequate water supply and pressure must be
available on site to meet the fire-fighting requirements for the
largest proposed units on the site, to the satisfaction of the
Planning Board.
(11) Open space, homeowners' association or deed restrictions. In the
event that the application of this procedure results in a plat
showing lands available for park, recreation, open space, or other
municipal purposes directly related to the plat, then the Planning
Board as a condition of plat approval may establish such conditions
on the ownership, use and maintenance of such lands as it deems
necessary to assure the preservation of such lands for their
intended purposes. Legal documents for such ownership, use and
maintenance, such as documents for a homeowners' association,
deed restrictions, covenants or park districts, shall be approved by
the City Attorney.
§ 535-35 WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS § 535-35
520:745
D. Conservation areas.
(1) General. Conservation areas may include wetland areas,
floodplains, steep slopes, or other open space areas having
meaningful scenic, ecological, environmental and/or recreational
characteristics, with such access, shape, size, and location as
determined appropriate by the Planning Board to satisfy the
intended purpose, but shall not include parking areas or roads.
(2) Continued preservation. The permanent preservation of such open
space areas shall be legally assured to the satisfaction of the
Planning Board and City Attorney by the filing of appropriate
covenants, deed restrictions, easements, or other agreements,
unless:
(a) The Common Council agrees in its discretion to accept the
dedication of all or any part of such areas; or
(b) All or part of such areas is to be transferred to a conservation
organization which is dedicated to the permanent preservation
of open spaces and is approved by the Common Council.
(3) Ownership of conserved land areas. The ownership of conserved
land areas shall be divided equally or proportionately among all
owners of building lots or units within the development, except
where all or an appropriate portion of the conserved land area is
deeded to a recognized conservation organization dedicated to the
preservation of open space and such dedication is acceptable to the
conservation organization and the Planning Board, or offered for
dedication to the City of Port Jervis, and the Common Council has
voted to accept such offer. Except in those cases where the
ownership of the conserved land areas is to be vested in the City or
an approved conservation organization, the developer shall execute
and file with the Common Council such documents as will be
sufficient to create a home or property owners' association
responsible for the conserved land areas in accordance with the
requirements of Subsections E and F below.
E. Organization. A Mountain Residence District development shall be
organization as one of the following:
(1) A home or property owners' association approved by the Common
Council upon recommendation of the City Attorney and the New
York State Attorney General;
(2) An organization akin to a condominium or a cooperative approved
by the New York State Attorney General and the Common Council;
(3) A funded community trust approved by the Common Council upon
recommendation of the City Attorney; or
§ 535-35 PORT JERVIS CODE § 535-35
520:746
(4) A special multipurpose taxing district approved by the Common
Council upon recommendation of the City Attorney.
F. Home or property owners' association. Whenever a home or property
owners' association is proposed, the Common Council shall retain the
right to review and approve the articles of incorporation and charter of
said association and to require whatever conditions it deems necessary
to ensure that the interest and purpose of this chapter are carried out.
In consideration of said approval, the Common Council shall, in part,
require the Mountain Residence District development to meet the
following conditions:
(1) The association shall be established as an incorporated, not-forprofit
organization operating under recorded land agreements
through which each lot owner (and any succeeding owner) is
automatically subject to a charge for a proportionate share of the
expenses for the organization's activities.
(2) Title to all common property shall be placed in the association, or
definite and acceptable assurance shall be given that it
automatically will be so placed when 50% of the units are sold, said
common property to be subject to a development easement granted
to the City for the purpose of guaranteeing its perpetuity as open
space.
(3) Each lot owner shall have equal voting rights in the association and
shall have the right to the use and enjoyment of the common
property.
(4) Once established, all responsibility for operation and maintenance
of the common land and facilities shall lie with the association.
(5) Dedication of all common areas shall be recorded directly on the
subdivision plat, or by reference on the plat to a dedication in a
separately recorded document. Resubdivision of such areas is
prohibited. The dedication shall:
(a) Save the title to the common property to the association free of
any cloud of implied public dedication;
(b) Commit the developer to convey the areas to the association at
an approved time;
(c) Grant easements of enjoyment over the area to dwelling unit/
lot owners; and
(d) Give to it the right to suspend membership rights for
nonpayments of assessments or infractions of published rules.
(6) Covenants shall be established limiting all dwelling units to onefamily
use and all common lands to open space uses. No structures
may be erected on such common lands except as approved by the
§ 535-35 WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS § 535-35
520:747
Planning Board in accordance with the provisions of § 535-61 of
this chapter.
(7) Each deed to each dwelling unit/lot sold shall include by reference
all recorded declarations, such as covenants, dedications and other
restrictions (including assessments and the provision for liens for
nonpayment of such).
(8) The association shall be perpetual and shall purchase insurance,
pay taxes, specify in its charter and bylaws an annual homeowner's
fee and provision for assessments, and establish that all such
charges become a lien on each property in favor of said association.
The association shall have the right to proceed in accordance with
all necessary legal action for the foreclosure and enforcement of
liens, and it shall also have the right to commence action against
any member for the collection of any unpaid assessment in any
court of competent jurisdiction.
(9) The developer shall assume all responsibilities as previously
outlined for the association until a majority of the dwelling sites are
sold, at which time the association shall be operated by an elected
board of directors whose members shall come from the association.
(10) As a condition of site plan approval, the developer shall file with the
Common Council a performance bond (or cash equivalent to the
cost of completion) to insure the proper installation of all
recreation and park improvements shown on the site plan and a
maintenance bond for all common land until the association is
established. The amount and period of said bonds shall be
determined by the Planning Board, and their form, sufficiency,
manner of execution, and surety shall be approved by the Common
Council upon recommendation of the City Attorney.
(11) Adjustment of assessments. The association shall have the power to
adjust assessments to meet changing needs.
(12) Recourse. In the event that the maintenance, preservation, and/or
use of the conserved land area(s) ceases to be in compliance with
any of the above requirements or any other requirements specified
by the Planning Board when approving the subdivision plat, the
City shall be granted the right to take all necessary action to assure
such compliance and to assess against the association and/or each
individual property owner within the development all costs
incurred by the City for such purposes.
(13) Permitted uses in conservation areas.
(a) Except where otherwise approved by the Planning Board,
conserved land areas shall be preserved in their natural state
and the use of such areas shall be limited to appropriate
conservation, open space, and recreation purposes as
determined by the Planning Board. A portion of the conserved
§ 535-35 PORT JERVIS CODE § 535-35
520:748
§ 535-36. Noncommercial swimming pools.
land area(s) may be designated "active recreation area" on the
plat, in a location approved by the Planning Board. Such active
recreation area shall not exceed 10% of the total area of the
proposed plat.
(b) Within such active recreation area, structures and facilities for
active recreational purposes, including playground equipment,
swimming pools, tennis courts, and so forth, may be
constructed and operated for the use of the property owners in
the related development and their guests. Where determined
appropriate, the Planning Board may specify a phased
construction schedule for such structures and facilities, or the
proposed establishment of such new structures and facilities
not shown on the filed plat shall be subject to site plan approval
procedures as set forth in § 535-61 of this chapter.
A. Requirements for in-ground and aboveground pools. Any private
swimming pool shall not be located, constructed or maintained on any
lot or land area except in conformity with the following requirements:
(1) Such pool shall be located in the rear yard only.
(2) If the water for such pool is supplied from a private well, there shall
be no cross-connection with the public water supply system.
(3) If the water for such pool is supplied from the public water supply
system, the inlet shall be six inches above the overflow level of said
pool.
(4) Such pool shall be chemically treated in a manner sufficient to
maintain the bacterial standards established by the provisions of
the New York State Sanitary Code relating to public swimming
pools.
(5) No permit shall be granted for the installation or construction of
said swimming pool unless the plan thereof shall meet the
minimum construction requirements of the Building Department of
the City of Port Jervis and unless the Building Official, or a licensed
professional engineer of New York State, shall have certified that
the drainage of such pool is adequate and will not interfere with the
public water supply system, with existing sanitary facilities, or with
the public streets.
(6) No loudspeaker or amplifying device shall be permitted which can
be heard beyond the lot lines of the lot on which said pool is
located.
(7) No lighting or spotlighting shall be permitted which will project
light rays beyond the lot lines of the lot on which said pool is
located.
§ 535-35 WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS § 535-36
520:749
(8) Adjacent to every side and rear lot line within the rear yard area
there shall be an effective screening consisting of either a wooden
fence of six feet in height or a dense, evergreen hedge of suitable
plant material capable of growing to a six-foot height. Such hedge
at the time of planting shall not be less than four feet high.
(9) All plumbing is to be installed in accordance with the New York
State Sanitary Code.
B. Additional requirements for in-ground noncommercial swimming pools.
Any in-ground swimming pool shall not be located, constructed or
maintained on any lot or land area except in conformity with the
following additional requirements:
(1) The entire portion of the premises upon which such pool is located
shall be entirely enclosed with a good quality fence of not less than
four feet in height.196
(2) The pool shall be provided with an adequate permanent fence or
barrier of not less than four feet in height. Said fence shall be
erected, maintained and provided with a self-closing, self-locking
gate to prevent unauthorized use of the pool and to prevent
accidents.197
(3) Such pool, measuring from the edge of the water, shall be located
no less than 10 feet from the side and rear lot lines and not less
than five feet from the main building.
(4) The slope around a pool that abuts the side or rear lot lines shall
not be in excess of 35% and shall meet the existing grade at least
two feet inside the property line.
C. Additional requirements for aboveground noncommercial swimming
pools. Any aboveground swimming pool shall not be located,
constructed or maintained on any lot or land area except in conformity
with the following additional requirements:
(1) Such pool, measuring from the outside edge of any elevated,
accessory walkway or deck, shall be located not less than 10 feet
from the side and rear lot lines. No setback shall be required for the
deck or walkway from the main building, except that the base of the
pool shall not be less than five feet from the main building.
(2) The entire portion of the premises upon which such pool is located
shall be entirely enclosed with a good quality fence of not less than
four feet in height, and all points of access shall be adequately
protected by a self-closing, self-locking gate.198
196. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
197. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 535-36 PORT JERVIS CODE § 535-36
520:750
§ 535-37. Landscaping and environmental control; erosion and
sedimentation control.
§ 535-38. Environmental quality review.
It is the responsibility of the applicant to see that all State Environmental
Quality Review Act (SEQRA) requirements are met (see 6 NYCRR 617
and § 8-0113 of the Environmental Conservation Law). To ensure this, an
applicant proposing a project deemed by the Planning Board to have the
potential of a positive declaration of environmental impact shall deposit
with the City Clerk-Treasurer $500 which will be used by the Board to
retain a consultant who will work with the applicant in identifying the
applicable SEQRA requirements and in reviewing the applicant's SEQRA
documentation on behalf of the Board. Any excess money will be returned to
the applicant, and any deficiency must be made up by the applicant within
30 days. Failure to make up such deficiency will result in review of the
application being suspended.
(3) Where the proposed pool is of such height or design that protective
fencing is not required or is impractical, the Building Official shall,
at his/her discretion, issue a permit for the erection of said pool
without such fencing. The Building Official shall, however, first
make a finding to the effect that, in his/her opinion, said pool has
equal protection from entry as would be afforded by the erection of
a fence as provided for above.
A. Landscape materials. The Planning Board is authorized to adopt rules
and regulations, including requirements to post maintenance bonds,
pertaining to the incorporation of landscape materials in any project
requiring site development plan approval and for the environmental
control of such projects.
B. Erosion and sedimentation controls. The Planning Board is authorized
to adopt rules and regulations, including requirements to post
maintenance bonds, pertaining to erosion and sedimentation controls in
any project requiring site development plan approval and for the
environmental control of such projects.
198. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 535-36 WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS § 535-38
520:751

ARTICLE X
Signs
[Amended 9-12-2005 by L.L. No. 5-2005, 6-12-2006 by L.L. No.
2-2006]
§ 535-39. Requirement for permits.
No sign shall hereafter be or caused to be erected, re-erected, relocated,
constructed, enlarged, maintained or altered without a sign permit. No sign
permit shall be issued except as shown on an approved site development
plan or sign plan. Where only the sign display portion of a validly erected
sign is being changed, no sign permit is required. Signs conforming to the
New York State Department of Transportation Manual of Uniform Traffic
Control Devices and other traffic regulatory signs shown on an approved
site development plan or required pursuant to the order of municipal traffic
control agencies shall be exempt from the requirement for sign permits.
§ 535-40. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meaning indicated:
ABANDONED SIGN — A sign that no longer identifies or advertises a
location, product, or activity conducted on the premises on which the sign
is located.
ANIMATED SIGN — A sign employing actual motion or the illusion of
motion. Animated signs, which are differentiated from changeable signs as
defined and regulated by this article, include the following types:
ENVIRONMENTALLY ACTIVATED — Animated signs or devices
motivated by wind, thermal changes, or other natural environmental
input. Includes spinners, pinwheels, pennant strings and/or other
devices or displays that respond to naturally occurring external
motivation.
A.
MECHANICALLY ACTIVATED — Animated signs characterized by
repetitive motion and/or rotation activated by a mechanical system
powered by electric motors or other mechanically induced means.
B.
ELECTRICALLY ACTIVATED — Animated signs producing the illusion
of movement by means of electronic, electrical, or electromechanical
input and/or illumination capable of simulating movement through
employment of the characteristics of one or both of the classifications
noted below:
FLASHING — Animated signs or animated portions of signs whose
illumination is characterized by a repetitive cycle in which the
period of illumination is either the same as or less than the period
of nonillumination. For the purposes of this article, "flashing" will
not be defined as occurring if the cyclical period between on-off
phases of illumination exceeds four seconds.
(1)
C.
§ 535-39 WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS § 535-40
520:753
ARCHITECTURAL PROJECTION — Any projection that is not intended for
occupancy and that extends beyond the face of an exterior wall of a building
but that does not include signs as defined herein. See also "awning,"
"backlit awning" and "canopy, attached and freestanding."
AWNING — An architectural projection or shelter projecting from and
supported by the exterior wall of a building and composed of a covering
of rigid or nonrigid materials and/or fabric on a supporting framework that
may be either permanent or retractable.
AWNING SIGN — A sign displayed on or attached flat against the surface or
surfaces of an awning. See also "wall sign" or "fascia sign."
BACKGROUND AREA OF SIGN — The entire area of a sign on which copy
and/or graphics could be placed.
BACKLIT AWNING — An awning whose covering material exhibits the
characteristic of luminosity obtained by means of a source of illumination
contained within its framework.
BANNER — A flexible substrate on which copy or graphics may be
displayed.
BANNER SIGN — A sign utilizing a banner as its display surface.
BILLBOARD — See "off-premises sign" and "commercial outdoor
advertising sign."
BUILDING FACADE — That portion of any exterior elevation of a building
extending vertically from grade to the top of the parapet wall or eaves and
horizontally across the entire width of the building elevation.
CANOPY (ATTACHED) — A multisided structure or architectural projection
supported by attachment to a building on one or more sides and either
cantilevered from such building or also supported by columns at additional
points. The surface(s) and/or soffit of an attached canopy may be
illuminated by means of internal or external sources of light. Similar to a
marquee.
CANOPY (FREESTANDING) — A multisided structure supported by
columns. The surface(s) and/or soffit of a freestanding canopy may be
illuminated by means of internal or external sources of light.
CANOPY SIGN — A sign affixed to the visible surface(s) of an attached or
freestanding canopy. May be internally or externally illuminated. Similar to
a marquee sign.
CHANGEABLE SIGN — A sign with the capability of content change by
means of manual or remote input. Includes the following types:
PATTERNED ILLUSIONARY MOVEMENT — Animated signs or
animated portions of signs whose illumination is characterized by
simulated movement through alternate or sequential activation
of various illuminated elements for the purpose of producing
repetitive light patterns designed to appear in some form of
constant motion.
(2)
§ 535-40 PORT JERVIS CODE § 535-40
520:754
COMMERCIAL OUTDOOR ADVERTISING SIGN — A permanent offpremises
sign erected, maintained or used in the outdoor environment
for the purpose of providing copy area for commercial or noncommercial
messages.
COPY — The graphic content or message of a sign.
COPY AREA OF SIGN — The actual area of the sign copy as applied to
any background. Copy area on any individual background may be expressed
as the sum of the geometrically computed area(s) encompassing separate
individual letters, words, or graphic elements on that background.
DIRECTIONAL SIGN — Any sign that is designed and erected for the
purpose of providing direction and/or orientation for pedestrian or vehicular
traffic.
DOUBLE-FACED SIGN — A sign with two faces, commonly back to back.
ELECTRIC SIGN — Any sign activated or illuminated by means of electrical
energy.
ELECTRONIC MESSAGE SIGN OR CENTER — An electrically activated
changeable sign whose variable message capability can be electronically
programmed.
EXTERIOR SIGN — Any sign placed outside a building.
FACADE — See "building facade."
FASCIA SIGN — See "wall sign."
FLASHING SIGN — See "animated sign, electrically activated."
FREESTANDING SIGN — A sign principally supported by one or more
columns, poles, or braces placed in or upon the ground.
FRONTAGE (BUILDING) — The length of an exterior building wall or
structure of a single premises along either a public way or other properties
that it faces.
FRONTAGE (PROPERTY) — The length of the property line(s) of any single
premises along either a public way or other properties on which it borders.
GROUND SIGN — See "freestanding sign."
MANUALLY ACTIVATED — Changeable sign whose message copy or
content can be changed manually on a display surface.
A.
ELECTRICALLY ACTIVATED — Changeable sign whose message copy
or content can be changed by means of remote electrically energized
on-off switching combinations of alphabetic or pictographic
components arranged on a display surface. Illumination may be integral
to the components, such as characterized by lamps or other lightemitting
devices, or it may be from an external light source designed
to reflect off the changeable component display. See also "electronic
message sign or center."
B.
§ 535-40 WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS § 535-40
520:755
ILLUMINATED SIGN — A sign characterized by the use of artificial light,
either projecting through its surface(s) (internally illuminated) or reflecting
off its surface(s) (externally illuminated).
INTERIOR SIGN — Any sign placed within a building, but not including
window signs as defined by this article. Interior signs, with the exception of
window signs as defined, are not regulated by this article.
MANSARD — A roof-like facade comparable to an exterior building wall.
MARQUEE — See "canopy (attached)." Definition is similar.
MARQUEE SIGN — See "canopy sign." Definition is similar.
MULTIPLE-FACED SIGN — A sign containing three or more faces.
OFF-PREMISES SIGN — A sign whose message content may not necessarily
bear any relationship to the activities conducted on the premises on which
it is located, or to the expression of commercial or noncommercial speech
by the owner or bona fide user of the premises on which it is located.
ON-PREMISES SIGN — A sign whose message content bears a direct
relationship to the activities conducted on the premises on which it is
located, or to the expression of any commercial or noncommercial speech
by the owner or bona fide user of the premises on which it is located.
PARAPET — The extension of a building facade above the line of the
structural roof.
POLE SIGN — See "freestanding sign."
POLITICAL SIGN — A temporary sign intended to advance a political
statement, cause, or candidate for office.
PORTABLE SIGN — Any sign not permanently attached to the ground or to
a building or building surface.
PROJECTING SIGN — A sign other than a wall sign that is attached to
or projects more than 18 inches from a building face or wall or from a
structure whose primary purpose is other than the support of a sign.
REAL ESTATE SIGN — A temporary sign advertising the sale, lease, or
rental of the property or premises upon which it is located.
REVOLVING SIGN — A sign that revolves 360° about an axis. See also
"animated sign, mechanically activated."
ROOFLINE — The uppermost line of the roof of a building or, in the case
of an extended facade or parapet, the uppermost point of said facade or
parapet.
ROOF SIGN — A sign mounted on the main roof portion of a building or
on the topmost edge of a parapet wall of a building and which is wholly or
partially supported by such building. Signs mounted on mansard facades,
pent eaves, and architectural projections, such as canopies or marquees,
shall not be considered to be roof signs.
SIGN — Any device visible from a public place whose essential purpose
and design is to convey either commercial or noncommercial messages
§ 535-40 PORT JERVIS CODE § 535-40
520:756
by means of graphic presentation of alphabetic or pictorial symbols or
representations. Noncommercial flags or any flags displayed from flagpoles
or staffs will not be considered to be signs.
SIGN STRUCTURE — Any structure designed for the support of a sign.
TEMPORARY SIGN — A sign intended to display either commercial or
noncommercial messages of a transitory or temporary nature. Portable
signs or any sign not permanently embedded in the ground, or not
permanently affixed to a building or sign structure that is permanently
embedded in the ground, are considered temporary signs.
UNDER-CANOPY SIGN or UNDER-MARQUEE SIGN — A sign attached to
the underside of a canopy or marquee.
V SIGN — A sign containing two faces of equal size, positioned at an interior
angle subtending less than 179° at the point of juncture of the individual
faces.
WALL OR FASCIA SIGN — A sign that is in any manner affixed to any
exterior wall of a building or structure and that projects not more than
18 inches from the building or structure wall. Also includes signs affixed
to architectural projections that project from a building, provided that the
copy area of such signs remains on a parallel plane to the face of the
building facade or to the face or faces of the architectural projection to
which it is affixed.
WINDOW SIGN — A sign affixed to the surface of a window with its message
intended to be visible to the exterior environment.
§ 535-40 WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS § 535-40
520:757
Examples of Signs as per Definitions:
§ 535-41. Signs prohibited.
A. Not permitted. Any sign not expressly permitted by this chapter is
prohibited. No signs shall be placed, painted or drawn upon trees, rocks
or natural features on the site, or on utility poles, bridges, culverts,
towers or similar structures.
B. Types prohibited. Additional types of signs that are prohibited include:
(1) Flashing, moving and revolving signs, including any sign or device
on which the artificial light is not maintained stationary and
constant in intensity and color at all times when in use, except for
clocks and customary time and temperature devices.
(2) Billboard or off-premises signs. Any sign affected by this chapter
purporting to advertise or announce a product not for sale on the
premises or only incidentally for sale or the business name or
activities of any firm, partnership, business or corporation not
§ 535-40 PORT JERVIS CODE § 535-41
520:758
attached to the premises used or occupied by said firm,
partnership, business or corporation.
(3) Signs representing or depicting, to any degree, official traffic signs
or signals.
(4) Signs which emit radio waves, noise, sounds or smoke.
(5) Signs made of cardboard, paper or similar impermanent materials,
except for interior or temporary signs.
(6) Signs mounted on parked vehicles or trailers or other similar
mobile advertising media not permanently installed and approved.
(7) Signs which project over a street.
(8) Signs obstructing traffic visibility.
(9) Sandwich boards or other temporary signs located on a sidewalk or
pedestrian walkway.
(10) Abandoned signs.
(a) Any existing signs, except those which are directly painted
onto the face of a building, which pertain to an activity no
longer in existence shall be removed by the owners of the signs
within 30 days from the time the activity ceases existence. This
provision does not apply to seasonal activities during the
regular periods in which they are closed.
(b) If the owner of the sign fails to remove or cause to be removed
such within 30 days after written notice by the Building Official
or his designee, the Building Official or his designee is
authorized to remove such sign and assess the cost of such
removal to the owner of the property.
(11) Roof signs. As shown below:
§ 535-41 WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS § 535-41
520:759
§ 535-42. Signs permitted.
As a general guide, the following is a summary of the types of signs which
are permitted.
A. All residential districts. Accessory signs permitted by right:
(1) One announcement sign for any residence, home professional office
or home occupation, which must be not more than four square feet
in area and set back at least 10 feet from any designated street line.
Such signs may be indirectly illuminated by a light integral to the
sign.
(2) One temporary nonilluminated "for sale" or "for rent" sign which
must not be less than 15 feet from any designated street line. Such
sign shall be promptly removed when premises are sold or rented.
B. All nonresidential districts. Accessory signs shall be as follows:
(1) Temporary nonilluminated "for sale" or "for rent" sign(s) which
must be not more than 30 square feet in total area for all signs. The
limitations on the number and setback of such signs shall be as set
forth below.
(2) Business identification sign(s) in R-O, CBD, SC, and LI Districts as
described in § 535-43 below.
§ 535-41 PORT JERVIS CODE § 535-42
520:760
§ 535-43. Additional requirements for certain signs.
The following additional requirements and standards shall apply to the
types of signs identified below:
(3) Directory sign(s) and shopping center identification sign(s) for
shopping centers.
C. All districts.
(1) Directional signs. Such signs are permitted in all districts and
accessory to any use requiring site development plan review. Such
signs shall be located as determined by the Building Official and
shall generally not exceed three square feet in area and, if
illuminated, shall not exhibit glare.
A. Identification signs for nonresidential establishments in residential
districts.
(1) Freestanding signs may be provided, not to exceed 20 square feet
in area, located at least 15 feet from any designated street line, not
to exceed one such sign on each street frontage, except that each
500 feet of frontage shall be considered an additional frontage;
such signs may be indirectly illuminated by a constant light integral
to the sign.
(2) One such sign may be provided on each street frontage, except that
each 500 feet of frontage shall be considered an additional
frontage.
(3) Such signs shall be promptly removed when premises are sold or
rented.
B. "For sale" or "for rent" signs in nonresidential districts.
(1) Such signs shall be located no closer than 10 feet to any designated
street line.
(2) One such sign may be provided on each street frontage, except that
each 500 feet of frontage shall be considered an additional
frontage.
(3) Such signs shall be promptly removed when premises are sold or
rented.
C. Business identification signs.
(1) In the case of a building devoted to one or more uses or
establishments, one indirectly illuminated sign for each such use or
establishment may be located on each building facade facing the
frontage street or streets, or parking lots or pedestrian courts as
directed by the Building Official. The total sign area on each facade
shall not exceed 20% of the primary facade area in the R-O, CBD
§ 535-42 WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS § 535-43
520:761
and SC Districts or 60 square feet in the LI District. Any other
building face other than the primary shall be allowed a maximum
of a twenty-square-foot sign.199
(2) In the case of a use or establishment not involving a building, one
freestanding business identification sign may be located on a lot
facing each frontage street, as directed by the Building Official,
with the total sign area of each sign not to exceed 30 square feet,
and provided that each such sign shall be set back a minimum of 10
feet from any designated street line. Such signs shall not be
illuminated by exposed tubes, bulbs, or similar exposed light
sources, and there shall be no exterior spotlighting or other
illumination of any such sign that will cause any glare.
(3) In the case of motor vehicle service stations, customary pump
island price signs, not to exceed one square foot per sign per pump
upon each island, may be permitted.
(4) Mural or painted wall signs may be unlit or illuminated by nonglare
wall-mounted lighting suitable to the Building Official.
Example:
Example Calculations:
Building = 12' H x 35' W = 420 sq. ft.
20% of building front = 3.91' H x 28.01' L = 84 sq. ft.
D. Freestanding signs in shopping centers.
(1) One freestanding sign may be located on a shopping center site for
each street frontage, at least 10 feet from the property line, with a
total sign area of each such sign not to exceed 40 square feet. Only
those tenants not identified on any other shopping center sign may
be identified on the freestanding sign.
199. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 535-43 PORT JERVIS CODE § 535-43
520:762
(2) Such signs shall not exceed 25 feet above ground level, measured
from the top of the sign, and a minimum of 10 feet from grade to
bottom of sign.
(3) Such signs shall not be illuminated by exposed tubes, bulbs or
similar exposed light sources, and there shall be no exterior
spotlighting or illumination of any such sign that will cause any
glare.
(4) Such signs shall be owned and maintained by the same
management as the shopping center, and said management shall
exercise full responsibility for the proper installation and
maintenance of such freestanding signs.
E. Illuminated signs.
(1) A sign illuminated by electricity or equipped in any way with
devices or applications shall conform with respect to wiring and
appliances to the regulations of the New York Board of Fire
Underwriters and shall bear an Underwriter's stamp and must be
wired by an electrician licensed by the City of Port Jervis.
(2) No sign shall be illuminated by gas.
(3) Signs self-illuminated from within. All wiring shall be self-enclosed
in armored cable.
F. Ground or freestanding signs.
(1) Ground and freestanding signs shall be permitted only if the signs
are set back at least 10 feet from the front property line. Only one
such sign shall be set back at least 10 feet from the property line.
The top of such sign shall be no higher than 15 feet from the
ground, and the sign shall be no larger than 24 square feet. Such
signs are limited to pole signs affixed to at least a single pole with
no guy wire or bracing. All ground signs shall be located within the
property line, and the location and illumination of such shall not
block the view of or otherwise interfere with official traffic signs
and signals or other permitted signs.
(2) A freestanding sign to identify the occupants of a medical clinic or
professional office building shall be permitted in any district where
such uses are permitted under this chapter. It may be erected with
two poles as long as all other requirements of this section are
satisfied. Signs shall be constructed in such fashion so as not to
interfere with the flow or view of traffic.
(3) Freestanding signs shall be permitted as downtown business
directories at strategic locations approved by the Building Official.
The sign standard shall be no higher than 10 feet from the ground
and no larger than 24 square feet in area on a single face. The
individual placards shall be no larger than three inches in height
§ 535-43 WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS § 535-43
520:763
and 12 inches wide. Said signs shall only be permitted to be erected
by a businessmen's association or similar organization. No more
than one such directory will be permitted on any given street
corner. Once a standard design is established by an organization
and is approved by the Building Official, all future directories shall
conform to that design.
G. Interior signs. An interior sign or combination of signs, temporary or
permanent, shall not cover more than 50% of each window upon which
or in which it is affixed, displayed or painted.
H. Marquee signs. Signs shall not be permitted on any marquee, other
than signs built into and forming a part of the structure of the marquee.
Such signs shall not exceed a height of three feet or a total area of 21
square feet on any one side of the marquee and shall not extend beyond
the edge of the marquee. In addition to the foregoing, only that portion
of the marquee containing such sign may be illuminated.
I. Wall signs (including painted murals used as signs). Wall signs, as
defined in this chapter, shall be attached to the face of the building in a
plane parallel to such face. Such sign shall not extend or project more
than eight inches from the face of the building. Any such sign which
overhangs any publicly owned property shall not extend higher than the
top of the parapet, in the case of one-story buildings, and in the case of
other buildings it shall not extend above the sill of the windows of the
second story nor extend more than 15 feet above the outside grade. No
wall sign or combination of signs on any single frontage in a business
district shall exceed an area equivalent to 100% of the linear length of
the structure on such frontage or a maximum of 50 square feet,
whichever is less. Where an establishment for which signs are
permitted has a rear entrance on a public way or parking lot or frontage
on two or more streets, such as a corner, signs shall be permitted on
each frontage, up to the maximum permitted for that frontage. Wall
signs shall not cover, wholly or partially, any wall opening, including
doors, fire escapes and windows, nor project beyond the ends of the
wall to which they are attached. All such signs must be safely and
adequately attached to said building wall by means satisfactory to the
Building Official or his designee. Within an industrial district, one sign
not exceeding 100 square feet is permitted for each street frontage
from which access is provided to the lot.
J. Overhanging signs. Each establishment in a business district shall be
permitted one overhanging sign which shall project not more than 48
inches from the perpendicular face of the building, unless such sign
hangs from a permanent canopy over the walkway and shall not exceed
10 square feet in area. Such signs shall be limited to frontage on streets
and mall areas. All overhanging signs shall be constructed of such
material in such workmanlike manner as shall make them safe and
satisfactory to the Building Official or his designee. The bottom of such
signs shall be a minimum of nine feet or a maximum of 12 feet above the
sidewalk and shall not extend beyond the curbline or into any areas
§ 535-43 PORT JERVIS CODE § 535-43
520:764
which are accessible to service or emergency vehicles or which
interfere with fire fighting. Any such sign which overhangs any publicly
owned property shall be insured in accordance with § 535-44F.
K. Temporary signs. The erection, installation or maintenance of
temporary signs is hereby prohibited, except as follows:
(1) The Building Official may grant special permission for the
maintenance of a temporary sign or signs to a municipal,
charitable, or nonprofit organization or requested special event for
a period of not to exceed 15 days. Said permit, by the consent of the
Building Official, may be extended for an additional period not to
exceed 15 days with banner insurance as in § 535-44F. Submission
of a refundable bond in the amount prescribed by the Common
Council from time to time is required. The bond amount is
refundable to the applicant upon removal and inspection by the
Building Official or his designee.200
(2) A temporary sign announcing anticipated occupancy of a site or
building shall be permitted for a period not to exceed six months
without approval. Such sign shall not exceed 24 square feet if it is
freestanding and shall not exceed the maximum size permitted for
a permanent sign if it is affixed to a building.
(3) Temporary signs announcing special sales or events shall be
permitted without approval for a period not to exceed 15 days. Any
such temporary signs must conform to the size and location
requirements applicable to permanent signs.
(4) Real estate signs. Such signs shall be for the sole purpose of
advertising the sale of the premises upon which the sign is located.
(a) Provisions applicable to all zoning districts. One real estate
sign only, not larger than six square feet on one lot, advertising
the sale or letting of only the premises on which it is
maintained and set back not less than 15 feet from the street
line and not less than 10 feet from each side line, shall be
allowed; where setbacks do not permit. This regulation shall
apply to all zoning districts.
(b) Prohibited locations. No sign shall be erected, placed or
maintained within the right-of-way lines of any public street,
sidewalk or public right-of-way. Any sign violating this
subsection may be removed by the Building Official/Code
Enforcement Officer or any other City employee or agent duly
designated by the Mayor without prior notice to the owner.
Such removal shall include the sign structure.201
200. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
201. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 535-43 WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS § 535-43
520:765
§ 535-44. Permit procedure; maintenance of signs.
(c) Reclamation fee. If the City has removed a sign, a fee as
provided in Chapter 280, Fees, shall be charged and paid to the
City for a reclamation fee.202
(5) All political support signs shall be removed seven days after the
general election.
(a) Political campaign signs do not require a permit from the City.
(b) Political campaign signs shall not be designed or situated so as
to become a traffic or safety hazard.
(c) Political campaign signs should not be placed on private
property without the owner's permission.
(d) The candidate, on whose behalf the sign is placed, is
responsible for having the signs removed.
(6) Temporary signs may not be placed to stand on sidewalks or other
pedestrian walkways.
L. Under-canopy signs. Signs affixed to the underside of a canopy,
marquee, or architectural projection shall be limited to a copy area not
to exceed eight square feet. One such sign shall be permitted for each
means of entrance to or exit from a premises utilizing a canopy-type
structure and/or for every 100 linear feet of such canopy-type structure.
A. General. Permits for new and modified signs shall be issued by the
Building Official upon a finding of conformance with the standards of
this chapter. The Planning Board may permit signs larger in area or
greater in vertical dimension or height above the ground level than
those described above, on finding that such signs are required by virtue
of the special circumstances of the site or of the uses under
consideration at the time of site development plan review.
B. Submission; standards; required data.
(1) The applicant shall submit all plans and required information for
proposed signs to the Building Official for his approval.
(2) Application standards.
(a) Signs should be a subordinate part of the streetscape rather
than the dominant features. Properly designed signs can add
interest to building facades without overpowering them.
(b) Standard, approved methods of constant illumination shall be
permitted on ground signs and wall signs; provided, however,
that they shall concentrate the illumination upon the area of
202. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 535-43 PORT JERVIS CODE § 535-44
520:766
the sign so as to prevent direct glare upon the street or
adjacent residential property.
(c) Except for holiday seasons or grand openings, as approved by
the Building Official or his designee, no sign or part thereof
shall consist of pennants, ribbons, streamers, spinners or other
similar moving, fluttering or revolving devices.
(d) A sign shall not be suspended from an awning.
(e) All ground signs shall be designed according to generally
accepted engineering practice to withstand wind pressure
applied to the projected exposed area allowing for wind from
any direction of 75 pounds per square foot.
(f) Signs noting that a property has been sold must be removed at
or before taking title.
(g) To the extent possible, adjacent wall signs on the same or
adjoining buildings should be placed within the same
horizontal band and be of reasonably harmonious materials
and colors.
(h) Adjacent freestanding signs should be of the same height from
the ground and should be as low as practical.
(i) All signs should be as small and discreet as possible.
(j) The number of signs should be limited to as few as practical.
(k) Lettering should be as small as possible but shall not exceed
two feet in height; the sign should have as few words as
possible.
(l) All signs shall be incidental, customary to and commonly
associated with the principal use.
(m) Garish colors, lights or materials should be avoided. Whenever
possible, natural material such as wood or iron should be
utilized.
(3) Application data.
(a) Application for the permit shall be made to the Building Official
or his designee, in writing, upon forms prescribed and
provided by the Building Official or his designee and shall
contain the following data:
[1] Name, address and telephone number of the applicant.
[2] Location of the building, structure and/or land to which or
upon which the sign is to be erected.
§ 535-44 WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS § 535-44
520:767
[3] A reasonably detailed drawing or blueprint showing a
description of the construction details of the sign and
showing the lettering and/or pictorial matter composing
the sign and the position of the lighting or other
extraneous devices and weights and a location plan
showing the position in relation to nearby buildings or
structures and to any private or public street or highway.
This requirement may be fulfilled by a legible drawing
prepared by the store owner or tenant.
[4] Written consent of the owner of the building, structure
and/or land to which or on which the sign is to be erected,
in the event that the applicant is not the owner thereof.
[5] Such other pertinent information as the Building Official
or his designee may require to ensure compliance with this
chapter.
(b) An illuminated sign must be underwritten by an approved
testing firm and must be wired by an electrician licensed by the
City of Port Jervis.
(c) The owner of the structure and/or land to which or on which
any sign is erected shall be required to save harmless the City
of Port Jervis from any damage or claim arising out of the
enforcement of this chapter.
C. Application time limit. Following formal submission to the Building
Official or his designee, he shall act to approve, disapprove or approve
with conditions said application within 10 days from submission. The
Building Official shall notify the applicant immediately, in writing, of his
action, and he shall thereupon either issue a permit, with or without
conditions, or issue a notice of disapproval. Approved sign permits
expire after 60 days. One thirty-day extension may be granted by the
Building Official or his designee upon written request of the applicant.
D. Condition, safety and maintenance. All signs shall be properly secured,
supported and braced and shall be kept in good structural condition
and clean and well painted at all times. Every sign, its framework,
braces, anchors and other supports shall be constructed of such
material and in such workmanlike manner as shall make them safe and
satisfactory to the Building Official or his designee. Signs shall be
positioned so as not to block fire-fighting operations.
E. Notice of violation; failure to comply. If the Building Official or his
designee shall find that any sign regulated herein is unsafe or insecure
or is a menace to the public, or has been erected in violation of the
provisions of this chapter or without a permit, he shall give written
notice to the permittee or owner or lessee of the premises thereof. If the
permittee fails to move or alter the sign so as to comply with the
standards herein set forth within 15 days after such notice, such sign
may be removed or altered to comply by the Building Official or his
§ 535-44 PORT JERVIS CODE § 535-44
520:768
designee, at the expense of the permittee or owner who refuses to pay
costs so assessed. The Building Official or his designee may cause any
sign which is an immediate peril to persons or property to be removed
summarily and without notice.
F. Insurance required.
(1) For any sign erected which requires the issuance of a permit there
shall be furnished to the City of Port Jervis a certificate from an
insurance company, duly licensed in the State of New York and
subject to the approval of the Corporation Counsel, certifying that
the owner of the premises and/or the tenant of the premises
responsible for the affixing, painting, or erecting of a sign has in
force and effect a policy of general liability insurance. The
cancellation of this policy shall effect a cancellation of any sign
permit issued.
(2) Where a sign shall be erected which sign shall in whole or in part
encroach upon a public street, public highway or public right-ofway,
the owner of the premises or the owner of said sign or signs
shall furnish to the City of Port Jervis a public liability policy as
provided for in Subsection F(1) above and, in addition, said policy
shall name the City of Port Jervis as an additional named insured.
(3) In addition to the insurance required in Subsection F(1) and (2), the
acceptance of a permit by an applicant shall be deemed agreement
by the applicant that the applicant shall indemnify and hold
harmless the City of Port Jervis from any and all damages,
judgments, costs and expenses which said City may incur arising
from the erection, alteration, repair, relocation, reconstruction or
use of any such signs.
(4) Temporary and/or banner signs. The requirement of insurance set
forth in the foregoing subsections as well as the requirements of
indemnification shall apply equally to temporary signs or banners
and upon the same terms and conditions.
G. Exceptions. The provisions and regulations of this chapter shall not
apply to the following signs:
(1) Bulletin boards and signs not over 16 square feet in area for public,
charitable or religious institutions where the same are located on
the premises of said institutions.
(2) A sign not exceeding 16 square feet in area denoting the architect,
engineer and contractor when placed upon public property where
work is under construction. Such signs shall have the written
approval of the Building Official or his designee with regard to
length of time that the sign can be maintained.
(3) Name and number plates and professional signs, not more than two
square feet in area.
§ 535-44 WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS § 535-44
520:769
(4) Memorial signs or tablets, names of buildings and date of erection
when cut into any masonry surface or when constructed of bronze
or similar material and affixed directly to the front face of the
building and parallel to such front face and which shall not exceed
four square feet in area.
H. Nonconforming signs.
(1) Any sign of a type not permitted by this chapter or which exceeds
the maximum size permitted herein by 10% at the time of adoption
of this code shall be a nonconforming use.
(2) A nonconforming sign shall not be enlarged and shall be removed if
the Building Official or his designee declares it unsafe. The
relettering, painting or decorating of such signs shall be permitted,
but any sign once removed for more than 90 days for purposes
other than relettering or decoration shall be deemed permanently
removed and may be replaced only in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter.
(3) A sign legally erected and legally existing which becomes a
nonconforming sign as a result of the enactment of this chapter or
as a result of any amendment thereof shall be a nonconforming use.
§ 535-44 PORT JERVIS CODE § 535-44
520:770
ARTICLE XI
Off-Street Parking, Driveways and Loading Facilities
§ 535-45. Off-street parking and loading.
Parking and loading spaces shall be provided off the street for any use of
land, buildings and other structures as specified in this article. Required
off-street parking and loading spaces shall be permanently maintained and
made available for occupancy in connection with and for the full duration
of the use. If any existing use is changed to a use for which additional offstreet
parking or loading spaces are required to comply with this article,
the additional spaces shall be provided for the use in accordance with the
standards of this article. Plans for all such off-street parking and loading
spaces shall be submitted to the Planning Board for its review and approval.
§ 535-46. Supplementary parking regulations in all districts.
Off-street parking spaces, open or enclosed, are permitted accessory to any
use, subject to the following provisions:
A. Parking requirements. Accessory off-street parking spaces, open or
enclosed, shall be provided for any use as specified herein. Any land
which is developed as a unit under single ownership and control shall
be considered a single lot for the purpose of these parking regulations.
Reasonable and appropriate off-street parking requirements for
structures and uses which do not fall within the categories listed herein
shall be determined by the Planning Board upon consideration of all
factors entering into the parking needs of each such use.
B. Areas computed as parking spaces. Areas which may be computed as
open or enclosed off-street parking spaces include any private garage,
carport, or other area available for parking, other than a street or a
driveway. However, other than on that portion of a corner lot which is
subject to the provisions of § 535-23, a driveway within a required front
yard for a one- or two-family residence may count as one parking space.
C. Size of spaces. Each parking space shall be a minimum of nine feet wide
by 18 feet deep and shall be served by an aisle not less than 24 feet
wide. Where parking is arranged back-to-back, each parking space may
share a common backup space. Entrance and exit lanes shall not be
computed as parking space, except for driveways in one- and two-family
residences, as set forth above.203
D. Identification. Each parking space shall be identified with two painted
lines (white or yellow traffic paint), four inches wide, set seven feet
apart and placed one foot in from each side. These lines shall extend for
20 feet in length.
203. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 535-45 WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS § 535-46
520:771
E. Prohibited parking areas. Parking shall not be permitted between the
street line and the front elevation of the principal building in all
residential districts. Parking shall not be permitted anywhere in the
front yard of any dwelling, except that where the Planning Board finds
that due to unique conditions compliance with this limitation will cause
practical difficulties and tend to increase on-street parking by
residents, the Planning Board may authorize parking anywhere in the
front yard of such dwelling except for that portion thereof which is
directly in front of the principal building, exclusive of garage
structures.
F. Access. Unobstructed access to and from a street shall be provided.
Such access shall consist of at least one twelve-foot-wide lane for
parking areas with fewer than 20 spaces and at least two twelve-footwide
lanes for parking areas with 20 spaces or more. No entrance or
exit for any off-street parking area with a capacity of more than four
spaces shall be located within 50 feet of any street intersection nor
exceed a grade in excess of 6% within 25 feet of any street line or 10%
at any other point.
G. Drainage and surfacing. All parking areas shall be properly drained and
all such areas, except for parking spaces accessory to a one- or twofamily
dwelling, shall be provided with a dustless surface in accordance
with specifications of the City of Port Jervis. The maximum slope of a
parking area shall not exceed 5%.
H. Joint facilities. Required parking spaces, open or enclosed, may be
provided in spaces designed to serve jointly two or more
establishments, whether or not located on the same lot, provided that
the number of required spaces in such joint facilities shall not be less
than the total required for all such establishments.
I. Combined spaces. When any lot contains two or more uses having
different parking requirements, the parking requirements for each use
shall apply to the full extent. Where it can be conclusively demonstrated
that one or more such uses will be generating a demand for parking
spaces primarily during periods when the other use or uses is not or are
not in operation, the Planning Board may reduce the total parking
requirement to an amount which, in its judgment, will prevent frequent
parking on the street by persons working on, or visiting, the premises.
J. Enclosed facilities. Required parking areas may be constructed within
or under any portion of a main building, provided that the access
driveway does not at any point have a grade in excess of 10%.
K. Location and ownership. Required accessory parking spaces, open or
enclosed, shall be provided upon the same lot as the use to which they
are accessory or elsewhere, provided that no required spaces are
located farther than 200 feet walking distance from such lot. In all such
cases, the parking spaces shall conform to all the regulations of the
district in which the parking spaces are located, and in no event shall
§ 535-46 PORT JERVIS CODE § 535-46
520:772
§ 535-47. Off-street parking requirements for all uses. [Amended
8-22-2016 by L.L. No. 15-2016]
All parking spaces required below include those required by state law for
purposes of the handicapped.
Off-Street Parking Requirements
For Each Use One Parking Space Per
Adult care facilities 3 beds
Animal hospitals 250 square feet of floor area
Art galleries, museums and libraries 400 square feet of floor area
Banks 300 square feet of floor area
Bed-and-breakfast Bed-and-breakfast room
Bowling alleys 3 per alley
Building supply, wholesalers and
lumber yards
500 square feet of floor area
Business and professional offices/
services
250 square feet of floor area
Convenience retail 150 square feet of floor area
such parking spaces be located in any residence district unless either
the use to which the spaces are accessory is permitted in such
residence districts or upon approval by the Planning Board. Such
spaces shall be in the same ownership as the use to which they are
accessory and shall be subject to deed restrictions, approved by the
Planning Board, binding the owner and the owner's heirs and assigns to
maintain the required number of spaces available either throughout the
existence of the use to which they are accessory or until such spaces
are provided elsewhere, in a location and manner acceptable to the
Planning Board.
L. Lots divided by district boundaries. When a parking lot is located partly
in one district and partly in another district, the regulations for the
district requiring the greater number of parking spaces shall apply to
the entire lot. Parking spaces on such lot may be located without regard
to district lines, provided that no such parking spaces shall be located
in any residential district unless either the use to which they are
accessory is permitted in such district or upon approval by the Planning
Board.
M. Landscaping. All open parking areas shall be suitable landscaped. In
parking lots with more than 20 spaces, at least 5% of the area of the
parking lot shall be devoted to landscaping within the interior of the
parking area. Such landscaping shall be in addition to that which may
be required along the street line, the lot lines, or the building
foundation.
§ 535-46 WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS § 535-47
520:773
Off-Street Parking Requirements
For Each Use One Parking Space Per
Dwellings (except accessory
dwelling units in multi-use
structures located in the Central
Business District)
1 dwelling unit
Fast food 75 square feet of floor area
Funeral homes 100 square feet of usable floor area
Health and fitness centers 400 square feet of floor area
Home occupation or home
professional office
1/2 home occupation/office
Hospitals or sanitariums 3 beds, plus 1 per employee on
largest shift
Hotels and motels Unit, plus 1 per employee on largest
shift
Manufacturing 400 square feet of floor area
Membership club or recreation
buildings
300 square feet of floor area
Motor vehicle repair or service
stations
300 square feet of floor area
Motor vehicle sales 500 square feet of floor area
Nightclubs 75 square feet of floor area
Places of worship 200 square feet of floor area, but not
fewer than 1 for each 4 seats
Personal services 1/2 chair or 1/2 employee
Printing 300 square feet of floor area
Public utility structures 300 square feet of floor area
Restaurants 150 square feet of occupant load
area
Retail uses, including hardware
stores or retail sales areas of
building supply facilities
300 square feet of floor area
Schools 12 seats of students of elementary
age and 1 for each 5 students in all
other grades
Taxi dispatching Taxi and each employee on largest
shift
Theaters Each 4 seats
Trade shops Employee
Travel agencies or real estates
offices
300 square feet of floor area
§ 535-47 PORT JERVIS CODE § 535-47
520:774
Off-Street Parking Requirements
For Each Use One Parking Space Per
Warehousing 5,000 square feet of floor area
§ 535-48. Off-street loading.
Off-street loading berths, open or enclosed, are permitted as accessory
to any use (except one- or two-family dwellings) subject to the following
provisions:
A. Loading requirements. Accessory off-street loading berths shall be
provided for any use specified herein. Any land which is developed as a
unit under single ownership and control shall be considered a single lot
for the purpose of these loading requirements. Reasonable and
appropriate off-street loading requirements for structures and uses
which do not fall within the categories listed shall be determined by the
Planning Board upon consideration of all factors entering into the
loading needs of each such use.
(1) For a public library, museum, or governmental building, hospital or
sanitarium, nursing or convalescent home, residential health care
facility, adult care facility, or school: if floor area does not exceed
10,000 square feet, one berth; and for each additional 25,000
square feet or fraction thereof, one additional berth.
(2) For buildings with professional, governmental, or business offices
or research, design and development laboratory: if floor area is less
than 8,000 square feet, none; if floor area amounts to between
8,000 and 25,000 square feet, one berth; for each additional 25,000
square feet or major fraction thereof up to 100,000 square feet, one
additional berth; and for each 50,000 square feet or major fraction
thereof, one additional berth.
(3) For retail sales establishments and trade shops: if floor area is less
than 8,000 square feet, none; if floor area amounts to between
8,000 and 25,000 square feet, one berth; and if floor area exceeds
25,000 square feet, one additional berth for each additional 25,000
square feet of floor area, or major fraction thereof.
(4) For undertakers and funeral homes: one berth for each chapel.
Such berths shall be at least 10 feet wide, 20 feet long, and 14 feet
high.
(5) For hotels or similar establishments: one berth for each 25,000
square feet, or major fraction thereof, of floor area.
(6) For manufacturing, wholesale and storage uses, and for drycleaning
establishments and laundries: one berth for each 10,000
square feet of floor area or less and one additional berth for each
additional 20,000 square feet of floor area, or major fraction
thereof, so used.
§ 535-47 WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS § 535-48
520:775
§ 535-49. Parking regulations for multiple dwellings.
(7) For multiple dwellings in structures with a height of over 2 1/2
stories, one berth for each structure or each 150 dwelling units or
major fraction thereof, whichever results in the lesser number.
B. Size of spaces. Except as provided hereinbefore, each required loading
berth shall be at least 12 feet wide, 35 feet long, and 15 feet high.
C. Location and access. Unobstructed access, at least 12 feet wide, to and
from a street shall be provided. Such access may be combined with
access to a parking lot. All permitted or required loading berths shall be
on the same lot as the use to which they are accessory, except as
provided above. No entrance or exit for any loading area shall be
located within 50 feet of any street intersection. All loading berths shall
meet the minimum setback requirements and shall be screened where
visible from any residential district boundary.
D. Joint facilities. Permitted or required loading berths, open or enclosed,
may be provided in spaces designated to serve jointly two or more
adjacent establishments, provided that the number of required berths
in such joint facilities shall not be less than the aggregate of all such
requirements.
E. Lots divided by district boundaries. When a lot is located partly in one
district and partly in another district, the regulations for the district
requiring the greater number of loading berths shall apply to the entire
lot. Loading berths on such lot may be located without regard to district
lines, provided that no such berths shall be in any residence district,
unless either the use to which they are accessory is permitted in such
district or upon approval by the Planning Board.
A. Pavement markings. Wherever space is provided for the parking of five
or more vehicles in the open, such spaces shall be individually identified
by means of pavement markings.
B. Proximity to windows. The parking of motor vehicles is prohibited
within 15 feet of any wall or portion thereof of a three- or more family
dwelling, which wall contains windows (other than bathroom or kitchen
windows) with a sill height of less than eight feet above the level of said
parking space.
C. No motor vehicle services to be rendered. No service of any kind shall
be permitted to extended users of the lot, including automobile service,
repair or fueling, and no gasoline, oil, grease, or other supplies shall be
stored or sold in any such lot or in any garage on such lot.
D. Screening. Parking areas shall be thoroughly screened, subject to
approval by the Planning Board. Generally, such screening shall be
eight feet in height and, if composed of plants, shall not be less than
three feet in height, but capable of reaching eight feet in height at
maturity.
§ 535-48 PORT JERVIS CODE § 535-50
520:776
§ 535-50. Parking spaces adjacent to lots in any residence district.
§ 535-51. Driveways.
No driveway shall provide access to a lot located in another district, which
lot is used for any use prohibited in the district in which such driveway is
located. No driveway shall provide access to a lot located in a nonresidential
district, across land in a residential district.
§ 535-52. Trailers and boats.
A. Abutting. Wherever a parking area of over five spaces is within 15 feet
of the side or rear lot lines of a lot in any residence district, said parking
lot shall be thoroughly screened from such adjoining lot, subject to
approval by the Planning Board. Generally such screening shall be eight
feet in height and, if composed of plants, shall not be less than three
feet in height, capable of reaching eight feet in height at maturity.
B. Across the street. Whenever a parking area of over five spaces is
located across the street from any land in a residence district, it shall be
thoroughly screened subject to approval by the Planning Board. Such
screening shall be located along a line drawn parallel to the street and a
distance of five feet therefrom. The open area between such screening
and the street shall be landscaped in harmony with the landscaping
prevailing on neighboring properties fronting on the same street. Two
identification and directional signals located on the street side of such
screening, with an area of not more than three square feet each, shall
be permitted.
A. Maximum slope. The maximum slope of a driveway shall not exceed
13% to 15%, as may be approved by the Planning Board.
B. Dual service. A driveway servicing a loading berth and/or a parking
area of over five spaces shall not be less than 24 feet wide and shall be
adequate and sufficient in size, location, and design to accommodate
the maximum traffic, parking, and loading needs and the access of firefighting
equipment and police or emergency vehicles.
A. Trailer. The storage or parking and use of a trailer by any person or
persons is hereby prohibited in all districts, except that:
(1) One camping trailer not over 20 feet in length, whether or not
mounted on wheels, may be stored, but not used for any purpose,
on an occupied lot in any residence district, provided that such
trailer is not stored within any required setback, nor between the
street line and the principal building.
(2) Where a building permit has been issued for the construction or
alteration of a building, the Building Official may issue a temporary
permit for one trailer for a period not to exceed six months. Said
temporary permit may be extended for one additional period of six
months if the Building Official finds the construction has been
§ 535-50 WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS § 535-52
520:777
§ 535-53. Commercial vehicles in residential districts.
§ 535-54. Commercial vehicles in nonresidential districts.
Commercial vehicles are permitted as accessory to a nonresidential use (in
a nonresidential district) and can be stored in an improved parking lot but
shall not be stored or parked closer to the street line than the minimum
front setback line.
diligently pursued and that justifiable circumstances require such
an extension. Said trailer may be occupied during the term of the
temporary permit and shall be situated upon the lot for which the
building permit has been issued.
B. Boat. Not more than one boat not over 20 feet in length may be stored
on an occupied lot in any residence district, provided that such boat is
not stored within any required setback nor between the street line and
the principal building.
C. Mobile homes and mobile home courts. Mobile homes and mobile home
courts are prohibited in all districts.
A. Weight restriction. In any residence district, not more than one
commercial vehicle with a gross vehicle weight limited to 2 1/2 tons
may be parked on an occupied lot. In no case may the vehicle be parked
within the required setbacks of such lot, and in no case between the
street line and the principal building.
B. One per private garage. Not more than one such commercial vehicle
may be parked within a private garage in any residence district.
C. Prohibited on open lots. No vehicle or part(s) thereof shall be parked or
stored on any unimproved lot.
§ 535-52 PORT JERVIS CODE § 535-54
520:778
ARTICLE XII
Nonconforming Uses and Noncomplying Buildings
§ 535-55. Nonconforming uses.
The following provisions shall apply to all buildings and uses existing on
the effective date of this chapter which do not conform to the requirements
set forth in this chapter and to all buildings and uses that become
nonconforming by reason of any subsequent amendment to this chapter.
Any nonconforming use of buildings or open land may be continued
indefinitely but:
A. Shall not be enlarged, altered, extended, reconstructed, or restored
(except as provided below), or placed on a different portion of the lot or
parcel of land occupied by such use on the effective date of the chapter,
if such enlargement, alteration, extension, reconstruction or
restoration exceeds 25% of the area of the use. Such permitted
expansion is not intended to nullify or make inapplicable any bulk
requirements otherwise required by this chapter. The above-referenced
twenty-five-percent expansion is intended to permit only a one-time
expansion and shall not be interpreted to permit cumulative expansions
which would exceed 25% of the original area of use.
B. Shall not be moved to another location where such use would be
nonconforming.
C. Shall be allowed to be changed to another nonconforming use provided
that it is of the same or of a more restricted nature or lesser density in
terms of traffic, noise, odor or other impact on neighborhood character
as determined by the Building Official.
D. Shall not be reestablished if such use has been discontinued by reason
of vacancy for any reason or no reason at all for a continuous period of
240 days or more or has been changed to, or replaced by, a conforming
use. If vacancy is caused by the loss of a certificate of occupancy due to
unaddressed and uncorrected building and zoning code violations, the
time of such vacancy shall count toward the two-hundred-forty-day
period in this Code section. Furthermore, in any building or property
having multiple dwelling units, occupancy of only one or fewer dwelling
units and vacancy in the remaining units shall be deemed a vacancy for
the purposes of this Code section. Intent to resume a nonconforming
use shall not confer the right to do so. Such time period shall apply to
properties whose nonconforming use was discontinued after the
enactment of this statute. Properties whose nonconforming use was
discontinued prior to the enactment of this statute shall not reestablish
or resume the nonconforming use after a period of one year. The
Building Official of the City of Port Jervis must send a notice to the
owner of the real property advising the owner of the Code sections that
exist relating to potential loss of use and discontinuance, the date of
potential loss of use or discontinuance, the proof that is required, and
the ability to appeal to the Zoning Board of Appeals after a
§ 535-55 WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS § 535-55
520:779
determination by the Building Official. The Building Official or Deputy
Building Official may direct that water service be denied or terminated
at any time at a property where the certificate of occupancy for that
property/structure has been revoked or denied for a violation of any
local, county, state or federal statute or regulation. [Amended
5-28-2013 by L.L. No. 4-2013; 3-28-2016 by L.L. No. 8-2016;
4-25-2016 by L.L. No. 10-2016]
E. Restoration and reconstruction.
(1) Shall not be restored for other than a conforming use after damage
for any reason exceeding 75% of its assessed value or its bulk (such
determination to be made solely by the City Assessor). If the
restoration of a building whose damage does not exceed 75% of its
assessed value or of its bulk is not commenced and substantially
completed within a one-year period, the nonconforming use of such
building shall be deemed to have been discontinued.
(2) Where a catastrophic fire or disaster has occurred and a structure/
building housing a nonconforming use has been demolished by
direction of officials of the City of Port Jervis or has been voluntarily
demolished by the property owner in order to protect the health
and safety of the citizens of Port Jervis and adjacent properties, the
Port Jervis Common Council may permit the reconstruction of a
structure/building on the site of the demolished structure/building
and may authorize continuation of the nonconforming use after
conducting a public hearing on the question of whether or not to
grant said waiver. [Added 10-27-2008 by L.L. No. 4-2008]
(3) Once the Common Council has agreed to permit the reconstruction
of a structure/building on the site of a demolished structure/
building and/or continuation of the nonconforming use housed in
that structure/building, a site redevelopment plan must be
submitted to and approved by the Planning Board of the City of Port
Jervis prior to the issuance of a building permit or certificate of
occupancy/compliance. The site development plan rules and
regulations set forth in § 535-61 of this Code must be adhered to.
[Added 3-23-2009 by L.L. No. 2-2009]
F. Removal of additional kitchens or kitchenettes in nonconforming
dwellings. If any nonconforming multiple dwelling or two-family
detached dwelling as such items are defined in the Port Jervis City Code
shall, as result of noncompliance with any subsections of § 535-55, lose
its use or uses as a multiple dwelling or two-family detached dwelling,
then in addition to not reestablishing such nonconforming use, such
dwellings shall have removed, prior to the reoccupancy of the entire
premises, all additional kitchens or kitchenettes that were previously
permissible when the allowable nonconforming use existed. Removal
shall include, but not be limited to, the removal of all structures and
appliances for the cooking or preparation of food as well as all plumbing
and gas lines feeding said kitchen or kitchenette back to their source of
§ 535-55 PORT JERVIS CODE § 535-55
520:780
§ 535-56. Noncomplying buildings.
Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to prevent normal maintenance
and repair, structural alteration in, or the reconstruction of a noncomplying
building, provided that such action does not increase the degree of
nonconformity by more than 25% or create any new nonconformity with
regard to the regulations pertaining to such buildings.
§ 535-57. Buildings, structures or lots with nonconforming bulk.
origin, multiple gas manifolds to a single manifold and meter, multiple
electrical meters and boxes to a single box, and wall openings allowing
for a through way in the interior of the structure. No nonconforming
multiple dwelling or two-family detached dwelling that shall lose its use
or uses as a multiple dwelling or two-family detached dwelling shall be
able to establish a new use, including a use as a single-family dwelling,
without a full inspection by the Code Enforcement Officer to confirm
removal of all additional kitchens or kitchenettes. [Added 5-28-2013
by L.L. No. 5-2013; amended 8-28-2018 by L.L. No. 7-2018]
A. Residential buildings or structures. Any existing one- or two- or
multiple-family residential building or structure, or building accessory
thereto, made noncomplying as to bulk by this chapter or any
amendment thereof shall be permitted to comply with the yard and
setback requirements as specified for the highest residential district
having the same or less lot width. In no event, however, shall the yard
and setback requirements of any be less than the requirements for the
R-2 Zone. No front setback may, in any event, be closer to the
designated street line than the existing established setback.
B. Nonresidential buildings and structures. Normal maintenance and
repair of, structural alteration in, or reconstruction of a building or
structure with noncomplying bulk is permitted if the same does not
increase the degree of noncomplying bulk in such building or structure
by more than the above-referenced 25%, in such building or structure.
C. Adjoining lots. Two or more adjoining nonconforming subdivision lots,
regardless of ownership, in a subdivision approved by the Planning
Board shall have three years from the date of filing with the office of the
County Clerk to obtain a building permit. Any noncomplying lot in a
subdivision approved by the Planning Board and filed with the office of
the County Clerk more than three years prior to the effective date of
this chapter and in the same ownership shall not be eligible to receive a
building permit. Said subdivision or part thereof shall be resubmitted to
the Planning Board for approval in accordance with the applicable
provisions of this chapter. Any lot in a subdivision approved by the
Planning Board after the effective date of this chapter but which is
made nonconforming as to bulk by any future amendments of this
chapter shall have three years from the date of filing to obtain a
building permit.
§ 535-55 WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS § 535-57
520:781
§ 535-58. Termination of nonconforming uses.
Each of the nonconforming uses specified in this section is deemed
sufficiently objectionable, undesirable, and out of character in the district in
which such use is located as to depreciate the value of other property and
uses permitted in the district and blight the proper and orderly development
and general welfare of such district and the community, to a point that each
such nonconforming use must be, and shall be, terminated on or before
the expiration of the specified period of time after the effective date of this
chapter, which period of time is specified for the purpose of permitting the
amortization of the remaining value, if any, of such use:
§ 535-59. Required modification of nonconforming uses.
Each of the nonconforming uses specified in this section is deemed
sufficiently objectionable, undesirable, and out of character in the district
in which such use is located as to depreciate the value of other property
and uses permitted in such district and blight the proper and orderly
development and general welfare of such district and the City, to a point
requiring that each of such nonconforming uses be modified to the extent
possible within a specified period of time as set forth below:
D. Noncomplying lots. A residential lot separated from any other land in
the same ownership and noncomplying as to bulk, whether or not
located in and part of a subdivision plat approved by the Planning Board
and filed in the office of the County Clerk, and which has a minimum lot
width of 60 feet, may be used for a one-family detached residence,
provided that such use shall comply with the bulk requirements as
specified in the highest residential district having the same or less lot
width.
A. Open land. In any residence district, any nonconforming use of open
land, including but not limited to such uses as a parking lot, mobile
home, junkyard, or open storage yard for materials or equipment, may
be continued for three years after the effective date of this chapter,
provided that, after the expiration of that period, such nonconforming
use shall be terminated.
B. Sign. Any sign not of a type permitted, or of a permitted type but of a
size exceeding the maximum permitted size by more than 10%, may be
continued for one year following the effective date of this chapter,
provided that, after the expiration of that period, such nonconforming
use shall be terminated. Any sign that is now nonconforming by reason
of a previous chapter shall be terminated upon the adoption of this
chapter.
A. Open land. In any residence district, any nonconforming use of open
land, including such uses as parking lots, junkyards, fuel tanks, or open
storage yards for material or equipment, regardless of the presence of
any building thereon, may be continued as is for one year after the
enactment of this chapter, during which time the Building Official shall
§ 535-57 PORT JERVIS CODE § 535-59
520:782
§ 535-60. Repairs and maintenance.
Notwithstanding any of the foregoing regulations, nothing in this article
shall be deemed to prevent normal maintenance and repair of any use or
building, or the carrying out upon the issuance of a building permit of major
structural alterations or demolitions necessary in the interest of public
safety. In granting such a building permit, the Building Official shall state
the precise reason why such alterations were deemed necessary.
notify each property owner that the use of such property is to be
terminated, unless within 60 days the owner applies to the Planning
Board for a conditional use permit. On or before the expiration of
said one-year period such nonconforming use shall be modified in
accordance with such reasonable conditions as shall be imposed by the
Planning Board when issuing a conditional use permit, which conditions
shall be designed to minimize any detrimental effect that such use of
open land may have on adjoining or nearby lots in a residence district.
B. Building not fully enclosed. In any district, other than as residence
district, any use which is nonconforming because it is not located within
a building fully enclosed on all sides may be continued for three years
after the effective date of this chapter, provided that, after the
expiration of that period, such nonconforming use shall be terminated.
Any other provision to the contrary notwithstanding, however, no such
use will be required to terminate if, within said period, such use shall be
located within a completely enclosed building complying with the
requirements of the district in which it is located or if, within said
period, such use shall be surrounded with a solid fence, of material and
design acceptable to the Planning Board, which fence shall be one foot
higher than any material stored outdoors, provided that such fence
shall be maintained in good condition at all times.
§ 535-59 WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS § 535-60
520:783

ARTICLE XIII
Planning Board
§ 535-61. Site development plan rules and regulations.
A. Authorization. Pursuant to General City Law, in all cases where this
chapter requires authorization and approval of site development plans
by the Planning Board or Building Official, no building permit and/or
certificate of occupancy/compliance shall be issued by the Building
Official except upon authorization of and in conformity with the plans
approved by the Planning Board or Building Official as hereinafter
provided.
B. Applicability.
(1) No site development plan approval shall be required for singlefamily
detached residential uses or for additions, alterations or
structures accessory thereto. All other principal uses, conditional
uses and expansions of nonconforming or noncomplying uses shall
require a site plan approval prior to the issuance of a building
permit or certificate of occupancy/compliance. No lot or parcel of
land shall be used except in conformity with an approved site
development plan, when required.
(2) Site plans for all permitted uses or uses permitted by right, and
expansions thereof, or changes of use which do not require a
variance or conditional use permit, or expansions of nonconforming
or noncomplying uses which do not require a variance and are
allowed in this chapter, shall be reviewed and approved by the
Building Official.
(3) Site plans for all conditional uses, or uses which require a variance,
shall be reviewed and approved by the Planning Board.
(4) Any approvals by the Building Official given pursuant to this
section shall be reported to the Planning Board at the next
regularly scheduled meeting of the Planning Board.
C. Application fee. All applications made to the Planning Board or Building
Official shall be in writing on forms prescribed by the Planning Board or
Building Official and shall be accompanied by a fee as determined by
the fee schedule of the City of Port Jervis.
(1) A site plan requiring Planning Board approval shall be submitted to
the Planning Board Secretary at least 14 days prior to the Planning
Board meeting at which review is sought. Of the 15 copies
required, the Building Official shall retain one copy and send two
copies to the Director of Public Works.
(2) A site plan requiring Building Official approval shall be submitted
to the Building Official with four copies.
§ 535-61 WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS § 535-61
520:785
D. Sketch plan. For purposes of an initial informal submission, the
applicant should provide a sketch plan with as much information as may
be required by the Planning Board to determine basic conformance
with applicable regulations and to determine the exact nature of
SEQRA review required. The sketch plan review by the Planning Board
shall not constitute a formal review, and no approval can be granted
based on it. At this time, the applicant should outline any modifications
he/she is requesting from the requirements specified herein. In the
event that a conditional use approval is required, or that a draft
environmental impact statement will be required to be submitted, the
Planning Board shall simultaneously consider all applications and
documents.
E. Preliminary approval. If a particular application is, in the opinion of the
Planning Board, of sufficient complexity to warrant review in stages,
the Planning Board may defer the submission of certain required
detailed engineering work at time of public hearing, rendering a
preliminary decision on the basis of a less than complete submission
and a final decision only on the basis of a complete submission (similar
to the review of a major subdivision according to the City Subdivision
Regulations).
F. Materials to be submitted. The following information must be submitted
to the Planning Board or Building Official for site plan approval, unless
items are specifically waived by the Planning Board or Building Official
as not being relevant to the particular site, building or use which is part
of the application.
(1) Map.
(a) General location: A location map at a minimum scale of one
inch equals 2,000 feet to indicate the relationship of the
proposed development to significant existing community
facilities which will serve or influence the layout, such as
shopping areas, schools, parks, employment centers, churches,
firehouses, etc.; also the relationship of the proposed
development to the nearest public roads on all four sides, and
the relationship to adjacent parcels, as well as all streams,
drainage and watercourses. This map (which may be based on
the pertinent tax map) shall be set into the site plan and shall
include a North point and indication of scale.
(b) Site plan. A map of the entire contiguous holding at a scale
preferably not less than one inch equals 200 feet indicating the
location of that portion which is to be developed in relation to
the entire tract, and the distance to the nearest existing street
intersection, showing the following:
[1] Acreage of each distinct land use and the proposed density
of each (if residential uses are proposed).
[2] The names of all owners of record of adjacent property.
§ 535-61 PORT JERVIS CODE § 535-61
520:786
[3] Existing school, zoning, and special district boundaries
within 100 feet of the tract.
[4] Boundaries of the property with surveyed dimensions.
[5] Location of all existing structures on the site as well as
those on adjacent property within 100 feet of the subject
lot lines.
[6] The proposed location, height, spacing and use of all
proposed and existing buildings, structures, and outdoor
signs and storage, if any.
[7] The proposed location of any use not requiring a structure,
including walkways, benches, fences, and recreational
facilities.
[8] Locations of existing and proposed usable open spaces and
recreational areas, and their landscaping.
[9] All existing and proposed means of vehicular access and
egress from the site, and all streets which are either
proposed, mapped or built.
[10] Location and design of all driveways, off-street open and
enclosed (if any) parking and loading areas, with the
number of stalls provided therewith, and curbing provided
or to be provided.
[11] Location of all existing and proposed waterlines, valves,
and hydrants, all sewer lines, and other utilities.
[12] Existing drainage features (e.g., culverts, marshes, ponds
and streams) of the property and within 100 feet thereof,
and the proposed storm drainage system.
[13] Existing and proposed fencing, landscaping, buffer strips
and screening, where required.
[14] Proposed location, direction and type of outdoor lighting.
[15] Existing and proposed contours with intervals of five feet
or less extending 100 feet beyond the tract, if grades
exceed 3%, or portions of the site have a moderate to high
susceptibility to erosion, or a moderate to high
susceptibility to flooding and ponding.
[16] Location of existing rocky outcrops, isolated trees over 12
inches in caliper and all trees over 24 inches in caliper,
orchards, hedges, and other ornamental landscaping,
wooded areas, stone walls, roads or lanes, power lines,
easements and other natural features and improvements
thereto on the property and within 100 feet thereof.
§ 535-61 WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS § 535-61
520:787
[17] Where the applicant wishes to develop the project in
stages, a site plan indicating ultimate development shall
be presented.
[18] Boundaries and identification of existing soil types as may
be found in Soil Survey of Orange County, New York.
(2) Supporting materials.
(a) A copy of each covenant, easement or deed restriction in effect
or intended to cover all or part of the tract.
(b) Letter of approval from the City Department of Public Works
relative to access to a public road under its jurisdiction.
(c) Written offers of easement to the City of Port Jervis or other
public agencies for purposes of stormwater drainage, utility
right-of-way, etc.
(d) A copy of the deed to the property as most recently filed and/or
a copy of the executed contract of sale.
(e) Plans and plan elevations, except structural and mechanical
plans, of all proposed or proposed to be altered buildings or
structures, or accessory structures, including all proposed
freestanding signs.
(f) In the case of uses requiring approval of the Orange County
Department of Health and/or New York State Department of
Environmental Conservation, the approval of said
Department(s).
(g) Accompanying statement setting forth the nature of all
proposed modifications of existing zoning provisions.
(h) Letters of review from the City Police Department and the City
Fire Department.
(i) Short (or long, as determined by the Planning Board) State
Environmental Quality Review Act (SEQRA) assessment form,
properly completed.
G. General considerations. In authorizing any use, the Planning Board or
Building Official shall take into consideration the public health, safety
and general welfare and the comfort and convenience of the public in
general and of the prospective occupants of the proposed development
and residents of the immediate neighborhood in particular and may
attach reasonable conditions and safeguards as a precondition to its
approval. The Board shall consider the special conditions set forth for
any use requiring Planning Board authorization in Article XIV and the
following general objectives:
§ 535-61 PORT JERVIS CODE § 535-61
520:788
(1) Traffic access. All proposed traffic accessways are adequate but not
excessive in number; adequate in width, grade, alignment and
visibility; not located too near street corners or other major access
points or places of public assembly; located on a roadway capable
of adequately and safely handling the additional traffic; and will
provide for other similar safety considerations.
(2) Circulation and parking. Adequate off-street parking and loading
spaces are provided to prevent parking in public streets of the
vehicles of any persons connected with or visiting the use and the
interior circulation system is adequate to provide safe accessibility
to all required off-street parking.
(3) Landscaping and screening. All recreation areas, parking and
service areas are reasonably screened at all seasons of the year
from the view of adjacent residential lots and streets and the
general landscaping of the site is in character with that generally
prevailing in the neighborhood. As approved by the Planning Board
or the Building Official, any such required landscaping and
screening shall be bonded, as provided for elsewhere in this
chapter. Existing trees over 12 inches in caliper should be
preserved to the maximum extent possible. Roadside plantings
shall be in conformance with the requirements of the City
Department of Public Works.204
(4) Character and appearance. The character and appearance of the
proposed use, buildings, and/or outdoor signs will be in general
harmony with the character and appearance of the surrounding
neighborhood and that of the City of Port Jervis and will not
adversely affect the general welfare of the inhabitants of the City of
Port Jervis, such determination to be made by the City's Design
Review Board. Signs and lights will be compatible and in scale with
building elements and will not represent significant impact on the
environment or result in a waste of the land and other natural
resources of the City. To the greatest possible extent, development
will be in harmony with the natural environment, and adequate
mitigating measures will be taken to offset potential significant
deterioration resulting from the project. Signs shall conform to
size, shape, color, materials and location as called for by the
Planning Board, the Design Review Board and/or the Building
Department.
(5) Development. The site development plan elements, including
buildings, parking, drainage, circulation, signs and lighting, will
not adversely affect the potential of adjacent properties or the
property under review from its highest and best use.
204. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 535-61 WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS § 535-61
520:789
(6) Fire and police protection. All proposed structures, equipment or
material shall be readily accessible for fire and police protection.
(7) Harmony. The proposed use shall be in such location, size and
character that, in general, it will be in harmony with the
appropriate and orderly development of the district in which it is
proposed to be situated and will not be detrimental to the orderly
development of adjacent properties in accordance with the zoning
classification of such properties.
(8) In or adjacent to residence district. In addition to the above, in the
case of any use located in, or directly adjacent to, a residence
district:
(a) The location and size of such use, the nature and intensity of
operations involved in or conducted in connection therewith,
its site layout and its relation to access streets shall be such
that both pedestrian and vehicular traffic to and from the use
and the assembly of persons in connection therewith will not
be hazardous or inconvenient to, or incongruous with, said
residence district or conflict with the normal traffic of the
neighborhood; and
(b) The location and height of buildings, the location, nature and
height of walls and fences, and the nature and extent of
landscaping on the site shall be such that the use will not
hinder or discourage the appropriate development and use of
adjacent land and buildings or impair the value thereof.
(9) Environmental consideration. The proposed use shall not have a
significant adverse environmental impact as defined by the New
York State Environmental Quality Act. In the event that any aspect
of the proposed use might have a significant environmental impact,
the Planning Board shall require either a special report of limited
scope, or a draft environmental impact statement of enlarged
scope, addressing the background information, the anticipated
impact(s), and the proposed mitigation measures.
(10) Dumpster enclosure and screening requirements. If a person or
commercial establishment as defined in Chapter 457 of the Code
uses or maintains a dumpster the following requirements for
enclosure or screening shall apply: [Added 10-28-2013 by L.L.
No. 8-2013]
(a) The enclosure shall provide complete visual screening.
(b) The enclosure shall be compatible in color with the principal
structure on the lot.
(c) The enclosure shall be a three-sided masonry or concrete
enclosure, six feet in height with a solid, swing-open gate, door
or fence made from a suitable material. The gate, door or fence
§ 535-61 PORT JERVIS CODE § 535-61
520:790
shall be equipped with an appropriate mechanism for holding
the doors open only during garbage pickup operation and shall
close securely.
(d) The enclosure and/or screening shall be kept in good repair or
condition and all garbage, refuse, rubbish or waste shall be
kept only within the container and permit the lids on said
container to remain completely closed at all times.
(e) The Planning Board may also require a roof if the site is sloped
and adjoining neighbors are at a higher elevation, making the
containers visible.
(f) Any other requirements with respect to dumpsters or solid
waste as defined in Chapter 457 of the Code shall also apply.
H. Public hearing. The Planning Board shall not authorize any use
requiring approval of plans by the Planning Board without first holding
a public hearing. Notice of the hearing and the substance of the
application shall be given by publication in the official newspaper of the
City at least 10 days before the date of such hearing. In addition to such
published notice, the applicant shall cause notice to be given of the
substance of the application together with notice of the hearing thereon
by causing notices thereof to be mailed (certified mail, return receipt
requested) at least 10 days before the date of the hearing to the owners
of the property abutting that of the applicant and all other owners of
property within 300 feet, or such additional distance as the Planning
Board may deem advisable, from the exterior boundaries of the land
involved in such application, as the names of said owners appear on the
last completed assessment roll of the City. At the discretion of the
Planning Board, the Secretary of the Planning Board or the applicant
shall furnish proof of compliance with the notification procedure, all
costs required and fees assessed by the Secretary of the Planning Board
to be borne by the applicant. Any or all of the notices required by this
section shall be issued by the Secretary of the Planning Board on order
of the Planning Board or upon order of the Chairperson of the Board if
the application is received when the Board is not in session and the
Chairperson deems it necessary or desirable to expedite the public
hearing on such application. Provided that due notice shall have been
published as above provided and that there shall have been substantial
compliance with the remaining provisions of this section, the failure to
give notice in exact conformance herewith shall not be deemed to
invalidate any action taken by the Planning Board. This same public
hearing may serve the purposes of SEQRA, the contents of the draft
environmental impact statement (if required) also being the proper
subject of public comment.
I. Notification of adjacent municipality. If the land involved in any
application lies within 500 feet of the boundary of any other
municipality, the City Clerk-Treasurer shall also transmit to the
municipal clerk of such other municipality a copy of the official notice of
§ 535-61 WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS § 535-61
520:791
public hearing thereon not later than the day after such notice appears
in the official newspaper of the City.
J. Referral to county. Should any proposed site plan approval, conditional
use approval, or special permit consist of or include any of the following
conditions, the Planning Board shall notify the City Clerk-Treasurer,
who shall, prior to final action by said Board, refer the proposal to the
Orange County Planning Department in accordance with §§ 239-1 and
239-m of Article 12-B of the General Municipal Law on the form titled
"County Zoning Referral."
(1) Any site development plan involving real property lying within a
distance of 500 feet from:
(a) The boundary of any village or town.
(b) The boundary of any state park or other recreation area.
(c) The right-of-way of any county or state parkway, thruway,
expressway, or other controlled access highway.
(d) The right-of-way of any stream or drainage channel owned by
the county or for which the county has established channel
lines.
(e) The boundary of any county- or state-owned land on which a
public institution is located.
K. Action on application. Within 62 days after the date of such hearing, the
Planning Board shall approve with or without modification or
disapprove such site plan, and the grounds of a modification, if any, or
the grounds for disapproval shall be stated upon the records of the
Planning Board. Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions, the time in
which the Planning Board must take action on such site plan may be
extended by mutual consent of the applicant and the Planning Board.
When so approving a site plan, the Planning Board shall state in writing
such revisions, if any, as it deems necessary to be made prior to
submission of the site plan in final form for signature by the
Chairperson. An approval of a site development plan by the Planning
Board shall expire unless a building permit is secured within six months
of the approval and unless actual construction is begun within nine
months of the approval. The decision of the Planning Board shall be
certified by the Chairperson of the Planning Board and filed in the office
of the City Clerk-Treasurer and a copy thereof mailed to the
applicant.205
L. Improvements. The Planning Board shall require that on- or off-site
improvements be installed, including but not limited to on- or off-site
drainage systems to ensure that all drainage, storm runoff and
205. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 535-61 PORT JERVIS CODE § 535-61
520:792
subsurface water are carried into approved watercourses and drainage
systems shown on the Official Map. The Planning Board shall further
require that all such off-site improvements and/or drainage systems be
installed on property granted to the City by fee, easement or otherwise,
as determined by the Planning Board.
(1) No certificate of occupancy/compliance shall be issued for the site
until all the improvements shown on the site development plan,
including off-site requirements required by the site development
plan, have been duly installed and all easements and property
interests granted or dedicated to the City.
(2) A partial certificate of occupancy/compliance for a period of 90
days, but not more than one year in the aggregate, for a building,
structure or part thereof may be issued before all the on-site
improvements are complete; provided, nonetheless, that such
portion or portions of the site improvements as are necessary to
permit the site to be occupied safely without endangering life or
the public welfare have been completed. The Building Official shall
require a cash deposit to insure and guarantee the completion of
the on-site improvements. The Building Official or the Planning
Board's professional consultants shall determine the sum of such
cash deposit.
M. Field changes. The site shall be developed in strict conformity with the
approved site development plan, except as provided for below. When
the approval of a minor field change is requested of the Building Official
or other appropriate City agency, such request shall be submitted to the
appropriate inspecting agency in writing. No field change shall be valid
unless a copy of the requested change is filed with the Planning Board
or Building Official, with the approval of the appropriate agency noted
thereon or appended thereto, within five days of such approval. Such
change shall be deemed acceptable if not acted upon by the Planning
Board within 45 days or Building Official within five days.
N. Signing of plan.
(1) Upon submission of the final site development plan with
modifications required by the Planning Board or Building Official in
its final approval and upon satisfaction of any conditions imposed
by such approval, the Chairperson of the Planning Board or
Building Official shall sign the approved site development plan and
file one copy with the Building Official, who may thereafter issue a
building permit or certificate of occupancy/compliance in reliance
thereon.
(2) After approval is granted, with or without conditions, to any site
plan the applicant or his representative shall present the plan to
the Planning Board for signature of the Planning Board
Chairperson within 60 days after the vote granting approval or
conditional approval. If the plan is not presented in final approved
§ 535-61 WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS § 535-61
520:793
§ 535-62. Stated policy relative to the Central Business and Service
Commercial Districts.
form within said 60 days, the site plan approval shall be deemed
null and void.
O. Renewal of permit. The Board may require that its approval be
periodically renewed. Such renewal shall be granted and may be
withheld only upon a determination by the Building Official to the effect
that such conditions as may have been prescribed by the Board in
conjunction with the issuance of the original permit have not been, or
are being no longer, complied with. In such cases, a period of 60 days
shall be granted the applicant for full compliance prior to the
revocation of said permit. Any use authorized by the Planning Board
shall be deemed to be a conforming use in the district in which such is
located, provided that:
(1) The provision in this chapter under which such permit was issued is
still in effect;
(2) Such permit was issued in conformity with the provisions of this
chapter; and
(3) Such permit shall be deemed to affect only the lot or portion
thereof for which such permit shall have been granted.
P. Maintenance. It shall be the duty of every property owner to maintain
his/her property in conformity with the approved site development plan.
Failure to do so may constitute a violation of this chapter, resulting in
civil or criminal penalties, forfeiture of bonds, suspension of
consideration of all applications before the Planning Board relating to
the same property, and other remedies deemed necessary by the
appropriate authorities.
Q. Expansion of existing structure subsequent to site plan review and
approval. Any principal or accessory structure incorporated within a
site plan approved by the Planning Board and granted a special use
permit under the provisions of this section subsequently may be
expanded by not more than 15% of its ground floor area in square feet,
upon the granting of a duly issued building permit. Enlargement of any
such structure by more than 15% of its ground floor area in square feet
requires approval by the Planning Board acting upon a new application
under the full provisions of the section.
A. Policy. Relative to the Central Business and Service Commercial
Districts, it is the stated policy of the City of Port Jervis to:
(1) Achieve a dynamic mix of higher-density uses that will generate a
high level of mutually beneficial interrelationships between the
business community and its clients/customers and within the
business community itself.
§ 535-61 PORT JERVIS CODE § 535-62
520:794
(2) Provide an ample supply of decent housing for those who would
most benefit from being able to walk to places of employment and
to places providing goods and services, thus enriching the vitality
of the area through a strong resident population.
(3) Achieve a reasonable pedestrian scale (with circulation assisted by
sidewalks, malls, bridges, elevated walkways, mini parks, etc.) that
encourages walking between two or more places of business and
that encourages lingering and relaxing out-of-doors as weather
permits.
(4) Provide an adequate supply of short- and long-term municipal and
private parking to serve customers, merchants, employees,
residents, tourists, and commuters.
(5) Generate a sufficient tax base that will support a high level of
public services and amenities
B. Effectuation. In order to effectuate this policy, the Planning Board, in
performing site plan reviews and in issuing conditional use permits,
shall be guided by the following considerations:
(1) Multistory, multi-use structures. The scale of operation of the
Central Business and Service Commercial Districts requires an
optimum high density of usage for each and every property located
therein. In order to support the higher costs of traffic control and
parking facilities, pedestrian circulation, street furniture and
lighting, and police and fire protection, multistoried and, wherever
appropriate, multi-use structures should be encouraged, but not
required.
(2) Accessory residential uses. In addition to owner/caretakeroccupied
residences accessory to principal uses this chapter
encourages residential apartments on the second floor and above
in multistoried, multi-use structures. To achieve this intention, the
Planning Board shall:
(a) Discourage any single-storied structures.
(b) Permit no dwelling units on the first (or ground) floor.
(c) Require off-street parking to be provided at the standard of one
parking space per dwelling unit.
(d) Require usable open space (exterior) and common lounge/
recreation area (interior) to be provided for all structures
containing three or more dwelling units.
(e) Require the provision of an enclosed refuse collection area.
(f) Require the provision of a centralized coin-operated facility, if
laundry facilities (washer and dryer) are not provided within
§ 535-62 WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS § 535-62
520:795
each dwelling unit. (No external clothes drying shall be
permitted.)
(g) Require the provision of safety protection devices (perforated
plexiglass or childproof ornamental bars) for all openable
windows above the first floor.
(h) Require a design that assures that all deliveries will be made to
the rear of the building, where possible.
(3) Parking.
(a) The developers of all existing structures which cover 75% or
more of the parcel on which they are located, in which a
change of use is proposed or which is proposed for
enlargement, and which is not able to provide the requisite
number of on-site parking spaces set by this chapter, shall not
be required to provide off-street parking. However, no existing
parking spaces may be eliminated. The developers of all new
structures on vacant lots shall meet the requisite number of onsite
parking spaces. For existing structures occupying less
than 75% of a lot the developer shall provide as many parking
spaces as possible.
(b) In calculating required parking spaces for an expansion, the
applicant shall only be required to provide the number of
spaces needed for the expansion area. In the case of a change
of use, parking spaces are only required if the new use has a
greater parking requirement that the previous use, and then
only the additional number of spaces shall be required.
(c) Laundromats within the Central Business District must have at
least 10 on-site parking spaces available for customers.
[Added 8-27-2007 by L.L. No. 9-2007]
(d) The purpose of this Subsection B(3)(d) is to allow gymnasiums,
physical fitness centers and/or health club facilities as
conditional uses within the Central Business District, provided
that at least 30 on-site parking spaces for customers are
available. [Added 6-22-2009 by L.L. No. 6-2009]
(e) The purpose of this Subsection B(3)(e) is to allow self-storage
warehouses as conditional uses within the Central Business
District, provided that at least 10 on-site parking spaces for
customers are available. [Added 12-28-2009 by L.L. No.
10-2009]
(4) Loading facilities. The standards of § 535-48 of this chapter shall
prevail relative to deliveries to, and shipping from, all new or
enlarged structures in the Central Business and Service
Commercial District. In order to avoid, to the greatest extent
possible, the use of City streets and sidewalks for these purposes,
§ 535-62 PORT JERVIS CODE § 535-62
520:796
the Planning Board shall assist the applicant in exploring all
possible alternatives, including joint ventures among two or more
property owners in the provision of alleys via which loading
facilities would obtain access.
§ 535-62 WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS § 535-62
520:797

ARTICLE XIV
Conditional Use Standards
§ 535-63. Authorization of conditional uses.
On application, and after public notice and hearing, the Planning Board may
authorize the issuance by the Building Official of permits for any of the
conditional uses for which this chapter requires such permits, in the district
in which such use is proposed to be located. In approving any such use, the
Planning Board shall take into consideration the public health, safety, and
welfare and the comfort and convenience of the public in general and of the
residents of the immediate neighborhood in particular and may prescribe
such appropriate conditions and safeguards as may be required in order
that the result of its action shall, to the maximum extent possible, further
the expressed intent of this chapter.
A. Conditional use rules and regulations. The procedure for obtaining a
conditional use permit shall be identical to that of site development
plans and shall be conducted concurrently where applicable. The
Planning Board may, at its discretion, waive any of the rules or
regulations it considers not pertinent to conditional use approval.
B. Conforming use. Any use for which a conditional use permit may be
required shall be deemed to be a conforming use in the district in which
such use is located, except as provided below, provided that such
permit shall affect only the lot or portion thereof for which such permit
shall have been granted.
C. Nonconforming use of open land. In its review of the nonconforming
use of open land, the Planning Board may impose only such reasonable
conditions, including but not limited to the placing of fencing and
screening, as will minimize the impact such open use has upon
surrounding residential properties. In such cases the Planning Board
may also permit reasonable changes in existing structures on the land,
within the limitations of the district in which said use is located, for the
purpose of reducing the nonconforming open use of the land.
D. Periodic renewal. The Planning Board may require that conditional use
permits be periodically renewed. Such renewal shall be granted
following a due public notice and hearing and may be withheld only
upon a determination by the Planning Board to the effect that such
conditions as may have been prescribed by the Planning Board in
conjunction with the issuance of the original permit have not been, or
are being no longer, complied with. In such cases a period of 60 days
shall be granted the applicant for full compliance prior to the
revocation of said permit. The sixty-day time period for full compliance
only applies for the first violation. If any subsequent violation occurs the
conditional use permit will be revoked.
§ 535-63 WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS § 535-64
520:799
§ 535-64. General requirements.
Prior to approving any conditional use, the Planning Board shall determine
the conformity of such use and the proposed development therefor with
the conditions and standards as set forth in this chapter, including the
conditions and standards as set forth for site development plans. Conditions
prerequisite to approval of such uses are of a general and specific nature.
In various provisions of this chapter, specific standards are enumerated for
certain uses, which standards shall be the minimum conditions for such use.
The general conditions and standards for conditional use approval are as
follows:
A. Harmony. The proposed use shall be of such location, size and character
that it will be in harmony with the appropriate and orderly development
of the district in which it is proposed to be situated and shall not be
detrimental to the site or adjacent properties in accordance with the
zoning classification of such properties.
B. Traffic. The location and size of such use, the nature and intensity of
operations involved in or conducted in connection therewith, its site
layout, and its relation to access streets shall be such that both
pedestrian and vehicular traffic to and from the use and the assembly of
persons in connection therewith will not be hazardous.
C. Adjacent land and buildings. The location and height of buildings, the
location, nature and height of walls and fences, and the nature and
extent of landscaping on the site shall be such that the use will not
hinder or discourage the development and use of adjacent land and
buildings.
D. Fire and police protection. All proposed structures, equipment, or
material shall be readily accessible for fire and police protection.
E. Public facilities and services required. The proposed use will not
require such additional public facilities or services or create fiscal
burdens upon the City greater than those which characterize uses
permitted by right.
F. Inspection. As a condition of all conditional use permits, right of entry
for inspection with reasonable notice shall be provided for to determine
compliance with the conditions of said permit.
G. Time limitation for completion. As a condition of all conditional use
permits, a time limitation for completion of proposed plans may be
imposed.
H. Additional standards. In addition to the general standards for
conditional use permits as set forth above, the approving board may, as
a condition of approval of any such use, establish any other additional
standards, conditions and requirements, including a limitation on hours
of operation, as it may deem necessary or appropriate to promote the
§ 535-64 PORT JERVIS CODE § 535-64
520:800
§ 535-65. Public utilities.
Nothing in this chapter shall restrict the construction or use of underground
or overhead distribution conduits of public utilities operating under the laws
of the State of New York. However, public utility structures, water supply
reservoirs, wells, sewage treatment plants, water treatment facilities and
transmission lines and towers for electric power, telephone and gas are
subject to the following supplementary requirements:
§ 535-66. Membership clubs.
Membership clubs are subject to the following supplementary regulations:
public health, safety, and welfare and to otherwise implement the intent
of this chapter.
A. Public necessity. These uses shall be subject to a finding that a public
necessity exists for such use and that use of the particular site for which
application is made is necessary from the public standpoint.
B. Within residential districts. Public utility buildings and electrical
substations are permitted in a residential district only when the
location within such district is necessary for the furnishing of service to
customers, and provided that no business offices, warehouses,
construction or repair shops or garage facilities are included, and
provided that the Planning Board approves such application in
accordance with the provisions of this section and § 535-61.
C. Fencing. The Planning Board may require that such use be enclosed by
protective fencing with a gate, which shall be closed and locked except
when necessary for authorized personnel to obtain access thereto.
D. Harmony with surroundings. The installation shall be so designed,
enclosed, painted and screened with evergreens that it will be
harmonious with the area in which it is located. The entire property
shall be suitably landscaped and maintained in reasonable conformity
with the standards of property maintenance of the surrounding
neighborhood.
E. Off-street parking. Adequate off-street parking areas shall exist or be
provided for maintenance, service, or other vehicles.
F. Interference with reception. In appropriate cases, satisfactory evidence
shall be submitted establishing that there will be no interference with
radio and television reception on adjoining property in the
neighborhood.
A. Private nature. The privileges of any club shall be limited to bona fide
regularly enrolled members and their guests. The club shall be
operated solely for recreational, social, or athletic purposes and not for
pecuniary gain.
§ 535-64 WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS § 535-66
520:801
§ 535-67. Hotels and motels.
Hotels and motels are subject to the following supplementary regulations.
B. Lawn parking. The Planning Board may reduce the parking
requirement, provided that the club facilities are so laid out that there
are lawn areas that could accommodate temporary overflow parking.
C. Existing building. The Planning Board may permit the use of any
existing building meeting the setback requirements of this chapter for
club purposes, provided that the club meets all other standards and
requirements of this chapter.
D. Public address systems. The Planning Board may permit the use of
outdoor public address systems, provided that no more sound shall
carry beyond the limits of the club site than would be inherent in the
ordinary residential use of the property.
E. Nuisance. No club shall be operated so as to create a nuisance to
surrounding properties. The Planning Board may require such facilities
as are required to protect neighbors from any nuisances or hazards
which would be inherent in the operation of the club.
F. Caretaker. One dwelling unit may be located in the clubhouse for the
use of a caretaker and his/her family.
G. Change of use. A conditional use approval shall be issued to a qualified
organization for a specific use or purpose and for a maximum number of
members or seating capacity, and a new approval shall be required for
any change of organization, use or purpose or increase in maximum
membership or seating capacity.
A. Nonresidential units. Hotel and motel units shall not contain kitchen
facilities of any nature, shall not be used as apartments for nontransient
tenants, shall not contain more than two rooms and shall not be
connected by interior doors in groups of more than two.
B. Site area. There shall be no more than one hotel or motel unit for each
3,000 square feet of site area exclusive of the area between the lot lines
and the minimum required setback lines.
C. Room size. Each hotel or motel room shall have an area of at least 300
square feet. Each hotel or motel unit shall have a bath facility with a
shower and/or bath, one toilet facility and a sink. No hotel or motel
building shall exceed the height of 35 feet.
D. Accessory uses. The following accessory uses shall be permitted:
(1) One apartment for the use of the manager or caretaker and his/her
family.
§ 535-66 PORT JERVIS CODE § 535-67
520:802
§ 535-68. Motor vehicle service stations.
Motor vehicles service stations are subject to the following supplementary
requirements:
(2) One coffee shop for hotels and motels with no more than 25 rooms.
For hotels or motels with more than 25 rooms, a restaurant with
bar facilities and a coffee shop are permitted.
(3) Amusement and sports facilities for the use of the hotel and motel
guests, including:
(a) Swimming pool.
(b) Children's playground.
(c) Tennis and other game courts.
(d) Game or recreation rooms.
(4) Office and lobby, provision of which shall be mandatory for each
hotel or motel.
(5) Meeting and/or conference rooms and banquet facilities.
E. Fire protection. All hotels and motels shall be equipped with sprinkler
and fire alarm systems.
A. Proximity. No station shall be located closer than 200 feet to a school,
public recreation area, church or hospital, measured to the lot lines
thereof.
B. Access. Access points shall be located a minimum of 100 feet from the
intersection of designated street lines.
C. Setbacks. Pumps, pump islands and canopies are structures and shall
not be located within any required setbacks. No outdoor display of
products not associated with the service station use shall be permitted.
D. Screening. A ten-foot-wide landscaped area shall be provided along all
motor vehicle service station property lines, excluding the front line,
property lines adjacent to existing commercial uses and access points.
E. Maintenance and operation. Due to the extent of land use impacts from
such stations which are a product of exterior operations, the following
requirements shall be made and noted on the site development plan:
(1) All vehicles except one tow truck shall be stored within a building
when the facilities are not open for business. However, licensed
vehicles parked for minor repairs may be left outside for a period
not to exceed 72 hours. At no time shall any unlicensed or
dismantled vehicles be outside a building. No car, truck or trailer
rentals or sales shall be permitted.
§ 535-67 WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS § 535-68
520:803
§ 535-69. Motor vehicle, boat and trailer sales.
Motor vehicle, boat and trailer sales establishments are subject to the
following supplementary requirements:
§ 535-70. Multiple dwellings.
Multiple dwellings are subject to the following supplementary
requirements:
(2) There shall not be any outside storage or display of accessories or
portable signs when the facility is not open for business.
(3) Waste materials may be temporarily stored in a completely fencedin
opaque enclosure adjacent to the facility. The area of such
enclosure shall not exceed 200 square feet.
(4) No repair work may be performed out of doors, with the exception
of simple repairs normally performed in conjunction with the sale
of gasoline, such as adding oil.
A. Repair work. All repair work is done within a totally enclosed
soundproof building.
B. Outdoor storage. The outdoor storage of motor vehicles, boats and
trailers is limited to new motor vehicles, boats and trailers for sale on
the premises and used motor vehicles, boats and trailers acquired as
trade-ins upon new vehicles sold on the premises.
C. Primacy of sale of new motor vehicles, boats and trailers. The permitted
repair shop, motor vehicle, boat and trailer storage and used motor
vehicle, boat and trailer sales shall continue so long as the sale of new
motor vehicles, boats and trailers continues and all are conducted
under the same ownership as one enterprise.
D. Exterior lighting. Outdoor area lighting generally shall be that
necessary for security purposes, and lighting for illuminating an
outdoor sales area shall be restricted to the front 1/2 of the lot depth,
shall not be permitted in the front setback, and shall be reduced to
security lighting at the close of business. All outdoor lighting shall be
located at a height not more than 14 feet above ground level and shall
be so directed and shielded that the beams are directed vertically to the
ground or to the front of the lot and no source of illumination shall be
visible beyond lot lines.
E. Screening. Additional evergreen buffer must be provided around all
storage or repair areas if the same abuts the side or rear yards of
adjacent residential property.206
206. Editor's Note: Original § 158-69, Satellite dish antennas, which immediately followed this
section, was deleted at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
§ 535-68 PORT JERVIS CODE § 535-70
520:804
A. Compatibility. Multiple dwellings and related accessory structures shall
not be approved by the Planning Board without first determining that
the location of the proposed use, the structures proposed, and the
general character of the development are compatible with their
surroundings and such other requirements as this chapter may apply.
The maximum density that may be approved by the Planning Board is
indicated in Subsection C(3) below. In consideration of the resources
and physical conditions of the site and the general character of the
area, the Planning Board may determine that a lower density should be
permitted.
B. Ownership. The entire site occupied by a multiple dwelling and related
accessory structures shall be maintained in single or group ownership
or common control throughout the life of the development.
C. Intensity of use. Based on consideration of the following criteria, the
Planning Board shall determine the maximum number of dwelling units
that the site is capable of supporting without causing adverse effects to
the resources of the City:
(1) The maximum number of dwelling units that may be approved in a
development of multiple dwellings shall be computed by dividing
the usable area in acres of the site by the sum of the lot area
requirements for all dwelling units, based on habitable rooms in
each dwelling unit, as provided in Subsection C(3) below.
(2) The usable area of the site shall not include those portions of the
site that are occupied by water bodies, wetlands, floodplains, high
tides, slopes in excess of 20%, rights-of-way of existing public or
private roads, and utility easements that would prevent use or
development of the underlying land in any manner.
(3) Maximum density.
Habitable Rooms in
Dwelling Unit
Lot Area Requirements for
Dwelling Unit
(square feet)
1 2,000
2 2,500
3 3,000
4 or more 3,500
(4) The maximum number of dwelling units shall not be approved
unless, in the judgment of the Planning Board, the site plan
indicates adequate design and management of open space areas
according to all of the following criteria:
(a) Provision of recreation facilities.
§ 535-70 WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS § 535-70
520:805
(b) Protection or enhancement of the resources of the site,
including landforms, soils, water bodies, and natural
vegetation.
(c) Protection or enhancement of scenic quality.
D. Site planning standards.
(1) Access facilities shall be adequate for the estimated traffic to and
from the site to assure the public safety and to avoid traffic
congestion in the surrounding neighborhoods.
(2) Vehicular entrances and exits shall be clearly visible from the street
and shall be at least 125 feet from any street intersection. At the
intersection of such entrances and exits with the main street, sight
distances along the main street shall be at least 300 feet in each
direction.
(3) The distance between the rear of the principal building and any
other principal building shall not be less than 100 feet, nor less
than twice the height of the taller building.
(4) The distance between the side of a principal building and the side
of any other principal building shall not be less than the height of
the taller of the two buildings.
(5) The site shall be served by central sewer and water facilities which
shall be approved by all agencies having jurisdiction.
(6) Any parking or garage area, service or drying yard, or active
recreation area shall be screened so as to adequately protect the
view of neighboring properties as well as to assure an attractive
environment within the site.
(7) There shall be provided on any multiple dwelling site usable open
space at the rate of 700 square feet per dwelling unit. Utilizing the
latest edition of The New Practitioner's Guide to Fiscal Impact
Analysis, published by the Center for Urban Policy Research of
Rutgers University, Exhibit 17, Regional and National Demographic
Multipliers for Common Configurations of Standard Housing Types
for Pre-School Children, there shall be provided usable open space
for the outdoor play of younger children at the rate of 100 square
feet per one preschool age child (or fraction thereof) projected as
being generated by the proposed housing type(s) according to the
proposed number of bedrooms per unit. Such outdoor play area for
children shall not be less than 25 feet in its least dimension and
shall be preserved and maintained by the owner or homes'
association and may be suitably fenced or screened by plantings.
Such outdoor play area for children may be counted as part of the
required usable open space area per dwelling unit.
§ 535-70 PORT JERVIS CODE § 535-70
520:806
§ 535-71. Accessory apartments; conversion of existing dwellings to
multifamily use.
(8) In any multiple dwelling development, front, rear and side yards
shall be established for each block bounded by streets.
(9) A buffer strip shall be provided between any multiple dwelling site
and the adjacent properties in any residential districts. The buffer
strip shall be at least 50 feet in depth, of which a maximum of 20
feet may be used for parking, and the 30 feet closest to the
property line shall contain plantings, either existing or proposed,
sufficient to screen the multiple dwelling site from adjacent uses.
(10)No off-street parking areas or spaces shall be located in any such
front yard or within 30 feet of any side or rear lot line of the overall
site.
A. Accessory apartment.
(1) An accessory apartment may be permitted in any R-1, R-2, and R-O
Residence District, provided that:
(a) The lot meets the requirements of the zoning district for a twofamily
home.
(b) Adequate off-street parking is available.
(c) Adequate water supply and sewage disposal facilities are
available.
(d) The accessory apartment contains at least 600 square feet and
not over 800 square feet of usable floor area.
(2) The accessory apartment may be owner- or caretaker-occupied. In
making the conversion, the property owner must comply with the
requirements of §§ 535-61 and 535-62 of this chapter. These
sections deal with site development plan rules and regulations.
Since the office use is a commercial use, site plan approval is
required. The Planning Board shall review proposed parking, traffic
access, landscaping and screening, appearance, development
proposals, environmental considerations and impact on the
neighborhood as a result of the proposed conversion. [Amended
9-12-2005 by L.L. No. 4-2005]
B. Conversion of an existing dwelling. An existing dwelling may be
converted to a two-family dwelling or multiple dwelling, provided that:
(1) In the R-1 Zone:
(a) Conversion of a dwelling erected prior to the enactment of this
chapter to a two-family dwelling shall be governed only by the
requirements as to lot area per dwelling, livable floor area, and
off-street parking.
§ 535-70 WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS § 535-71
520:807
(b) The exterior of any building to be converted to two-family use
shall not be enlarged, extended or altered, except as permitted
by the Planning Board.
(2) In the R-2 and R-O Zones:
(a) Conversion of a dwelling erected prior to the enactment of this
chapter to more intensive residential use shall be governed
only by the requirements as to lot area per dwelling, livable
floor area, and off-street parking.
(b) The maximum number of dwelling units that may be permitted
in any conversion to multiple dwelling use shall be as set forth
in § 535-70C(3) of this chapter, but in no case shall the number
of units permitted exceed the number permitted under the
Table of Bulk Requirements, Column P.207
(c) The exterior of any dwelling to be converted to multiple
dwelling use shall not be enlarged, extended or altered, except
as required for compliance with the New York State Multiple
Dwelling Law.
207. Editor's Note: The Table of Bulk Requirements is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 535-71 PORT JERVIS CODE § 535-71
520:808
ARTICLE XV
Enforcement
§ 535-72. Building permit.
No building in any district shall be erected, reconstructed, or restored, or
structurally altered, without a building permit duly issued upon application
to the Building Official. No building permit shall be issued unless the
proposed structure or use is in full conformity with all the provisions of
this chapter. Any building permit issued in violation of the provisions of
this chapter shall be null or void and of no effect, without the necessity
for any proceedings for revocation or nullification thereof, and any work
undertaken or use established pursuant to any such irregularly issued
permit shall be unlawful.
A. Information of application. Every application for a building permit shall
contain the following information and be accompanied by the required
fee and by a plot plan drawn to scale and signed by the person
responsible for such drawing. If no such plot plan is available, a survey,
prepared by a New York State licensed engineer or land surveyor, is
required.
(1) The actual shape, dimensions, radii, angles, and area of the lot on
which the building is proposed to be erected, or of the lot on which
it is situated (if an existing building);
(2) The section, block and lot numbers as they appear on the latest tax
records;
(3) The exact size and locations on the lot of the proposed building or
buildings or alteration of an existing building and of other existing
buildings on the same lot;
(4) The dimensions of all setbacks in relation to the subject building
and the distances between such building and any other existing
buildings on the same lot;
(5) The existing and intended use of all buildings, existing or proposed,
the use of land and the number of dwelling units the building is
designed to accommodate; and
(6) Such topographic or other information with regard to the building,
the lot or neighboring lots as may be necessary to determine that
the proposed construction will conform to the provisions of this
chapter.
B. Access. No building permit shall be issued for the construction or
alteration of any building upon a lot without access to a street or
highway as stipulated in New York State General City Law.
C. Site plan approval. No building permit shall be issued for any building
subject to site plan approval by the Planning Board, or subject to review
§ 535-72 WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS § 535-72
520:809
by the Design Review Board, except in conformity with the plans
approved by either or both of said boards, as appropriate.
D. Conditional use permit. No building permit shall be issued for a
building to be used for any conditional use in any district where such
use is subject to approval by the Planning Board unless and until such
approval has been duly granted by the Planning Board.
E. Variance. No building permit shall be issued for a building permitted
subject to a variance granted by the Zoning Board of Appeals except in
accordance with all conditions which may have been prescribed by such
Board.
F. Copies. The building permit application and all supporting
documentation shall be made in such number of copies as may be
required by the Building Official. On the issuance of a building permit,
the Building Official shall return one copy of all filed documents to the
applicant.
G. Action. The Building Official shall, within 10 days after the filing of a
complete and properly prepared application, either issue or deny a
building permit. If a building permit is denied, the Building Official shall
state in writing to the applicant the reason for such denial.
H. Expiration. Every building permit shall expire if the work authorized
has not been commenced within three months after the date of
issuance, or has not been completed 12 months from such date for
construction costing less than $1,000,000, and has not been completed
within 18 months from such date for construction cost in excess of that
amount. If no amendments to this chapter or to other codes or
regulations affecting subject property have been enacted in the interim,
the Building Official may authorize, in writing, the extension of either of
the above periods for an additional six months, following which no
further work is to be undertaken without a new building permit.
I. Location survey. As soon as the foundation of a building or of any
addition to an existing building is completed, and before first story
framing or wall construction is begun, there shall be filed with the
Building Official an accurate survey signed by the person responsible
for said survey, showing the exact location of such foundation with
respect to the street and property lines of the lot, as well as the
locations of water service and sewer service lines, if applicable.
J. Fees.208
(1) General. Fees for various functions and services of the Building
Official, Building Department and Planning Board shall be as
provided in Chapter 280, Fees.
208. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 535-72 PORT JERVIS CODE § 535-72
520:810
(2) Renewal or extension of building permits. In the event that an
individual holding a building permit fails to complete the work
covered by the permit prior to the expiration of the permit, a fee
equal to twice the fee charged for the prior permit will be required
on the permit renewal. The fee will be double the prior fee each
time a renewal is required. This requirement shall take effect on
September 1, 2003.
(3) Mailing lists and lot coverage information for Planning Board and
Zoning Board of Appeals.
(a) A fee as provided in Chapter 280, Fees, shall be paid to the City
Assessor's office for mailing lists of property owners for
Planning Board and Zoning Board of Appeals applications.
(b) A fee as provided in Chapter 280, Fees, shall be paid to the City
Assessor's office for a record search on lot coverage of specific
properties for a Zoning Board of Appeals applicant. Where the
lot coverage information is requested on the same property
owners that would be on the mailing list [Subsection J(3)(a)
above] the fee will include the mailing list and lot coverage
information. Where the lot coverage owners list and
information is different from the mailing list, fees as provided
in Chapter 280, Fees, shall be paid for the lot coverage
information and for the mailing list.
K. Any property owner, owner's agent, architect, engineer or contractor
found to have started to construct, erect, reconstruct, restore, repair,
renovate, alter or structurally alter any structure without a proper
building permit and all necessary documents as required by this
chapter and 19 NYCRR 444 shall be required to pay triple all prescribed
fees set above.
L. If, in the opinion of the Building Official or his representative, it is
determined that the actual cost of construction exceeded the amount
set forth in the application for the building permit by more than 20%, he
shall not be obligated to issue a certificate of occupancy until the
additional fee is paid.
M. Inspection(s) requested of the Building Official or his representative, by
the Department of Social Services or any other governmental agency
shall not be done unless the fee for said inspection(s) is paid in advance
by the owner of the structure to be inspected. The fee shall be as
provided in Chapter 280, Fees. Payment must be made by cash,
certified check, cashier's check or money order. Canceled inspections
will result in the City's retaining an administrative fee as provided in
Chapter 280, Fees, but refunding the balance to the owner. [Amended
2-26-2007 by L.L. No. 2-2007]
§ 535-72 WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS § 535-72
520:811
§ 535-73. Certificate of occupancy/compliance.
N. Sidewalk and curb installations for new construction and/or substantial
redevelopment of existing building sites. [Added 11-27-2006 by L.L.
No. 4-2006]
(1) The location of existing and/or proposed adjacent curbs, driveway
aprons and sidewalks shall be shown on the plot plan drawn to
scale. Proposed curbs, driveway aprons and sidewalks shall be
installed in compliance with installation details required for same
by the City of Port Jervis Department of Public Works. Corner lots
shall provide compliant handicap curb ramps at each corner or
designated crosswalk adjacent to a Port Jervis City street compliant
with the Americans with Disabilities Act of July 26, 1990, and all
amendments thereto.
(2) Sidewalk and driveway apron material shall be a suitable
impervious surface, i.e., blacktop, bluestone slate, concrete or
paver materials specifically manufactured for use as a walking
surface.
(3) Curbing shall be concrete installed as detailed above. Substitutes
for concrete curbing shall be approved by the Director of the
Department of Public Works or his representative prior to
installation. Compliance with the above requirements must be
gained prior to issuance of final certificate of occupancy by the
Building Official or his representative for all new construction and/
or substantial redevelopment of existing building site(s).
(4) Exception: If, due to existing site or street conditions, the above
requirements create a hazard, detriment or undue hardship of any
kind, the property owner must gain a waiver in writing from the
Director of the Department of Public Works or his representative
prior to requesting final inspection for a certificate of occupancy
from the Building Official or his representative.
A. Actions requiring certificates. The following shall be unlawful until a
certificate of occupancy/compliance shall have bee applied for and
issued by the Building Official or his representative:
(1) Occupancy and use of a building erected, reconstructed, restored,
altered or moved, or any change of use of an existing building;
(2) Occupancy, use, or any change in use of land;
(3) Any change in use of a nonconforming use; and
(4) Occupancy and use of an enlargement to an existing structure.
B. Conditional use. No certificate of occupancy/compliance shall be issued
for any conditional use of a building or of land requiring conditional use
approval by the Planning Board or for any land or use requiring site
§ 535-72 PORT JERVIS CODE § 535-73
520:812
plan approval by the Planning Board unless and until such conditional
use or site plan approval has been duly granted by the Planning Board.
Every certificate of occupancy/compliance for which conditional use or
site plan approval has been granted by the Zoning Board of Appeals
shall contain a detailed statement of any condition to which the same is
subject.
C. Application. Application for a certificate of occupancy/compliance for a
new building, or for an existing building which has been altered, shall
be made on forms furnished by the Building Official, after erection of
such building or part thereof has been completed in conformity with the
provisions of this chapter. In the case of a new building such application
shall be accompanied by an accurate plot plan or, if not available, by a
survey prepared by a licensed land surveyor or engineer showing the
location of all buildings as built. Such certificate shall be issued within
10 days after receipt of the properly completed application, but only
provided that the application states that all requirements of all other
applicable codes or ordinances in effect are complied with.
D. Action. If the proposed use is in conformity with the provisions of this
chapter and of all other applicable codes and ordinances, a certificate
of occupancy/compliance for the use of vacant land or for a change of
use of a nonconforming use shall be issued by the Building Official
within 10 days after receipt of a properly completed application. If a
certificate of occupancy/compliance is denied, the Building Official shall
state the reasons in writing to the applicant.
E. Performance standards. In regard to those uses which are subject to the
performance standards procedure, the following requirements shall
also apply:
(1) Any normal replacement or addition of equipment and machinery
not affecting the operations or the degree or nature of dangerous
and objectionable elements emitted shall not be considered a
change in use.
(2) After occupancy, if there occur frequent or continuous, even though
intermittent, violations of the performance standards and other
provisions for a period of five days, without bona fide and
immediate corrective work, the Building Official shall suspend or
revoke the occupancy permit of the use and the operation shall
immediately cease until it is able to operate in accordance with
these regulations, at which time the occupancy permit shall be
reinstated.
(3) The Building Official shall investigate any alleged violation of the
performance standards, and if there are reasonable grounds to
believe that a violation exists, the Building Official shall investigate
the alleged violation and for such investigation may employ
qualified experts. A copy of said findings shall be forwarded to the
Common Council. The services of any qualified experts employed
§ 535-73 WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS § 535-73
520:813
§ 535-74. Duties of Building Official.
by the City to advise in establishing a violation shall be paid for
by the violator, if a violation is proved, and otherwise by the City.
No new certificate of occupancy/compliance shall be issued unless
such charges have been paid to the City.
F. Fee. Every application for a certificate of occupancy/compliance or a
temporary certificate of occupancy/compliance shall be accompanied
by a fee as set forth in the fee schedule of the City of Port Jervis.
G. Required landscaping and shade trees. Where landscaping and/or
shade trees are part of the submission requirements of a site plan or a
subdivision plat, either a performance bond shall be issued for two
growing seasons or a nurseryman's guarantee provided, to insure that
required plantings survive or are replaced by stock that does survive
two growing seasons. Evidence of such shall be presented to the
Building Official prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy/
compliance.209
H. As-built plans. Every application for a certificate of occupancy/
compliance that involves new construction or development shall
require the submission of as-built plans showing the actual location of
all improvements (i.e., water, sewer, drainage, roadways, building
locations, etc.).
I. Certification by design professional. Every application for a certificate
of occupancy/compliance that involves facilities or improvements that
are to be dedicated to the City shall be accompanied by a letter of
certification from the licensed design engineer stating that they have
been built in conformance with the approved plans.
J. Authority. A certificate of occupancy/compliance shall be deemed to
authorize, and is required for, both initial occupancy and use and the
continued occupancy and use of the building or land to which it applies.
K. Buildings and uses without certificates. Upon written request by the
owner, and upon payment of a fee as provided in the Building Code, the
Building Official shall, after inspection, issue a certificate of occupancy/
compliance for any building or use thereof, or of land, existing at the
time of the adoption of this chapter, certifying such use and whether or
not the use and the building conform to the provisions of this chapter.
L. Record and copies. A record of all certificates of occupancy/compliance
shall be kept in the office of the Building Official and copies shall be
furnished on request to any agency of the City or to any persons having
a proprietary or tenancy interest in the building or land affected.
209. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 535-73 PORT JERVIS CODE § 535-74
520:814
§ 535-75. Penalties for offenses.
A. Enforcement. It shall be the duty of the Building Official to enforce the
provisions of this chapter and of all rules, conditions, and requirements
adopted or specified pursuant thereto.
B. Inspection. The Building Official or that official's duly authorized
assistant(s) shall have the right to enter any building or enter upon any
land at any reasonable hour as necessary in the execution of his duties.
A. Violation. Violation of any provision or requirement of this chapter, or
violation of any statement, plan, application, permit, or certificate
approved under the provisions of this chapter, shall constitute a
violation pursuant to Penal Law.
B. Guilty parties. The owner, general agent, or contractor of a building,
premises, or part thereof where such a violation has been committed or
does exist shall be guilty of such an offense.
C. Other guilty parties. Any agent, contractor, architect, builder,
corporation, or other person who commits, takes part or assists in such
violation shall also be guilty of such an offense.
D. Continuance of violation. Each and every day that any such violation
continues after notification that such violation exists shall constitute a
separate offense. Such notice shall be written by the Building Official
and shall be served by mail or by personal service.
E. Penalty. Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter, or
who shall build or alter any structure or use any land in violation of any
statement or plan submitted and approved thereunder, or who shall
knowingly assist therein, shall be liable to a fine of not more than
$5,000 or imprisonment not exceeding 15 days, or both such fine and
imprisonment. Each and every day that any such violation continues
after notification that such violation exists shall constitute a separate
offense. Such notice shall be written by the Building Official and shall
be served by mail or by personal service.
F. Legal remedies. The imposition of penalties herein prescribed shall not
preclude the City or any person from instituting appropriate legal
action or proceeding to prevent an unlawful erection, construction,
reconstruction, alteration, repair, conversion, maintenance, or use, or
to restrain, correct, or abate a violation, or to prevent the illegal
occupancy of a building, land or premises.
§ 535-74 WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS § 535-75
520:815

ARTICLE XVI
Design Review Board
§ 535-76. Findings and purpose.
The Common Council hereby finds that excessive uniformity, dissimilarity,
inappropriateness, or poor quality of design in the exterior appearance of
buildings erected in any neighborhood adversely affects the desirability of
the immediate area and neighboring areas for residential, business, or other
purposes and by so doing impairs the stability and value of both improved
and unimproved real property in such areas, prevents the most appropriate
development and use of such areas, contributes to the degeneration of
property in such areas with attendant deterioration of conditions affecting
the health, safety, and general welfare of the community, and contributes to
the diminution of the taxable value of real property in such areas and its
ability to support the municipal services provided therefor. It is the purpose
of this article to prevent these and other harmful effects of such exterior
appearance of buildings erected or altered in any neighborhood and thus to
promote the health, safety, and general welfare of the community, conserve
the value of buildings, and encourage the most appropriate use of land
within the City of Port Jervis.
§ 535-77. Composition.
The Planning Board of the City of Port Jervis shall act as the Design Review
Board for the purposes of this chapter.
§ 535-78. Meetings, records, rules and regulations.
Meetings of the Design Review Board may be held concurrently with, or
separately from, the regular meetings of the Planning Board. A majority of
said Board shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business. The
Design Review Board shall keep minutes of its proceedings. All reports,
recommendations or decisions made by the Board must have the approval
of the majority of the Board and shall be officially filed with the City
Clerk-Treasurer. All meetings of the Board shall be open to the public.
Applicants before the Design Review Board shall provide a full set of plans
and accompanying data for its use and permanent file. The applicant shall
not take any action prior to receiving a decision from the Design Review
Board. The Design Review Board must take action within 45 days of the
date of any referral to the Board of a completed application as required
in § 535-79. The applicant may be requested to appear to review with the
Board any submission to it. The Design Review Board shall have the power
from time to time to adopt, amend and repeal rules and regulations not
inconsistent with this chapter.
§ 535-79. Referrals; disapprovals.
A. Concurrent review. In all cases where site plan approval is required, as
stated in other sections of this chapter, or where subdivision approval is
§ 535-76 WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS § 535-79
520:817
§ 535-80. Criteria for recommendations.
The Design Review Board shall base its recommendations on the following
criteria. No building or structure or land development shall be so
detrimental to the desirability, property values or development of the
surrounding area as to provoke one or more of the harmful effects set forth
in § 535-76 by reason of:
required, the review by the Design Review Board for similarity,
dissimilarity, or inappropriateness of structures shall be given, if at all
possible, concurrent with the Planning Board's review for subdivision
and/or site plan approval. If the architectural plans and designs are not
advanced enough to permit simultaneous review, the Planning Board
may act but condition its final approval on subsequent design review.
B. Action independent of Planning Board. In all cases where site plan
approval is not required by the Planning Board, such as for one- and
two-family residences, and for remodeling and renovation projects,
separate application shall be made to the Design Review Board and
approval is required prior to the issuance of a building permit.
C. Referrals. The Building Official shall promptly refer to the Design
Review Board every application for a building permit. Such Board may
approve, or conditionally approve, subject to specified modifications, or
disapprove any application for a building permit, provided that such
Board finds the structure or building, if erected or altered as proposed
in the application for building permit, would be so detrimental to the
desirability, property values, or development of the surrounding areas
as to be the cause of one of the harmful effects set forth in § 535-76
hereof.
D. Recommendation to Building Official. The Building Official shall refuse
any building permit application which is disapproved as provided
herein. If the Design Review Board shall fail to disapprove, or
conditionally approve subject to specified modifications, any such
application referred to it within 45 days of the date of filing of such
application, or if such Board shall approve any such application, the
Building Official shall forthwith issue the building permit, provided that
it conforms in all respects to all other applicable laws and regulations.
E. Exclusion. This chapter shall not apply to a residential accessory
structure on individual property when not part of a major or minor
subdivision. Furthermore, no design review shall be required for the
alteration of the interior of any structure, or for the normal
maintenance and repair of the exterior of any structure.
A. Excessive similarity. Excessive similarity to any other existing structure
or one for which a permit has been issued, or to any other structure
included in the same permit application, facing upon the same or
intersecting street and within 500 feet of the proposed site as measured
along center lines of streets in a residence district, and within 250 feet
§ 535-79 PORT JERVIS CODE § 535-80
520:818
of the proposed site in any nonresidential district in respect to one or
more of the following features of exterior design and appearance:
(1) Apparently identical elevations as they relate to form, proportion,
texture and color;
(2) Substantially identical size and arrangement of either doors,
windows, porticos, or other openings or breaks in the elevation
facing the street, including reverse arrangement;
(3) Other signification identical features of design, such as, but not
limited to, material, roofline and height, or other design elements,
provided that a finding of excessive similarity shall state not only
that such excessive similarity exists but also that it is of such a
nature as to be reasonably expected to provoke one or more of the
harmful effects set forth in § 535-76; or
(4) Other significant identical features of site design, such as, but not
limited to, setbacks and alignment with street and other structures.
B. Excessive dissimilarity. Excessive dissimilarity in relation to any other
structures existing or for which a permit has been issued, or to any
other structures included in the same permit application, facing upon
the same or intersecting street and within 500 feet of the proposed site
as measured along center lines of streets in any residence district, and
within 250 feet of the proposed site in any nonresidential district, in
respect to one or more of the following features, provided that the
finding is not based on personal preference as to taste or choice of
architectural style:
(1) Cubical contents.
(2) Gross floor area.
(3) Height of building or height of roof.
(4) Other significant design features, such as types of materials used,
the durability of materials and the texture of the buildings, roof
structures, chimneys, exposed mechanical equipment, service and
storage enclosures, signs, landscaping, retaining walls, fencing,
lighting posts and standards.
C. Inappropriateness. Inappropriateness in relation to the established
character of other structures in the immediate area or neighboring
areas with respect to the significant design features, such as the
texture, color, character (style), and form of architectural design,
provided that the Board shall find that the inappropriateness which
exists is of such a nature as to be reasonably expected to be the cause of
one or more of the harmful effects set forth in § 535-76 hereof and that
the finding is not based on personal preference as to taste or choice of
architectural style.
§ 535-80 WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS § 535-81
520:819
§ 535-81. Appeal.
Any person aggrieved by the action of the Design Review Board in
disapproving a building permit application and of the Building Official
in denying such permit because of such disapproval may take an appeal
therefrom to the Zoning Board of Appeals in the same manner as is provided
for other zoning appeals, and such Zoning Board of Appeals, with the same
power and authority therein vested in passing upon appeals before it under
the provisions of law and these regulations, and in exercise thereof, may
reverse or affirm, or modify and affirm, the actions of the Design Review
Board and of the Building Official.
§ 535-82. Procedures.
The Design Review Board is hereby directed to formulate a clearly stated
procedural outline designed to carry out the intent of this chapter. Such
procedure shall be submitted to the Common Council for approval in the
form of a Common Council resolution.
§ 535-83. Employees and expenses; fees.
A. Employees and expenses. The Design Review Board shall have the
power and authority to employ experts and staff and to pay for their
services and such other expenses as may be necessary and proper, not
exceeding, in all, the appropriation that may be made for such Board.
Legal counsel for the Design Review Board shall be the Planning Board
Attorney.
B. Fees. Every application for review by the Design Review Board shall be
accompanied by a fee as prescribed by the fee schedule of the City of
Port Jervis.
§ 535-81 PORT JERVIS CODE § 535-83
520:820
ARTICLE XVII
Zoning Board of Appeals210
§ 535-84. Creation.
The existing Zoning Board of Appeals of seven members is hereby
continued.
§ 535-85. Powers and duties.
A. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meaning indicated:
AREA VARIANCE — The authorization by the Zoning Board of Appeals
for the use of land in a manner which is not allowed by the dimensional
or physical requirements of the applicable zoning regulations.
USE VARIANCE — The authorization by the Zoning Board of Appeals
for the use of land for a purpose which is otherwise not allowed or is
prohibited by the applicable zoning regulations.
B. Orders, requirements, decisions, interpretations, determinations. The
Zoning Board of Appeals may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may
modify the order, requirement, decision, interpretation or
determination appealed from and shall make such order, requirement,
decision, interpretation or determination as in its opinion ought to have
been made in the matter by the administrative official charged with the
enforcement of this chapter and to that end shall have all the powers or
the administrative official from whose order, requirement, decision,
interpretation or determination the appeal is taken.
C. Use variances.
(1) The Zoning Board of Appeals, on appeal from the decision or
determination of the administrative official charged with the
enforcement of this chapter, shall have the power to grant use
variances, as defined herein.
(2) No such use variance shall be granted by the Zoning Board of
Appeals without a showing by the applicant that applicable zoning
regulations and restrictions have caused unnecessary hardship. In
order to prove such unnecessary hardship the applicant shall
demonstrate to the Zoning Board of Appeals that for each and
every permitted use under the zoning regulations for the particular
district where the property is located:
(a) The applicant cannot realize a reasonable return, provided that
lack of return is substantial as demonstrated by competent
financial evidence;
210. Editor's Note: Throughout this chapter, references to the "Board of Appeals" were
amended to "Zoning Board of Appeals" at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. III).
§ 535-84 WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS § 535-85
520:821
(b) The alleged hardship relating to the property in question is
unique and does not apply to a substantial portion of the
district or neighborhood;
(c) The requested use variance, if granted, will not alter the
essential character of the neighborhood; and
(d) The alleged hardship has not been self-created.
(3) The Zoning Board of Appeals, in the granting of use variances, shall
grant the minimum variance that it shall deem necessary and
adequate to address the unnecessary hardship proven by the
applicant and at the same time preserve and protect the character
of the neighborhood and the health, safety and welfare of the
community.
D. Area variances.
(1) The Zoning Board of Appeals shall have the power, upon an appeal
from a decision or determination of the administrative official
charged with the enforcement of this chapter, to grant area
variances as defined herein.
(2) In making its determination, the Zoning Board of Appeals shall take
into consideration the benefit to the applicant if the variance is
granted, as weighted against the detriment to the health, safety
and welfare of the neighborhood or community by such grant. In
making such determination the Board shall also consider:
(a) Whether an undesirable change will be produced in the
character of the neighborhood or a detriment to nearby
properties will be created by the granting of the area variance;
(b) Whether the benefit sought by the applicant can be achieved
by some method feasible for the applicant to pursue, other
than an area variance;
(c) Whether the requested area variance is substantial;
(d) Whether the proposed variance will have an adverse effect or
impact on the physical or environmental conditions in the
neighborhood or district; and
(e) Whether the alleged difficulty was self-created, which
consideration shall be relevant to the decision of the Zoning
Board of Appeals but shall not necessarily preclude the
granting of the area variance.
(3) The Zoning Board of Appeals, in the granting of area variances,
shall grant the minimum variance that it shall deem necessary and
adequate and at the same time preserve and protect the character
of the neighborhood and the health, safety and welfare of the
community.
§ 535-85 PORT JERVIS CODE § 535-85
520:822
§ 535-86. Procedure.
The powers and duties of the Zoning Board of Appeals shall be exercised in
accordance with the following procedure:
E. Imposition of conditions. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall, in the
granting of both use variances and area variances, have the authority to
impose such reasonable conditions and restrictions as are directly
related to and incidental to the proposed use of the property. Such
conditions shall be consistent with the spirit and intent of this chapter
and shall be imposed for the purpose of minimizing any adverse impact
such variance may have on the neighborhood or community.
A. Public hearing. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall not decide upon any
appeal for a variance or interpretation of this chapter without first
holding a public hearing, notice of which hearing, including the
substance of the appeal or application, shall be given by publication in
the official newspaper of the City at least 10 days before the date of
such hearing. In addition to such published notice, the applicant shall
cause such notice to be mailed (certified mail, return receipt requested)
at least 10 days before the hearing to all owners of property which lies
adjacent to the property for which relief is sought and to such other
owners as the Zoning Board of Appeals may deem advisable.
B. Surrounding owners. The names of said owners shall be taken as they
appear on the last completed tax roll of the City.
C. Substantial compliance. Provided that due notice shall have been
published and that there shall have been substantial compliance with
the remaining provisions of this section, the failure to give notice in
exact conformance herewith shall not be deemed to invalidate action
taken by the Zoning Board of Appeals in connection with the granting of
any appeal or variance.
D. Appeals and applications. All appeals and applications made to the
Zoning Board of Appeals shall be in writing and shall be accompanied
by the required fee payable to the Building Department. The fee filed in
connection with applications shall not be returnable regardless of
disposition of the case by the Board.
E. Circumstances to be set forth. Each appeal or application shall fully set
forth the circumstances of the case, shall refer to the specific provisions
of the section(s) of this chapter involved, and shall exactly set forth, as
the case may be, the interpretation that is claimed, the details of the
variance that is applied for, and the grounds on which it is claimed that
the same should be granted.
F. Transmittal of official notification. Should any appeal involve either of
the two following conditions, the Secretary of the Zoning Board of
Appeals shall transmit to the designated office or official a copy of the
§ 535-85 WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS § 535-86
520:823
official notice of the public hearing not later than 10 days prior to the
date of the hearing.
(1) Any change in the boundaries of any district, which change would
occur within a distance of 500 feet of the boundary of any city or
town.
(2) Any change in the regulations prescribed for any district, any
portion of which is located within 500 feet of the boundary of any
city or town.
G. Designated officials. The designated official for counties shall be the
clerk of the county legislature. In cities and towns, the designated
official shall be the clerk of the municipality.
H. Advisory opinion of Planning Board. Prior to the date of any public
hearing, the Secretary of the Zoning Board of Appeals shall transmit to
the Secretary of the Planning Board a copy of any appeal or application,
together with a copy of the notice of such hearing. The Planning Board
may submit to the Zoning Board of Appeals an advisory opinion on said
appeal or application at any time prior to the rendering of a decision by
the Zoning Board of Appeals.
I. Record. Every decision of the Zoning Board of Appeals shall be
recorded in accordance with the standard forms adopted by the Board,
shall fully set forth the circumstances of the case, shall contain a full
record of the findings on which the decision is based, and, if such
decision is not in accordance with the recommendation of the Planning
Board, the reasons therefor. Every decision of said Board shall be by
resolution, and each such resolution shall be filed in the office of the
City Clerk-Treasurer by case number, under one of the following
headings: "Interpretation" or "Variances," together with all documents
pertaining thereto. Regarding its decision in each case, the Zoning
Board of Appeals shall notify the Building Official, Common Council,
City Planning Board, and the municipal clerk of any affected
municipality given notice of hearing.
J. Minutes. The Secretary shall keep minutes of the Board's proceedings
showing the vote of each member upon every question, or if absent or
failing to vote, indicating such fact. The Secretary shall keep records of
the Board's examinations and official actions, all of which shall be
immediately filed in the office of the City Clerk-Treasurer and shall be a
public record.
K. Strict construal. All provisions of this chapter relating to the Zoning
Board of Appeals shall be strictly construed. Said Board as a body of
limited jurisdiction shall act in full conformity with all provisions of law
and of this chapter and in compliance with all limitations contained
therein.
L. Expiration. Unless construction is commenced and diligently pursued
within six months of the date of the granting of a variance, such
§ 535-86 PORT JERVIS CODE § 535-86
520:824
variance shall become null and void, unless renewed upon application
to the Zoning Board of Appeals.
§ 535-86 WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS § 535-86
520:825

ARTICLE XVIII
Amendments
§ 535-87. Amendment procedure.
This chapter or any part thereof may be amended, supplemented or
repealed, from time to time, by the Common Council on its own motion or
upon recommendation by the Planning Board. Prior to the public hearing
specified below, every proposed amendment shall be referred by the
Common Council to the Planning Board for a report which shall be rendered
within 45 days of such referral.
A. Report of the Planning Board. In making such report on a proposed
amendment, the Planning Board shall make inquiry and determination
concerning the items specified below:
(1) Concerning a proposed amendment to, or change in, the text of the
chapter:
(a) Whether such change is consistent with the aims and
principles embodied in the chapter as to the particular districts
concerned;
(b) Which areas, land uses, buildings, and establishments in the
City will be directly affected by such change and in what way
they will be affected;
(c) The indirect implications of such change in its effect on other
regulations; and
(d) Whether such proposed amendment is consistent with the aims
of the Comprehensive Plan of the City.211
(2) Concerning a proposed amendment involving a change in the
Zoning Map:
(a) Whether the uses permitted by the proposed change would be
appropriate in the area concerned;
(b) Whether adequate public school facilities and other public
facilities and services, including roads, exist or can reasonably
be expected to be created to serve the needs of any additional
dwellings or other uses likely to be constructed as a result of
such change;
(c) Whether the proposed change is in accord with any existing or
proposed plans in the vicinity; and
(d) The effect of the proposed amendment upon the growth of the
City as envisaged by the Comprehensive Plan.212
211. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 535-87 WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS § 535-87
520:827
B. Fee. Each petition for a zoning amendment shall be accompanied by a
fee, adequate to cover the cost of processing said petition, payable to
the City Clerk-Treasurer upon the filing thereof. No fee shall be
required for petitions filed in favor of, or against, any application.
C. Public hearing. By resolution adopted at a meeting of the Common
Council, the Common Council shall fix the time and place of a public
hearing on the proposed amendment and cause notice thereof to be
given in accordance with provisions of the General City Law. All notices
of public hearing shall specify the nature of any proposed amendment,
the land or district affected, and the date when, and the place where,
the public hearing will be held. At least 15 days' notice of the time and
place of such hearing shall be published in the official newspaper. When
such proposed amendment reflects a change to the Zoning Map, the
City Clerk-Treasurer shall cause notice to be mailed at least 15 days
before the hearing to all owners of properties which lie within 300 feet
of the map change and to such other owners as the Common Council
may deem advisable.
D. Names of affected parties. The names of said owners shall be taken as
they appear on the last completed tax roll of the City.
E. Transmittal to designated officials. Should any proposed amendment
consist of, or include, either of the two following conditions, the City
Clerk-Treasurer shall transmit to the designated office or official a copy
of the official notice of the public hearing not later than 15 days prior to
the date of hearing.
(1) Any change in the boundaries of the district, which change would
occur within a distance of 500 feet of the boundary of any city or
town.
(2) Any change in the regulations prescribed for any district, any
portion of which is located within 500 feet of the boundary of any
city or town.
F. Designated officials. The designated official for counties shall be the
clerk of the county legislature. In cities and towns, the designated
official shall be the clerk of the municipality.
G. Referral to Orange County Planning Department. Should any proposed
amendment consist of, or include, any of the following conditions, the
City Clerk-Treasurer shall, prior to final action, refer the proposed
amendment to the Orange County Planning Department:
(1) Any change in the district classification of, or the regulations
applying to, real property abutting:
(a) The boundary of any village or town;
212. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 535-87 PORT JERVIS CODE § 535-87
520:828
(b) The boundary of any state or county park or other recreation
area;
(c) The right-of-way of any state parkway, thruway, expressway, or
other controlled-access highway or county road or parkway;
(d) The right-of-way of any stream or drainage channel owned by
the county or for which the county has established channel
lines; and
(e) The boundary of any county- or state-owned land on which a
public building or institution is located.
H. Protest. In the case of a protest against any amendment, such
amendment shall not become effective except in accordance with the
provisions of the General Municipal Law.
§ 535-87 WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS § 535-87
520:829

ARTICLE XIX
Repealer
§ 535-88. Prior ordinance repealed.
The City of Port Jervis Zoning Ordinance of 1969 and any and all
amendments thereto are hereby repealed. Such repeal shall not affect or
impair any act done, offense committed, or right accruing, accrued, or
acquired, or liability, penalty, forfeiture, or punishment incurred, prior to
the time such repeal takes effect, but the same may be enjoyed, asserted,
enforced, prosecuted, or inflicted as fully and to the same extent as if such
repeal had not been effected.
§ 535-88 WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS § 535-88
520:831
Appendix
Chapter A605
CIVIL DEFENSE EMERGENCIES
§ A605-1. Continuation of government operations; location.
In the event of an enemy attack, all City officers of the City of Port Jervis
shall continue regular City government operations, to the extent permitted
by attack conditions, from the City emergency operation center, and will
follow the lines of succession established by local law for continuity of
government.
§ A605-2. Duties of certain officers and employees.
The following officers and agencies of the City of Port Jervis, under the
guidance of the Civil Defense Director, shall direct and coordinate
performance of the specific emergency civil defense functions to include but
not be limited to those hereinafter designated:
A. City Attorney. The City Attorney shall render advice and opinions to the
chief executive officer Mayor of the City of Port Jervis with regard to
continuity of government and interpretation, application and
implementation of the New York State Defense Emergency Act and
related defense emergency laws, other relevant laws and regulations
and orders of the State Civil Defense Commission, and draft executive
orders, regulations and orders in coordinating with the executive
officer Mayor of the City of Port Jervis and the Civil Defense Director.
B. City Clerk. The City Clerk is responsible for developing a plan for
implementing a system to preserve all of the essential records of the
City of Port Jervis; in addition, in a post-attack situation, under the
general direction of the City of Port Jervis Civil Defense Director or
myself (Mayor), he is responsible for the preparation and release of
official statements to the press, radio, television or other news media.
He will prepare releases to be disseminated via the Emergency
Broadcasting System and will act as the City's public relations officer in
all official matters. He is directed to immediately forward a copy of this
executive order to City department heads, City officers or employees
referred to herein, with all due speed.
C. Chief of Police. The Chief of Police shall utilize regular and auxiliary
police for maintenance of law and order, including protection of life and
property; regulate and control traffic; direct injured to medical
installations and homeless to welfare shelters; and provide assistance
to handicapped persons by obtaining transportation for them and
directing them to suitable care installation shelters; and be constantly
on alert for disorders such as riots, guarding food supplies, banks,
resources of all kinds, such as gas, oil, lumber, coal, hardware, clothing,
§ 535-88 PORT JERVIS CODE § A605-2
A605:832
shoes, etc.; patrol streets; prevent boating; and be responsible for the
training and organizing of approved volunteers equipped as auxiliary
police for duty in an emergency.
D. Chief of Fire Department. The Chief of the Fire Department, assisted by
Assistant Chiefs and officers of the Department and personnel by way of
trained firemen, shall, in sufficient numbers, estimated at 25 ablebodied
men and three officers per company, with all essential
equipment for fighting fires and assisting in rescue work, execute such
other duties and responsibilities as may be required by any situation in
an emergency or disaster, as may develop, and such other functions
than those designated. He is responsible for recruiting, training and
equipping the required number of auxiliary firemen.
E. Public works service. The Public Works Department shall assign, recruit
and organize such additional personnel as required and all publicly
owned construction equipment and publicly employed construction
personnel into public works, public utility and rescue teams; and shall
identify, locate and interrogate, with such teams, all privately owned
construction equipment with trained construction personnel, public
utility and maintenance personnel included, to be prepared in any
emergency to clear debris, perform highway and bridge maintenance
and emergency repairs, rehabilitate vital City services on streets,
sewers and all essential facilities and public services at all times during
an emergency, at all hours, day or night, as may be required or directed.
F. Chief of Water Department. The Chief of the Water Department shall
recruit, train and equip additional Water Department personnel, if
required, to be prepared to repair damaged or broken water mains,
damaged reservoirs, to make tests of water as to radioactive content at
all times during and after an emergency, and at such other times be
prepared to assist whenever required, as directed.
G. Chief of electrical maintenance service. In a natural disaster or postattack
situation, the Chief of the City's electrical service is responsible
for directing all activity required to restore and maintain electric
service within the City, including but not limited to all necessary
electrical repairs, removing dangerous wires, the testing and operation
of any emergency power generators, procurement of fuel necessary for
this operation, and for determining priorities for restoration of the
electrical service in the City of Port Jervis.
H. Director of Industrial Development Commission. The Director of the
Industrial Development Commission shall meet with the Director of
Civil Defense with a view toward carrying out, with the advice of
industry management, such post-attack measures as to enable
industrial management and business establishments to protect their
essential facilities and personnel, continue management and resume
production activity following attack emergency.
§ A605-2 CIVIL DEFENSE EMERGENCIES § A605-2
A605:833
I. Commissioner of Public Welfare. The Welfare Commissioner will be
responsible for all the post-attack welfare needs of the people of the
City of Port Jervis, assisted by the local Red Cross organization; will
maintain rosters of persons assigned to emergency housing; and
provide emergency housing, food, clothing, financial assistance or any
other commodity required for the preservation of life.
J. Director of Health Department. The Director of the Health Department
is in charge of providing health and medical services to the population,
care and treatment of the ill and injured, and identification and
disposing of the dead in an emergency.
K. Health Inspector of Public Health Department. Service are charged
with the inspection of food, water, drinking or cooking, and for the
decontamination facilities of radioactive evacuees. The mortuary
service is assigned to the Department of Health of the City of Port
Jervis.
L. City Superintendent of Schools service. The Superintendent of Schools
shall provide shelter protection for pupils and staff members and
provide for the maximum utilization of available school facilities and
resources in support of civil defense emergency operations, including
but not limited to the following:
(1) Coordination with other services in the care of pupils denied
parental care by reason of emergency conditions.
(2) Making available for civil defense use school facilities, buses and
other school-owned equipment not required for immediate use of
pupils.
(3) Operating and maintaining school buildings for use of and by
medical health service, welfare services and other emergency
services as may be directed.
(4) Implementing the rules, orders and regulations of the Civil Defense
Commission and the Commissioner of Education relating to the
state-wide school system under emergency conditions
requirements.
(5) Providing shelters for pupils within the school system and
recruiting and training shelter managers for school shelters.
(6) All schools, public or private, are under the command of the
Superintendent of Schools of the City of Port Jervis civil defense
jurisdiction in an emergency.
(7) The Superintendent of Port Jervis Schools, Central School District,
will advise all public and private schools' staff or personnel that
they, when not carrying out their assigned normal duties following
an enemy attack, will report, to the City of Port Jervis Civil Defense
Director for a duty assignment.
§ A605-2 PORT JERVIS CODE § A605-2
A605:834
Chapter A615
WATER RULES AND REGULATIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire Department — See Ch. 55.
Plumbing — See Ch. 410.
Sewers and sewage disposal — See Ch. 445.
Water — See Ch. 513.
§ A615-1. Reservoir and watershed restrictions; penalties for
offenses.
§ A615-2. Application for water service required.
All applications for the use of water or the supply of water must be made in
writing at the office of the Water Department, and no water shall be taken
from the City mains through any service pipe, fixture or apparatus of any
kind whatsoever unless written application for such water service, signed
by the owner of the property to be supplied or his agent, shall have first
been made to the Department.
§ A615-3. Authorization required to tap; penalties for offenses.
No person other than an employee of the Water Department, having been
directed to do so, shall tap any City water main or connect any pipe to such
M. General. All City agency heads or personnel assigned civil defense
functions via this executive order will report to the City's emergency
operations center for post-attack operations, tests or exercises when so
directed by either the City Director of Civil Defense or myself, Mayor of
Port Jervis.
A. No person shall wade, bathe or deposit any type substance into any
reservoir, spring or streams which feed said reservoirs. No person shall
tamper with any structure, dam, pipes, valves or any apparatus of the
water system. It shall be unlawful to hunt, fish or to trespass upon City
watershed property or any property under its care, custody and control.
No person shall deposit any garbage or mixed refuse upon said City
Water Department lands.
B. No person shall be allowed to cut or remove trees or timber from said
watershed except by authorization of the Common Council. No person
or persons shall spray chemicals either by ground or air upon the
watershed without approval of the Director of Public Works.
C. A violation of any of the above provisions shall subject the offender to a
fine not exceeding $200 or imprisonment not exceeding one year, or
both, as provided in § 1103 of the Public Health Law.
§ A605-2 CIVIL DEFENSE EMERGENCIES § A615-3
A605:835
main without due authorization from the Director of Public Works. Violators
shall be subject to a fine of $50.
§ A615-4. Deposit required; bill upon completion.
An application for water service connection with the City main must be
accompanied by a monetary deposit sufficient to cover the estimated cost
of the service installation. Such deposit will be applied toward the actual
cost of the installation when made, but in no sense shall be considered as
full payment for such installation. Upon completion of the work, an itemized
bill will be rendered to the applicant. If this amount is in excess of the
previous estimate, payment of the balance shall be required. If the bill is for
a lesser sum than the deposit, the difference will be refunded at once to the
applicant.
§ A615-5. Curb box installation; gate valve.
§ A615-6. Installation of service pipes; responsibility for costs.
§ A615-7. Control of service lines; responsibility for leaks or
defects.
A. Each service pipe shall be provided with a cock or valve of the same
nominal size as the pipe, set between the curb and sidewalk and one
foot from the curb. It shall be equipped with an iron housing or shaft
leading from the same to the level of the sidewalk and having a cover or
lid with the word WATER thereon. This shall be known as a "curb box"
and is to permit access to the valve for operation with a key or wrench.
B. In installation of service lines two inches or larger where a gate valve is
placed adjacent to the street main for use in tapping the main, this
valve shall be equipped with an access box for use as a control valve
instead of one placed inside the curb.
A. Service pipes, including the insertion of the corporation cock in the
street main, shall be installed from the main to the curb cock by Water
Department employees only. The entire cost of such installation,
including all labor, pipe, fittings and restoration of street pavement,
shall be borne by the property owner.
B. Service pipes from the curb cock to a point of use on the owner's
premises shall be installed only by a plumber or contractor employed by
the owner. The installing party shall notify the Director of Public Works
when such piping is in place and pressure-tested so that the Director or
his representative may inspect the work before the trench is backfilled.
No water use will be permitted until the installation has been approved
by the Director.
A. The Water Department reserves the right to exclusively control service
lines within the limits of public streets. The Department does not,
however, accept responsibility for the maintenance of such pipes except
§ A615-3 PORT JERVIS CODE § A615-7
A605:836
§ A615-8. Permission required for multiple use of single service.
No plumber, contractor or other person shall conduct water from one
service connection into two or more distinctly separate properties without
obtaining permission to do so from the Director of Public Works.
§ A615-9. Permission required for fixtures using water on
sidewalks.
Fixtures, including hydrants and sill cocks, for the use of water on
sidewalks, except for street washing, will be allowed only upon written
permission from the Director of Public Works.
§ A615-10. Use of fire hydrants.
for the repair of leaks which may occur between the street main and
the owner's property lines. Because such breaks usually are a hazard
and a nuisance to street traffic, they will be repaired by the Department
at its expense unless the pipe shall be deemed by the Director of Public
Works to be unrepairable. In this event the property owner shall be
notified of the pipe's condition and advised to apply for a replacement,
following the same procedure as in making an original application for
water service.
B. All other defects in the service line, such as inadequacy of water
pressure, unusable curb box, inoperative curb shutoff cock, etc., shall
be corrected at the expense of the property owner.
A. No person, other than employees of the Water Department or of another
City department or a City fireman in the course of his regular duty, may
open or otherwise tamper with any public fire hydrants. A fine of $25
may be imposed for such a violation.
B. A contractor or other person desiring to use water from a fire hydrant
temporarily must first deposit an amount as provided in Chapter 280,
Fees, at the office of the City Clerk-Treasurer and obtain permission
from the Director of Public Works for its use, who will prescribe the
manner of operation and the hours during which the hydrant may be
used.213
C. Persons desiring to make flow tests on private fire hydrants or
automatic sprinkler systems connected with the City water mains, in
which considerable quantities of water may be discharged, must notify
the Director of Public Works, who will advise them when such tests may
be made.
213. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ A615-7 CIVIL DEFENSE EMERGENCIES § A615-11
A605:837
§ A615-11. Right of entry.
Persons using water must at all reasonable hours of the day permit the
Director of Public Works or any officer or employee of the Water
Department to enter their premises for the purpose of determining the
manner in which water is used, inspecting and to install, replace or read
meters.
§ A615-12. Supplying water to persons not specified in application.
No property owner or tenant shall supply water to other persons or families
than those specified in the application for service. If any water is so
supplied, the party supplying same shall be liable to pay the regular rates
for such persons or families.
§ A615-13. Maintenance and protection from frost; continuous flow
to prevent freezing.
§ A615-14. Responsibility for protection of water meters in
basements.
It shall be the responsibility of the property owner or tenant to provide
protection for water meters installed in basements against damage from
freezing or the backflow of hot water. Any repairs necessitated by neglect
of such responsibility will be charged to the owner's account.
§ A615-15. Service interruptions; damage due to loss of water
pressure.
A. All persons taking water will be required to keep their service pipes,
stopcocks and fixtures connected therewith in good repair and
protected from frost and so arranged and provided with stop-and-waste
cocks as to allow the pipes to be drained and kept empty of water
during all periods of dangerous exposure to the action of frost.
B. No continuous flow of water to prevent piping from freezing will be
permitted except at special rates and with the written consent of the
Director of Public Works.
A. The Water Department reserves the right, at all times, to shut off the
water in case of any emergency which may demand it. For the making
of routine repairs or new connections not of an emergency nature, due
notice will be given all affected consumers as to the time of such shutoff
and its probable duration. When so notified, it becomes the consumer's
responsibility to act to prepare for his water needs during the service
interruption and to prevent any damage to his piping or plumbing
fixtures due to lack of pressure, backsiphonage, etc.
B. For any damages caused to customers' water pipes, plumbing fixtures
or hot-water boilers by loss of water pressure due to accidental water
§ A615-11 PORT JERVIS CODE § A615-15
A605:838
§ A615-16. Approval required for private hydrants and fountains.
The installation and location of private hydrants and fountains will be
subject to approval by the Water Department. Should waste therefrom
become a nuisance or a hazard to adjacent property, the supply will be
discontinued until repairs have been made.
§ A615-17. Water closet and urinal specifications.
None but self-closing water closets, spring-closing urinals, etc., will be
permitted. In public buildings this rule will also require the use of selfclosing
spring faucets.
§ A615-18. Reservation of rights during emergency situations;
notice.
§ A615-19. Payment procedure; penalty charges; shutoff of service;
restoration. [Amended 12-19-1979]
main or service line breaks or other failure beyond its control, the
Water Department assumes no responsibility.
A. The Water Department reserves the right during times of severe
drought conditions to restrict the use of water by its customers. Such
nonessential uses as lawn sprinkling, air conditioning, car washing,
etc., may be banned temporarily.214
B. Due notice in advance of such curtailment will be given, and it shall be
understood that the City is not to be liable for any deficiency or failure
of the water supply under these circumstances.
C. Any person committing an offense against any provision of this section
shall be punishable as provided in Chapter 1, General Provisions,
Article I. [Added 10-14-1980; amended 9-28-1981 by L.L. No.
4-1981]
A. Water rents are due and payable at the office of the Water Department
on January 1, April 1, July 1 and October 1 of each year for water
consumed during the preceding quarter, according to the rates herein
specified. Bills or balances thereof not paid within 30 days after the
date due shall become subject to a penalty charge of 5% additional and
a penalty of 5% for each succeeding month thereafter it remains
unpaid. [Amended 1-13-1986; 12-27-1990]
B. If bills or balances thereof remain unpaid at the end of three months
after having been rendered, the Water Department will at once notify
the consumer, in writing, that water service will be suspended.
Following a period of 10 days thereafter, water will, without further
notice, be shut off, and service will not be restored until all water rents
214. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 513, Water.
§ A615-15 CIVIL DEFENSE EMERGENCIES § A615-19
A605:839
§ A615-20. Rents chargeable against premises where water used;
lien for nonpayment.
Water rents are chargeable against the premises where the water is used.
If requested, in writing, by the owner, bills will be rendered to his agent or
tenant, but any delinquency in payments becomes a lien upon the property
where the water is used, and the same procedure for collecting unpaid bills
as set forth in the foregoing § A615-19 will be used by the Department.
§ A615-21. No deduction for temporary unoccupancy.
No abatement or deduction shall be allowed for temporary unoccupancy of
any unit or metered service.
§ A615-22. Discontinuance of service; resumption.
§ A615-23. Unmetered services; unit determination; swimming
pools.215 [Amended 12-19-1979; 12-6-1982; 1-13-1986; 12-22-1986]
accrued against the property have been paid in full. This will include
a charge of $50 for turning off the water and an additional $50 for
reestablishing such service. (Under certain conditions in lieu of full
payment, a substantial partial payment may be accepted, provided that
reasonable assurance is given that the reminder will be promptly paid
in frequent periodic installments.) [Amended 12-27-1990]
C. All uncollectable charges for water will become a lien on the real
property and will be added to the owner's City tax bill.
A. Any person or persons desiring permanent discontinuance of service
must give notice, in writing, to the Water Department. A pro rata bill for
the portion of water consumed shall be then submitted to said person or
persons. Upon receipt of said payment, water shall then be
discontinued. In the event that the same said owner requests the Water
Department to resume water service, a flat rate charge of $25 shall be
made for such service.
B. All persons requesting discontinuance of service due to change of
ownership must give notice, in writing, to the Water Department. A pro
rata bill for the portion of water consumed shall be submitted to said
person or persons. Upon receipt of said payment, water shall be
discontinued. The new owner of record shall follow the procedure set
forth in § A615-2 and shall only pay a turn-on fee of $5.
A. All unmetered services shall be charged on a per unit basis of $70
quarterly. (Example: The charge for a two-family house equals two
times the unit rate of $70 or $140 quarterly.) All unmetered services
outside the City limits incur a surcharge of 40% over the unmetered
215. Editor’s Note: See also the rate schedules in § A615-29 for charges for water consumed
through meters.
§ A615-19 PORT JERVIS CODE § A615-23
A605:840
§ A615-24. Lawn and garden sprinkling.
§ A615-25. Rates for building and construction.
For building and construction purposes, unit rates will be charged or
regular meter rates may be charged with the consumer paying for the
temporary meter installation plus metered rates for consumption as herein
stated.
§ A615-26. Ready-to-serve charge for standpipes with hoses.
[Amended 1-13-1986; 12-22-1986; 12-27-1993; 12-19-1994;
12-30-1996; 12-29-1997]
For standpipes with attached hoses for fire protection, a ready-to-serve
charge of $70 every quarter will be made.
§ A615-27. Ready-to-serve charge for automatic sprinklers.
[Amended 1-13-1986; 12-22-1986; 12-27-1993; 12-19-1994;
12-30-1996; 12-29-1997]
For automatic sprinkler services for fire protection, a ready-to-serve charge
of $70 every quarter will be made.
§ A615-28. Installation of meters; computation of charges;
reversion to regular rates. [Amended 12-22-1986]
rate. [Amended 12-28-1987; 12-27-1993; 12-19-1994;
12-30-1996; 12-29-1997]
B. Any building which also contains a beauty parlor, doctor's office, dental
office, etc., shall be considered an additional unit.
C. Any unit which is occupied by one person, when said person is also the
owner of the premises in which the unit is located, shall be charged at
1/2 the regular quarterly rate, provided that said person registers in the
form of an affidavit at the office of the Water Department. [Amended
1-23-1995 by L.L. No. 1-1995; 9-8-1997 by L.L. No. 6-1997]
D. Swimming pools. Swimming pools with a capacity in excess of 2,000
gallons shall be charged an annual rate of $32, to be paid via an
additional charge of $8 per quarterly billing. Notification of installation
of swimming pools must be made at the office of the Water Department.
Violators shall be subject to a fine of $50. [Amended 12-27-1993;
12-19-1994]
A. Water to be utilized for lawn or garden sprinkling shall not exceed four
hours in duration on each day between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 9:00
p.m. and shall be granted from April 1 to October 1.
B. Persons in violation of said limitations shall be subject to a fine of $25.
§ A615-23 CIVIL DEFENSE EMERGENCIES § A615-28
A605:841
§ A615-29. Meter rates; minimum charges. [Amended 12-19-1979;
12-6-1982; 1-13-1986; 12-22-1986; 12-28-1987; 12-27-1993;
12-19-1994; 12-30-1996; 12-29-1997; 1-1-2008; 12-28-2009;
12-9-2013]
A. The Water Department may install meters on any or all service lines at
its option, either on or off the owner's premises. (Property owners must
purchase and the Water Department install all meters. Meters will be of
the Director of Public Works' approved type and size, and the owners
will be required to pay for all repairs and adjustments to such meters.)
B. Charges for water consumed through meters will be computed
according to the rate schedules in § A615-29 of these regulations.
C. The Water Department may at any time elect to discontinue making
charges at meter rates and revert to the regular established unit or
fixed rates.
A. Charges for water consumed through meters shall be made at the
following rates per quarter:
Water Consumed
(gallons)
Quarterly Rate Per 1,000
Gallons
First 10,000 $10.26
From 10,000 to 25,000 (15,000) $8.70
From 25,000 to 100,000 (75,000) $4.97
From 100,000 to 500,000 (400,000) $4.62
From 500,000 to 1,000,000 (500,000) $2.70
From 1,000,000 to 2,000,000 (1,000,000) $2.22
From 2,000,000 to 3,000,000 (1,000,000) $1.67
Over (only the portion in excess) $1.37
B. Minimum charges. Minimum charges will be made in accordance with
the following schedule:
Size of Meter
(inches) Minimum Charge
1 $124.80
2 $180.01
3 $192.01
4 $362.44
5 $594.07
6 $1,188.14
7 $1,434.16
§ A615-28 PORT JERVIS CODE § A615-29
A605:842
Size of Meter
(inches) Minimum Charge
3-inch Kolmer $362.44
C. Residential rates. Residential rates are as follows:
Type of Residence Rate
1/4 rate $30
1/2 rate $60
1/2 rate plus pool $69.60
Single-family residence $120
Single-family residence plus pool $129.60
1 full and 1/2 rate $180
1 1/2 plus pool $189.60
2 units $240
2 units plus pool $249.60
2 1/2 units $300
3 units $360
3 units plus pool $369.60
4 units $480
4 units plus pool $489.60
4 1/2 units $540
5 units $600
6 units $720
7 units $840
8 units $960
11 units $1,320
16 units $1,920
25 units $3,000
40 units $4,800
46 units $5,520
50 units $6,000
54 units $6,480
Deerpark, 1/2 rate $84
Deerpark, 1 unit $168
Deerpark, 1 unit plus pool $177.60
Deerpark, 2 units $336
§ A615-29 CIVIL DEFENSE EMERGENCIES § A615-30
A605:843
§ A615-30. Fixing of additional rates.
The Water Department will fix and adopt rates for the use of water in all
cases not specifically covered or provided for in the foregoing rules and
regulations.
§ A615-31. Retention of option to install water mains in certain
property.
§ A615-32. Amendments; additional regulations; effective date.
[Amended 12-19-1979; 12-28-1987; 12-27-1993; 12-19-1994;
12-30-1996; 12-29-1997]
§ A615-33. Cross-connection control. [Added 4-28-2008 by L.L. No.
1-2008]
A. The Common Council and Water Department shall retain the option of
installation of water mains into a subdivision, street or right-of-way
which is to be deeded to or transferred to the City, to ensure
standardization of components and proper installation.
B. In the event that said option is exercised, the owner shall comply with
regulations of § A615-4.
A. The foregoing rules and regulations and rates for the consumption of
water adopted this 29th day of December, 1997, may be amended,
special rates and contracts made in all proper cases and additional
rules and regulations may be made whenever it is deemed proper to do
so.
B. The foregoing rules and regulations and rates become effective October
1, 1997.
A. Legislative intent. The purpose of this section is to safeguard the
potable water supply from potential contamination by preventing
backflow from a water user's system into the public water system and to
comply with the requirements of the New York State Sanitary Code, 10
New York Code of Rules and Regulations, Part 5, § 5-131. This is to be
accomplished by:
(1) Requiring an approved air gap, reduced pressure zone device,
double check valve assembly or equivalent protective device
consistent with the degree of hazard posed by any service
connection;
(2) Requiring the users of such connections to submit plans for the
installation of protective devices to the Director of Public Works
and the Orange County Department of Health and/or New York
State Department of Health for approval; and
§ A615-30 PORT JERVIS CODE § A615-33
A605:844
(3) Assuring that all protective devices be tested at least annually,
records of which shall be submitted by the property owner to and
maintained by the Director of Public Works.
B. Backflow prevention devices required.
(1) All nonresidential users of the public water system and all
residential users of the public water system having an auxiliary
water supply, including but not limited to a private well, lawn
sprinklers or an irrigation system, shall be required to comply with
this section.
(2) Any installation, service, maintenance, testing, repair or
modification of a backflow prevention device shall be performed in
accordance with the requirements of the City of Port Jervis and the
New York State Plumbing Code. For purposes of this section, a
backflow prevention device is an approved air gap, reduced
pressure zone device, double check valve assembly or equivalent
protection device designed to prevent potential contamination of a
public water system.
(3) Backflow prevention devices conforming to the most current
requirements of the New York State Department of Health and the
Orange County Department of Health shall be installed by the
owner of those systems pursuant to the rules of those departments
in force at the time of the installation.
(4) A certificate of occupancy shall not be issued by the Building
Inspector for a new or modified/renovated/rehabilitated structure
having a system classified by the Department of Health or
determined by the Building Inspector as hazardous, unless a
backflow prevention device has been installed and approved
pursuant to this section and Department of Health requirements.
(5) The cost to install a backflow prevention device shall be borne by
the owner of the property.
(6) The Director of Public Works or designee shall make a
determination as to whether a property owner requires a backflow
prevention device and the type of device in accordance with this
section and the New York State Department of Health and the
Orange County Department of Health requirements and
regulations.
C. Upgrade of preexisting systems required. Any preexisting system that
does not contain a backflow prevention device shall be upgraded so as
to comply with the current requirements of this section and/or the New
York State Department of Health and the Orange County Department of
Health within 120 days following the service of notice by certified mail
to install said device.
D. Determination of type of backflow protection device.
§ A615-33 CIVIL DEFENSE EMERGENCIES § A615-33
A605:845
(1) The Director of Public Works or designee shall determine the type
of device required for each property and facility. In making this
determination, the Director of Public Works shall utilize the
"Sample List of Facilities Requiring Backflow Prevention,"
prepared by the Department of Health, and, if necessary, shall
consult with the Orange County Department of Health.
(2) Cross-connection control by facility type.
(a) The types of facilities which shall require installation of an
approved reduced pressure zone (RPZ) or air gap in the service
connection to the public water distribution system include, but
are not limited to:
[1] Sewage and industrial wastewater treatment plants and
pumping stations, sewer flushers;
[2] Paper manufacturing or processing, dye plants, petroleum
processing, printing plants, chemical manufacturing or
processing, industrial fluid systems, steam generation,
rubber processing, tanneries;
[3] Canneries, breweries, food processing, milk processing,
ice manufacturing, meat packers, poultry processing,
rendering companies;
[4] Hospitals, clinics, laboratories, veterinary hospitals,
mortuaries, embalmers;
[5] Shipyards, marinas;
[6] Metal plating, photo processing, laundries, commercial
car washes, commercial refrigeration systems, drycleaning
establishments;
[7] Commercial greenhouses, spraying and irrigation systems
using weedicides, herbicides and exterminators;
[8] Boiler systems, cooling towers or internal fire-fighting
systems using conditioners, inhibitors and corrosioncontrol
chemicals;
[9] Residential units with lawn and irrigation systems with
chemical injection.
(b) The type of facilities which shall require installation of an
approved double check valve in the service connection of the
public water distribution system include, but are not limited to;
[1] Customer fire protection loops and fire storage tanks with
no chemical additives;
[2] High-temperature potable water;
§ A615-33 PORT JERVIS CODE § A615-33
A605:846
[3] Utilization of food-grade dyes;
[4] Complex plumbing systems in commercial buildings, such
as, but not limited to, beauty salons, churches, apartment
buildings, gas stations, supermarkets, nursing homes,
construction sites and carnivals;
[5] Residential units with lawn and irrigation systems.
(c) The above lists are not all-inclusive. The type of backflow
prevention device required for each facility shall be
determined by the Director of Public Works or designee as set
forth above.
E. Testing; owner liability for costs. The testing of backflow prevention
devices shall be performed on an annual basis by the owner of any
system requiring same, and the cost of such testing shall borne by the
owner of the system. The testing procedures shall conform to the
requirements of the New York State Department of Health and Orange
County Department of Health. Test results shall be submitted to the
Director of Public Works.
F. Department of Health requirements. The Building Inspector shall
enforce this section and the cross-connection and backflow protection
requirements, specifications, guidelines and facilities classifications of
the New York State Department of Health and the Orange County
Department of Health. Specifications, guidelines, facilities,
classifications and other administrative requirements and information
which shall be used to implement the requirements shall be on file in
the Building Inspector's office.
G. Penalties for offenses. In addition to, and not in lieu of, any other
penalty set forth in this chapter, any person who violates any provision
of this section shall be subjected to a fine not to exceed $250 for each
day the violation continues after notice by the Building Inspector. In
addition, the service of water to any premises may be discontinued by
the City if backflow prevention devices required by this section or
regulations adopted pursuant thereto, are not installed, tested and
maintained; if any defects are found in an installed backflow prevention
device; if it is found that the backflow prevention device has been
removed or bypassed; or if an unprotected cross connection exists on
the premises, and water service shall not be restored until such
condition or defect is corrected.
§ A615-33 CIVIL DEFENSE EMERGENCIES § A615-33
A605:847
Derivation Table
Chapter DT
DERIVATION TABLE
Disposition List
Chapter DL
DISPOSITION LIST
§ DL-1. Disposition of legislation.
Local Law
Number
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
4-2006 11-27-2006 Use of sidewalks and
streets adjacent to
construction sites
amendment; zoning
amendment
Ch. 464, Art. III;
Ch. 535
5-2006 11-27-2006 Building Code
administration and
enforcement
Ch. 231
6-2006 11-27-2006 Zoning amendment Ch. 535
1-2007 2-12-2007 Towing amendment Ch. 486
3-26-2007 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 505
2-2007 2-26-2007 Adoption of Code Ch. 1, Art. II
3-2007 4-23-2007 Zoning Map
amendment
NCM
4-2007 6-11-2007 Solid waste amendment Ch. 457
5-2007 6-11-2007 Fines Ch. 283
6-18-2007 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 505
6-2007 7-23-2007 Unlicensed, inoperative
or discarded vehicles
Ch. 508
7-2007 7-23-2007 Fire Department
amendment
Ch. 55
8-22-2007 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 505
8-2007 8-27-2007 Zoning Map
amendment
NCM
§ A615-33 PORT JERVIS CODE § DL-1
DT:848
Local Law
Number
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
9-2007 8-27-2007 Zoning amendment Ch. 535
10-2007 9-10-2007 Domestic animals
amendment
Repealed by L.L.
No. 6-2016
12-4-2007 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 505
1-1-2008 Water rules and
regulations amendment
Ch. A615
1-2008 4-28-2008 Water rules and
regulations amendment
Ch. A615
2-2008 5-27-2008 Advertising materials Ch. 203
3-2008 5-12-2008 Sex offenders: child
safety zones
Ch. 447, Art. I
6-10-2008 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 505
7-17-2008 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 505
7-22-2008 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 505
9-2-2008 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 505
9-22-2008 Fees amendment Ch. 280
4-2008 10-27-2008 Zoning amendment Ch. 535
12-1-2008 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 505
2-3-2009 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 505
1-2009 2-23-2009 Zoning Map
amendment
NCM
2-2009 3-23-2009 Zoning amendment Ch. 535
4-7-2009 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 505
3-2009 4-13-2009 Peace and good order:
littering
Ch. 398, Art. II
4-2009 4-13-2009 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 505
5-2009 5-26-2009 Flood damage
prevention
Ch. 288
6-2009 6-22-2009 Zoning amendment Ch. 535
§ DL-1 DERIVATION TABLE § DL-1
DT:849
Local Law
Number
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
8-6-2009 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 505
7-2009 9-14-2009 Zoning Map
amendment
NCM
8-2009 9-14-2009 Charter amendment § C2-1
9-2009 9-28-2009 Retirement: health
insurance and other
benefits
Ch. 147, Art. I
10-18-2009 Fees amendment Ch. 280
11-23-2009 Fees amendment Ch. 280
10-2009 12-28-2009 Zoning amendment Ch. 535
11-2009 12-28-2009 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 505
12-2009 12-28-2009 Noise Ch. 381
13-2009 12-28-2009 Peddling and soliciting Ch. 403
12-28-2009 Water rules and
regulations amendment
Ch. A615
1-2010 1-11-2010 Auctions and
auctioneers amendment
Ch. 220
2-2010 11-8-2010 Domestic animals
amendment
Repealed by L.L.
No. 6-2016
3-1-2010 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 505
8-23-2010 Fees amendment Ch. 280
8-23-2010 Fees amendment Ch. 280
10-25-2010 Fees amendment Ch. 280
10-25-2010 Fees amendment Ch. 280
11-17-2010 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 505
1-26-2011 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 505
1-2011 3-14-2011 Shade Tree
Commission
Ch. 153
3-25-2011 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 505
2-2011 6-27-2011 Electrical standards
and requirements
amendment
Ch. 267
3-2011 6-27-2011 Plumbing amendment Ch. 410
§ DL-1 PORT JERVIS CODE § DL-1
DT:850
Local Law
Number
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
6-27-2011 Fees amendment Ch. 280
6-27-2011 Fees amendment Ch. 280
4-2011 7-11-2011 Habitual offenders Ch. 310
12-22-2011 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 505
1-18-2012 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 505
1-2012 2-27-2012 Parks and recreation
amendment
Ch. 389
3-15-2012 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 505
3-15-2012 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 505
4-9-2012 Domestic animals
amendment
Repealed by L.L.
No. 6-2016
6-20-2012 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 505
6-20-2012 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 505
6-20-2012 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 505
6-20-2012 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 505
2-2012 7-23-2012 Streets, sidewalks and
public property:
general regulations
amendment
Ch. 464, Art. I
9-1-2012 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 505
3-2012 9-10-2012 2013 tax levy limit
override
NCM
11-13-2012 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 505
4-2012 11-26-2012 Domestic animals
amendment; parks and
recreation amendment
Repealed by L.L.
No. 6-2016; Ch.
389
12-10-2012 Fees amendment Ch. 280
12-15-2012 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 505
§ DL-1 DERIVATION TABLE § DL-1
DT:851
Local Law
Number
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
1-2013 1-28-2013 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 505
2-2013 3-25-2013 Multiple dwelling units
amendment; zoning
amendment
Ch. 370; Ch. 535
3-2013 4-8-2013 Housing standards
amendment; multiple
dwelling units
amendment; zoning
amendment
Ch. 370; Ch. 535
4-2013 5-28-2013 Zoning amendment Ch. 535
5-2013 5-28-2013 Zoning amendment Ch. 535
5-28-2013 Fees amendment Ch. 280
6-2013 6-24-2013 2014 tax levy limit
override
NCM
7-2013 9-23-2013 Domestic animals
amendment; zoning
amendment
Repealed by L.L.
No. 6-2016; Ch.
535
10-15-2013 Fees amendment Ch. 280
10-15-2013 Fees amendment Ch. 280
8-2013 10-28-2013 Solid waste
amendment; zoning
amendment
Ch. 457; 535
9-2013 12-9-2013 Fees amendment;
peddling and soliciting
amendment
Ch. 403
12-9-2013 Water rules and
regulations amendment
Ch. A615
12-23-2013 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 505
1-2014 2-24-2014 Zoning Map
amendment
NCM
2-2014 4-28-2014 Escrow deposits Ch. 272
3-2014 5-27-2014 Zoning amendment Ch. 535
4-2014 5-27-2014 Abandoned, vacant,
boarded, and
foreclosed properties
Ch. 415
5-2014 5-27-2014 Pawnbrokers
amendment
Ch. 394
6-2014 5-27-2014 Zoning amendment Ch. 535
§ DL-1 PORT JERVIS CODE § DL-1
DT:852
Local Law
Number
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
7-2014 5-27-2014 Film and video
productions
Ch. 282
8-2014 6-23-2014 Taxation: exemption for
improvements to
residential buildings
Superseded by
L.L. No. 12-2016
9-2014 7-14-2014 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 505
10-2014 7-14-2014 2015 tax levy limit
override
Repealed by L.L.
No. 1-2015
11-2014 10-14-2014 Zoning Map
amendment
NCM
8-11-2014 Fees amendment Ch. 280
12-2014 10-14-2014 Sewers and sewage
disposal amendment
Ch. 445; see
§ 445-142B
13-2014 12-8-2014 Sewers and sewage
disposal amendment
Repealed by L.L.
No. 11-2017
1-2015 1-12-2015 2015 tax levy limit
override repealer
NCM
2-2015 2-23-2015 Electrical standards
and requirements
amendment; solid
waste amendment;
streets, sidewalks and
public property:
general regulations
amendment
Ch. 267; Ch. 457;
Ch. 464, Art. I
3-2015 6-22-2015 2016 tax levy limit
override
NCM
4-2015 7-27-2015 Subdivision of land
amendment; zoning
amendment
See Ch. 470; Ch.
535
5-2015 7-27-2015 Charter amendment § C6-20; § C6-24; §
C6-25; § C6-27
through §C6-30
9-2-2015 Fees amendment Ch. 280
6-2015 12-14-2015 Rental property:
absentee landlords
amendment
Ch. 430, Art. I
7-2015 12-14-2015 Zoning amendment Repealed by L.L.
No. 1-2017
§ DL-1 DERIVATION TABLE § DL-1
DT:853
Local Law
Number
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
8-2015 12-14-2015 Dangerous buildings
amendment
Ch. 234
12-14-2015 Fees amendment Ch. 280
9-2015 12-28-2015 Zoning amendment Ch. 535
12-28-2015 Fees amendment Ch. 280
1-2016 2-8-2016 2017 tax levy limit
override
NCM
2-2016 2-8-2016 Building code
administration and
enforcement
Ch. 231
3-2016 2-8-2016 Taxation: collection of
delinquent fees, fines
and other charges
Ch. 475, Art. VII
4-2016 2-8-2016 Zoning amendment Ch. 535
5-2016 2-22-2016 Streets, sidewalks and
public property: snow
and ice removal
amendment
Ch. 464, Art. IV
6-2016 3-28-2016 Animals, dog control
and other
Ch. 215
7-2016 3-28-2016 Charter amendment § C2-2
8-2016 3-28-2016 Zoning amendment Ch. 535
9-2016 4-25-2016 Taxicabs Ch. 479
10-2016 4-25-2016 Water: emergency use
amendment; zoning
amendment
Ch. 513; Ch. 535
11-2016 4-25-2016 Property maintenance:
use of road paving
materials in front yards
or for sidewalks
Ch. 417, Art. II
12-2016 6-13-2016 Taxation: exemption for
improvements to
residential buildings
Ch. 475, Art. VI
13-2016 6-13-2016 2017 tax levy limit
override
NCM
14-2016 6-27-2017 Zoning Map
amendment
NCM
15-2016 6-27-2016 Zoning amendment Ch. 535
16-2015 11-28-2016 Fees amendment Ch. 280
1-2017 1-9-2017 Zoning amendment Ch. 535
§ DL-1 PORT JERVIS CODE § DL-1
DT:854
Local Law
Number
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2-2017 1-9-2017 Solid waste amendment Ch. 457
3-2017 1-9-2017 Parks and recreation:
Watershed Recreational
Area
Ch. 389, Art. II
4-2017 2-27-2017 Electrical standards
and requirements
amendment
Ch. 267
5-2017 2-27-2017 Building code
administration and
enforcement
amendment
Ch. 231
6-2017 3-13-2017 Zoning Map
amendment
NCM
7-2017 5-22-2017 2018 tax levy limit
override
NCM
8-2017 5-22-2017 Fees amendment Ch. 280
9-2017 5-22-2017 Charter amendment § C4-7
10-2017 5-22-2017 Taxicabs amendment Ch. 479
11-2017 6-12-2017 Sewers and sewage
disposal
Ch. 445
12-2017 10-10-2017 Fireworks Ch. 285
13-2017 10-10-2017 Film and Video
Productions
Amendment
Ch. 282
14-2017 10-23-2017 Taxation: Grievances of
Assessments
Ch. 475, Art. VIII
15-2017 12-11-2017 Habitual Offenders
Amendment
Ch. 310
1-2018 1-22-2018 Zoning Amendment Ch. 535
2-2018 5-14-2018 Tax Levy Limit Override NCM
3-2018 5-14-2018 Vehicles, Unlicensed,
Inoperative or
Discarded Amendment
Ch. 508
5-14-2018 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment (Fines and
Fees for Non-Moving
Violations)
Ch. 505
§ DL-1 DERIVATION TABLE § DL-1
DT:855
Local Law
Number
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
4-2018 5-28-2018 Taxation: Exemption for
Improvements to
Residential Buildings
Amendment
Ch. 475, Art. VI
5-2018 6-11-2018 Streets, Sidewalks and
Public Property:
General Regulations
Amendment; Zoning
Amendment
Ch. 464, Art. I;
Ch. 535
6-2018 6-11-2018 Moratorium NCM
7-2018 8-28-2018 Zoning Amendment Ch. 535
9-17-2018 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 505
8-2018 9-24-2018 Zoning Amendment Ch. 535
9-2018 9-24-2018 Zoning Amendment Ch. 535
1-2019 12-17-2018 Peddling and Soliciting
Amendment
Ch. 403
1-1-2019 Fees Amendment Ch. 280
1-1-2019 Water Rates NCM
1-1-2019 Sewer Rates NCM
§ DL-1 PORT JERVIS CODE § DL-1
DT:856

ZONING
535 Attachment 1
City of Port Jervis
Table of Use and Bulk Requirements
Description of Permitted Uses Bulk Requirements
Lot Area
(square feet)
Width
(feet)
Depth
(feet) Front
Both
Sides
One
Side Rear
Height
(feet)
Percent
Coverage
R-1 Low Density Residential
7,500 75
100
20
25 10
30 35
30%
R-2 Medium Density Residential
6,000 60
20
20
8 30 35
MC Mountain Conservation District
40,000 150 200 40 60 30 50 35 20%
