Part I: Administrative Legislation
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
1:1

ARTICLE I
Adoption of Code
[Adopted 12-16-2015 by L.L. No. 3-2015]
§ 1-1. Legislative intent.
In accordance with Subdivision 3 of § 20 of the Municipal Home Rule Law,
the local laws, ordinances and certain resolutions of the Town of Penfield,
as codified by General Code, and consisting of Chapters 1 through 255,
together with an Appendix, shall be known collectively as the "Code of
the Town of Penfield," hereafter termed the "Code." Wherever reference is
made in any of the local laws, ordinances and resolutions contained in the
Code of the Town of Penfield to any other local law, ordinance or resolution
appearing in said Code, such reference shall be changed to the appropriate
chapter title, chapter number, article number or section number appearing
in the Code as if such local law, ordinance or resolution had been formally
amended to so read.
§ 1-2. Continuation of existing provisions.
The provisions of the Code, insofar as they are substantively the same as
those of local laws, ordinances and resolutions in force immediately prior to
the enactment of the Code by this local law, are intended as a continuation
of such local laws, ordinances and resolutions and not as new enactments,
and the effectiveness of such provisions shall date from the date of adoption
of the prior local law, ordinance or resolution. All such provisions are hereby
continued in full force and effect and are hereby reaffirmed as to their
adoption by the Town Board of the Town of Penfield, and it is the intention
of said Town Board that each such provision contained within the Code is
hereby reaffirmed as it appears in said Code. Only such provisions of former
local laws and ordinances as are omitted from this Code shall be deemed
repealed or abrogated by the provisions of § 1-3 below.
§ 1-3. Repealer.
A. Repeal of inconsistent enactments. Except as provided in § 1-4,
Enactments saved from repeal; matters not affected, below, all local
laws and ordinances, or parts of such local laws or ordinances,
inconsistent with the provisions contained in the Code adopted by this
local law are hereby repealed as of the adoption and filing of this local
law as set forth in § 1-13; provided, however, that such repeal shall only
be to the extent of such inconsistency, and any valid legislation of the
Town of Penfield which is not in conflict with the provisions of the Code
shall be deemed to remain in full force and effect.
B. Repeal of specific enactments. The Town Board of the Town of Penfield
has determined that the following local laws and/or ordinances are no
longer in effect and hereby specifically repeals the following legislation:
§ 1-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-3
1:3
§ 1-4. Enactments saved from repeal; matters not affected.
The repeal of local laws and ordinances provided for in § 1-3 of this local law
shall not affect the following classes of local laws, ordinances, rights and
obligations, which are hereby expressly saved from repeal:
(1) Local Law No. 1-1965, adopted February 1, 1965, regarding
procedures for the adoption of local laws.
(2) Local Law No. 1-1985, adopted July 15, 1985, regarding building
construction.
(3) Local Law No. 1-1987, regarding the licensing of plumbers.
(4) Local Law No. 1-1992, adopted January 15, 1992, regarding open
space easements.
A. Any right or liability established, accrued or incurred under any
legislative provision of the Town of Penfield prior to the effective date of
this local law or any action or proceeding brought for the enforcement
of such right or liability.
B. Any offense or act committed or done before the effective date of this
local law in violation of any legislative provision of the Town of Penfield
or any penalty, punishment or forfeiture which may result therefrom.
C. Any prosecution, indictment, action, suit or other proceeding pending
or any judgment rendered prior to the effective date of this local law
brought pursuant to any legislative provision of the Town of Penfield.
D. Any agreement entered into or any franchise, license, right, easement
or privilege heretofore granted or conferred by the Town of Penfield.
E. Any local law or ordinance of the Town of Penfield providing for the
laying out, opening, altering, widening, relocating, straightening,
establishing grade, changing name, improvement, acceptance or
vacation of any right-of-way, easement, street, road, highway, park or
other public place within the Town of Penfield or any portion thereof.
F. Any local law or ordinance of the Town of Penfield appropriating money
or transferring funds, promising or guaranteeing the payment of money
or authorizing the issuance and delivery of any bond of the Town of
Penfield or other instruments or evidence of the Town’s indebtedness.
G. Local laws or ordinances authorizing the purchase, sale, lease or
transfer of property, or any lawful contract, agreement or obligation.
H. The levy or imposition of special assessments or charges.
I. The annexation or dedication of property.
J. Any local law or ordinance relating to salaries and compensation.
K. Any local law or ordinance amending the Official Zoning Map.
§ 1-3 PENFIELD CODE § 1-4
1:4
§ 1-5. Severability.
If any clause, sentence, paragraph, section, article, chapter or part of
this local law or of any local law, ordinance or resolution included in this
Code now or through supplementation shall be adjudged by any court of
competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such judgment shall not affect, impair
or invalidate the remainder thereof but shall be confined in its operation
to the clause, sentence, paragraph, section, article, chapter or part thereof
directly involved in the controversy in which such judgment shall have been
rendered.
§ 1-6. Copy of Code on file.
A copy of the Code, in loose-leaf form, has been filed in the office of the
Town Clerk of the Town of Penfield and shall remain there for use and
examination by the public until final action is taken on this local law; and,
if this local law shall be adopted, such copy shall be certified by the Town
Clerk of the Town of Penfield by impressing thereon the Seal of the Town
of Penfield, and such certified copy shall remain on file in the office of said
Town Clerk to be made available to persons desiring to examine the same
during all times while said Code is in effect. The enactment and publication
of this local law, coupled with the availability of a copy of the Code for
inspection by the public, shall be deemed, held and considered to be due
and legal publication of all provisions of the Code for all purposes.
§ 1-7. Amendments to Code.
Any and all additions, deletions, amendments or supplements to any of the
local laws, ordinances and resolutions known collectively as the "Code of
the Town of Penfield" or any new local laws, ordinances or resolutions,
when enacted or adopted in such form as to indicate the intention of the
Town to be a part thereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated into such
Code so that reference to the Code shall be understood and intended to
include such additions, deletions, amendments or supplements. Whenever
such additions, deletions, amendments or supplements to the Code shall be
enacted or adopted, they shall thereafter be incorporated into said Code as
amendments and supplements thereto. Nothing contained in this local law
shall affect the status of any local law, ordinance or resolution contained
herein, and such local laws, ordinances or resolutions may be amended,
deleted or changed from time to time as the Town Board deems desirable.
L. Any local law or ordinance relating to or establishing a pension plan or
pension fund for Town employees.
M. Any local law or ordinance or portion of a local law or ordinance
establishing a specific fee amount for any license, permit or service
obtained from the Town.
N. Any local law or ordinance adopted subsequent to November 4, 2015.
§ 1-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-8
1:5
§ 1-8. Code to be kept up-to-date.
It shall be the duty of the Town Clerk to keep up-to-date the copy of the Code
of the Town of Penfield required to be filed in the office of the Town Clerk
for use by the public. All changes in said Code and all local laws, ordinances
and resolutions adopted by the Town Board subsequent to the enactment
of this local law in such form as to indicate the intention of said Town
Board to be a part of said Code shall, when finally enacted or adopted, be
included therein by temporary attachment of copies of such changes, local
laws, ordinances or resolutions until such changes, local laws, ordinances
or resolutions are included as supplements to said Code, at which time such
supplements shall be inserted therein.
§ 1-9. Sale of Code; supplementation.
Copies of the Code, or any chapter or portion of it, may be purchased from
the Town Clerk, or an authorized agent of the Clerk, upon the payment of a
fee to be set by resolution of the Town Board. The Clerk may also arrange
for procedures for the periodic supplementation of the Code.
§ 1-10. Penalties for tampering with Code.
Any person who alters or tampers with the Code of the Town of Penfield
in any manner whatsoever which will cause the legislation of the Town of
Penfield to be misrepresented thereby, or who violates any other provision
of this local law, shall be guilty of an offense and shall, upon conviction
thereof, be subject to a fine of not more than $250 or imprisonment for a
term of not more than 15 days, or both.
§ 1-11. Changes in previously adopted legislation; new provisions.
§ 1-12. Incorporation of provisions into Code.
The provisions of this local law are hereby made Article I of Chapter 1 of
the Code of the Town of Penfield, such local law to be entitled "General
A. In compiling and preparing the local laws, ordinances and resolutions
for publication as the Code of the Town of Penfield, no changes in the
meaning or intent of such local laws, ordinances and resolutions have
been made, except as provided for in Subsection B hereof. In addition,
certain grammatical changes and other minor nonsubstantive changes
were made in one or more of said pieces of legislation. It is the intention
of the Town Board that all such changes be adopted as part of the Code
as if the local laws, ordinances and resolutions had been previously
formally amended to read as such.
B. In addition, the amendments and/or additions as set forth in Schedule A
attached hereto and made a part hereof are made herewith, to become
effective upon the effective date of this local law. (Chapter and section
number references are to the local laws, ordinances and resolutions as
they have been renumbered and appear in the Code.)
§ 1-8 PENFIELD CODE § 1-12
1:6
Provisions, Article I, Adoption of Code," and the sections of this local law
shall be numbered §§ 1-1 to 1-13, inclusive.
§ 1-13. When effective.
This local law shall take effect immediately upon filing with the Secretary of
State of the State of New York.
§ 1-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-13
1:7

ARTICLE II
Penalties and Enforcement
[Adopted 12-16-2015 by L.L. No. 3-2015]
§ 1-14. Penalties for offenses.
Whenever in this Code or in any ordinance, local law, rule, resolution, order
or regulation of the Town any act is prohibited or is made or declared to
be unlawful, is an offense against the ordinance, local law, rule, resolution,
order or regulation or whenever in such Code or ordinance, local law,
rule, resolution, order or regulation the doing of any act is required or
the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful, where no specific
penalty is provided therefor, the violation of any such provision of this Code
or any ordinance, local law, rule, resolution, order or regulation shall be
punished by a fine not exceeding $350 or imprisonment for a period not
to exceed 15 days, or both, for conviction of a first offense; for conviction
of a second offense, both of which were committed within a period of
five years, punishable by a fine not less than $350 nor more than $700
or imprisonment for a period not to exceed 15 days, or both; and upon
conviction for a third or subsequent offense, all of which were committed
within a period of five years, punishable by a fine not less than $700 nor
more than $1,000 or imprisonment for a period not to exceed 15 days,
or both. However, for the purpose of conferring jurisdiction upon courts
and judicial officers generally, violations of such ordinance, local law, rule,
resolution, order or regulation shall be deemed misdemeanors and for such
purpose only all provisions of law relating to misdemeanors shall apply to
such violations. Each week's continued violation shall constitute a separate
additional violation.
§ 1-15. Prosecution under multiple provisions; limitation on
recovery.
In all cases where the same offense may be made punishable or shall
be created by different clauses or sections of the laws of the Town, the
prosecuting officer may elect under which to proceed; but not more than
one recovery shall be had against the same person for the same offense.
§ 1-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-15
1:9
Chapter 7
APPEARANCE TICKETS
§ 7-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to authorize public servants of the Town of
Penfield to issue and serve appearance tickets in connection with violations
of state statutes, local laws, ordinances or rules and regulations of the Town
which the public servants are authorized to enforce.
§ 7-2. Definitions.
As defined in New York Criminal Procedure Law § 1.20(26), "appearance
ticket" means a written notice issued by a public servant, more fully defined
in Criminal Procedure Law § 150.10, requiring a person to appear before a
local criminal court in connection with an accusatory instrument to be filed
against him or her therein.
§ 7-3. Form and content.
Appearance tickets issued hereunder shall conform in form and content to
the requirements of Criminal Procedure Law § 150.10 as it now exists or
may hereafter be amended.
§ 7-4. Persons authorized to issue and serve tickets.
The following public servants of the Town of Penfield are hereby authorized
to issue and serve appearance tickets with respect to violations of a state
statute, a local law, ordinance, rule or regulation of the Town of Penfield
which such public servants are, respectively, required or authorized to
enforce:
A. Director of Public Works.
B. Building Inspector/Zoning Administrator.
C. Building/Code Compliance Inspector.
D. Assistant Building/Code Compliance Inspector.
E. Fire Marshal.
F. Dog/Animal Control Officer.
G. Park security personnel.
H. Any other public servant of the Town of Penfield who, by virtue of office,
title or position is authorized or required to enforce any state statute,
local law, ordinance, rule or regulation of the Town of Penfield.
§ 1-15 PENFIELD CODE § 7-5
1:10
§ 7-5. Areas in which issuance is authorized.
Any authorized public servant may issue and serve an appearance ticket in
the lawful enforcement of any state statute, local law, ordinance, rule or
regulation of the Town of Penfield.
Chapter 11
BOARDS AND PERSONNEL
§ 7-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-5
1:11

ARTICLE I
Department of Recreation
[Adopted 11-20-1969 by L.L. No. 1-1969]
§ 11-1. Creation of Department.
There is hereby created within the Town of Penfield a department to be
known as the "Department of Recreation."
§ 11-2. Director of Recreation. [Amended 12-16-2015 by L.L. No.
3-2015]
There is hereby created the office of Director of Recreation to administer
the Department of Recreation. Under general supervision from the Town
Supervisor, the Director of Recreation shall perform administrative,
supervisory and professional work in the planning, development, evaluation
and operation of a comprehensive public recreation program for the
community. Positions in the Department shall be filled utilizing civil service
standards. The Town Board may appoint assistant directors as necessary.
§ 11-3. Duties and responsibilities of Director.
The Director of Recreation shall have the following responsibilities and
perform the following duties:
A. Implement the policies adopted by the Town Board; administer the
work of the Department; submit plans, furnish data and recommend
policies to the Town Board.
B. Subject to the approval of the Town Board, employ and, for cause,
remove personnel in the Department; organize, train and supervise the
staff, including volunteers; assign duties and maintain good
relationships between the workers.
C. Select and approve the activities to be carried on, the special events to
be presented, the service to be provided and the new projects to be
initiated.
D. Direct the expenditure of Department funds in accordance with budget
appropriations, prepare annual estimates of the Department's financial
needs and supervise the keeping of complete records of receipts and
expenditures.
E. Keep complete records of Department activities and services, personnel
and property, and prepare regular reports.
F. Conduct studies of local conditions and needs affecting recreation,
check the effectiveness of the various Department services and keep
informed as to developments in the recreation field.
G. Arrange for proper maintenance and operation of the areas and
facilities under the control of the Department, determine the season
§ 11-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 11-3
1:13
§ 11-4. Parks and Recreation Board.
A Parks and Recreation Board may be established by resolution of the Town
Board pursuant to Town Law § 51, Subdivision 5. The number of Parks and
Recreation Board members and Chair shall be at the discretion of the Town
Board.
during which they are to be open and recommend new improvements
or extensions of the recreation system.
H. Interpret recreation to the Town Board and the general public, arrange
for publicity to keep other Town officials and local agencies concerned
with recreation informed, and participate in Town organizations and
activities in which recreation has a vital interest.
§ 11-3 PENFIELD CODE § 11-4
1:14
ARTICLE II
Department of Public Works
[Adopted 12-19-1988 by L.L. No. 4-1988]
§ 11-5. Creation of Department.
There is hereby created within the Town of Penfield a department to be
known as the "Department of Public Works."
§ 11-6. Scope of authority.
The Highway Department is hereby assigned to said Department of Public
Works for supervision, which includes highway, drainage and solid waste.
§ 11-7. Director and Deputy Director.
The position of Director of Public Works is hereby created to administer
such Department. The position of Deputy Director of Public Works is also
created to assist the Director in specific duties/tasks assigned. The terms of
office shall be at the discretion of the Town Board.
§ 11-8. Duties and responsibilities of Director.
The Director of Public Works shall have the following responsibilities and
perform the following duties:
A. Supervise and direct the activities of the Highway Department, which
include highway, drainage and solid waste. This supervision shall
coordinate the policies of the Town Board.
B. Ascertain that the Town ordinances/local laws, county and state codes,
rules or regulations that pertain to the Public Works Department are
complied with and implemented where necessary.
C. Establish and maintain close liaison and cooperation with the State and
County Departments of Public Works/Highways.
D. From reports submitted by department heads and other sources,
formulate programs for the various special districts/programs
(drainage, highway, solid waste) that will efficiently meet the needs of
the people in the special district/Townwide.
E. Ensure that all highway equipment, facilities and buildings are
adequately maintained through periodical inspections and report to the
Town Board any findings that require action.
F. Review and approve any specifications for supplies, new equipment and
repairs before the specifications are submitted for competitive bidding.
G. Review and manage the public works budget; submit a monthly report
to the Town Board.
§ 11-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 11-8
1:15
H. Ensure that all public works projects under contract to private
individuals and projects being performed by Town personnel are
adequately inspected.
I. Answer questions, investigate requests for assistance relating to public
works issues, whether received from the public or assigned by the Town
Supervisor, report to the Supervisor as to how the matter was disposed
of and include in the monthly report to the Town Board a summary of
complaints by category.
J. Prepare news items involving public works for release to the news
media. The Supervisor and Town Board must approve the items before
release and will determine the extent of coverage.
K. Develop a five-year capital expenditure program for the Highway
Department and submit it to the Town Board annually.
L. Recommend to the Town Board any new ordinances/local laws or
revisions to existing ones that will improve the operation or efficiency of
the Department or in any way favorably affect the general welfare of
the Town and its residents.
M. Recommend to the Town Board any changes in the organization of the
Highway Department that seem desirable.
N. Administer Town personnel policies affecting Highway Department
employees, and write job classifications; perform all necessary
performance appraisals for each employee.
O. Establish personnel training procedures and ensure that there will be
sufficient manpower available and trained when vacancies occur or
during an absence.
P. Establish uniform procedures for hiring new personnel.
Q. Establish procedures for determining the operating and maintenance
costs on all major equipment items and make economic comparisons
when requested by the Supervisor or Town Board.
R. Have the power, subject to the approval of the Town Board, to appoint
and, for cause, remove personnel in the Highway Department.
S. Issue stop-work orders whenever the Director of Public Works has
reasonable grounds to believe that any work pertaining to roadway and
drainage construction is in violation of any ordinance, local law or the
design criteria of the Town of Penfield or that such work or activity
endangers life, property or the environmental balance.
(1) The Director of Public Works shall have the authority to designate
employees of the Department to issue orders to stop work on his or
her behalf.
§ 11-8 PENFIELD CODE § 11-8
1:16
§ 11-9. Duties and responsibilities of Deputy Director.
The Deputy Director of Public Works is to provide any and all support
services to the Director of Public Works in the form of inspections,
reviewing/developing programs or any other support seminars requested.
§ 11-10. Qualifications for Director.
The qualifications for Director of Public Works shall be as follows:
§ 11-11. Qualifications for Deputy Director.
(2) When an order to stop work is issued pursuant to other authority
granted hereinabove, such order shall be posted by the Director of
Public Works in a conspicuous place in the vicinity of the work or
activity in violation.
(3) It shall be an offense for any person to fail to comply with a
properly issued order to stop work. Each day that such an offense
continues shall be deemed a separate offense. Each offense shall be
punishable by a fine of not more than $500 or 15 days'
imprisonment, or both. [Amended 12-16-2015 by L.L. No.
3-2015]
A. The Director of Public Works shall be completely familiar with the
Town, operation of all departments and have a general knowledge of
highway equipment. He/She must be technically competent to perform
all of the duties outlined above in § 11-8. It is desirable that he/she have
one or more years' experience as an administrative employee of the
Town before assuming the job. A college degree is also desirable, but
eight years of experience may be accepted in lieu thereof. Knowledge of
law, engineering and highway construction is essential.
B. The Director of Public Works must be knowledgeable in modern
administrative procedures, accounting techniques and office methods.
He/She must have the ability to maintain good relationships with
subordinates and the other Town departments. He/She must be adapt in
serving the Town's residents and in dealing with developers,
contractors, professional people, the news media and others with whom
contact is made.
A. The Deputy Director of Public Works shall be completely familiar with
the Town, the operation of all departments and have a general
knowledge of Town equipment and appurtenance.
B. The individual must have a minimum of three years' experience as an
employee in one of the following Town departments: Highway, Sanitary
Sewer, Planning, Zoning and Physical Services, Recreation or the
Building Department.
C. This position has no supervisory responsibilities.
§ 11-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 11-12
1:17
§ 11-12. Supersession of state law.
This article is intended to supersede New York Town Law § 64, Subdivision
21-a(2), relating to the term of office of the Director of Public Works.
§ 11-12 PENFIELD CODE § 11-12
1:18
ARTICLE III
Animal Control Officer
[Adopted 6-2-1993 by L.L. No. 3-1993]
§ 11-13. Title.
This article shall be known as the "Town of Penfield Animal Control Officer
Law."
§ 11-14. Purpose.
The purposes of this article are to protect the health, safety and welfare
of persons; to protect and preserve public and private property, peace and
good order; and to promote the taking of effective and appropriate action
when wildlife or animals become a nuisance, destroy property or menace an
individual or domestic animal.
§ 11-15. Authority.
This article is adopted under authority of the New York Constitution, Article
IX, the Municipal Home Rule Law, and the Town Law.
§ 11-16. Position created; qualifications; appointment.
The position of Animal Control Officer is hereby created. Such person
shall be educated in the care, seizure, custody, confinement, trapping,
destruction and disposal of animals. Such person shall be appointed by and
serve at the pleasure of the Town Board.
§ 11-17. Powers, duties and requirements.
The Animal Control Officer shall:
A. Take the training required by the State Department of Environmental
Conservation (DEC) so as to qualify and receive the nuisance wildlife
control license issued by the DEC.
B. Be protected against rabies by pre-exposure vaccination.
C. Act as a Town Dog Control Officer as provided in the Penfield Dog
Ordinance.1
D. Have responsibilities and render assistance relating to domestic cats.
E. Render assistance to residents of the Town whose persons and/or
property are threatened by wild animals.
F. Report cases of cruelty or suspected cruelty to animals to the Humane
Society of Rochester and Monroe County.
1. Editor's Note: See Ch. 90, Animals.
§ 11-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 11-17
1:19
§ 11-18. Appearance tickets.
The Animal Control Officer is authorized to issue appearance tickets for
violations of local laws and ordinances which such officer is responsible for
enforcing.
G. Deliver injured wildlife to a New York State licensed rehabilitator.
H. Deliver sick wildlife, other than those with rabies or suspected of being
rabid, to a duly licensed veterinarian.
I. Take and release wildlife to the wild.
J. Destroy or arrange for the destruction of animals, and in the case of
animals with rabies or suspected of being rabid, arrange for the
delivery of the destroyed animal's brain to the Monroe County
Department of Health.
K. Cooperate with New York State and Monroe County wildlife officers,
police and peace officers in dealing with wildlife problems.
§ 11-17 PENFIELD CODE § 11-18
1:20
ARTICLE IV
Residency Requirements
[Adopted 11-16-1994 by L.L. No. 3-1994]
§ 11-19. Title.
This article shall be known as the "Town of Penfield Residency Exemption
Law."
§ 11-20. Legislative intent.
The purpose of this article is to provide the Town of Penfield with greater
flexibility in appointing the most qualified persons to hold appointed offices
by permitting persons to be considered for such positions who reside in a
broad geographical area surrounding the Town.
§ 11-21. Exemption. [Amended 12-16-2015 by L.L. No. 3-2015]
The provisions of any section of law requiring a person to be a resident of
the political subdivision or municipal corporation of the state for which he
or she shall be chosen or within which his or her official functions are to
be exercised shall not prevent a person from holding any Penfield appointed
public office, provided that such person resides in Monroe County.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, members of the following boards shall not
be included in the foregoing exemption and members thereof shall continue
to be residents of the Town of Penfield: Planning Board, Zoning Board of
Appeals, Conservation Board, Historic Preservation Board, Library Board,
Board of Assessment Review, and any other board deemed appropriate by
the Town Board.
§ 11-22. Supersession of state law.
This article is intended to supersede any contrary provisions contained in
Town Law § 23 and Public Officers Law § 3.
§ 11-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 11-22
1:21

ARTICLE V
Town Clerk's Term of Office
[Adopted 8-16-2000 by L.L. No. 5-2000]
§ 11-23. Statutory authority.
This article is enacted pursuant to the authority contained in the Municipal
Home Rule Law of the State of New York.
§ 11-24. Increase in term.
The term of office of the elected Town Clerk shall be four years. Such fouryear
term shall commence as of the first day of January 2002, and shall
apply to the person elected to such office at the biennial Town election to
be held on November 6, 2001, and to those elected thereafter, provided a
proposition submitted pursuant to § 11-25 below is approved.
§ 11-25. Mandatory referendum.
This article is adopted subject to a mandatory referendum and shall be
submitted for approval of the qualified voters of the Town of Penfield at
the general election to be held on November 7, 2000. A proposition in the
following form shall be included on the ballot at such election, and the
increased term of office shall not take effect unless such proposition is
approved by a majority of the qualified voters voting thereon: "Shall Local
Law No. 5-2000, increasing the term of office of the Town Clerk from two
years to four years, be approved?"
§ 11-26. Supersession of state law.
This article shall supersede Town Law § 24, relating to the term of office for
the Town Clerk of the Town of Penfield.
§ 11-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 11-26
1:23

ARTICLE VI
Planning Board
[Adopted 3-19-2003 by L.L. No. 3-2003; amended in its entirety
12-16-2015 by L.L. No. 3-2015]
§ 11-27. Establishment.
A Planning Board may be established by the Town Board pursuant to Town
Law § 271. The number of Planning Board members and Chair shall be at
the discretion of the Town Board.
§ 11-28. Terms of office.
A. Legislative intent. The purpose of this section is to provide the Town of
Penfield with greater flexibility in appointing the most qualified persons
to become or continue to serve as members of the Penfield Planning
Board.
B. Terms of office of members first appointed. Notwithstanding any
provisions of any section of law to the contrary, in the creation of a new
Planning Board, or the reestablishment of terms of an existing Planning
Board, the appointment of each member to said Board shall be for a
term not to exceed three years.
C. Supersession of state law. This section is intended to supersede any
contrary provisions contained in Town Law § 271.
§ 11-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 11-28
1:25

ARTICLE VII
Zoning Board of Appeals
[Adopted 12-3-2003 by L.L. No. 4-2003; amended in its entirety
12-16-2015 by L.L. No. 3-2015]
§ 11-29. Establishment.
A Zoning Board of Appeals is established by resolution of the Town Board
pursuant to Town Law § 267. The number of Zoning Board of Appeals
members and Chair shall be at the discretion of the Town Board.
§ 11-30. Terms of office.
§ 11-31. Procedure.
The Zoning Board of Appeals, consistent with the provisions of the Town
Law applicable thereto, shall determine its own rules of conduct and
procedure.
A. Legislative intent. The purpose of this section is to provide the Town of
Penfield with greater flexibility in appointing the most qualified persons
to become or continue to serve as members of the Penfield Zoning
Board of Appeals.
B. Terms of office of members first appointed. Notwithstanding any
provisions of any section of law to the contrary, in the creation of a new
Zoning Board of Appeals or the reestablishment of terms on an existing
Zoning Board of Appeals, the appointment of each member to said
Board shall be for a term not to exceed three years. Each member's
appointment and term of office shall be made by resolution of the
Penfield Town Board.
C. Supersession of state law. This section is intended to supersede any
contrary provisions contained in Town Law § 267.
§ 11-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 11-31
1:27

ARTICLE VIII
Historic Preservation Board
[Adopted 12-16-2015 by L.L. No. 3-2015]
§ 11-32. Establishment.
A Historic Preservation Board may be established by resolution of the Town
Board pursuant to Town Law § 64, Subdivision 17-a, and General Municipal
Law § 96-A. The number of Historic Preservation Board members and Chair
shall be at the discretion of the Town Board.
§ 11-33. Members.
The Penfield Historic Preservation Board shall consist of seven members to
be appointed, to the extent available in the community, by the Town Board
as follows:
§ 11-34. Terms of office.
Board members shall serve for terms of five years. Members shall serve
terms with staggered expiration dates. The Chair of the Board shall be
appointed by the Town Board for a twelve-month period, effective January 1
of each year.
§ 11-35. Powers and duties.
The powers of the Board shall include:
A. At least one shall be an architect experienced in working with historic
buildings.
B. At least one shall be an historian.
C. At least one shall be a resident in an historic preservation overlay
district, or an owner of an historic property.
D. At least one shall have demonstrated significant interest in the field of
historic preservation by involvement in a local preservation group,
employment or volunteer activity in the field of historic preservation.
E. All members shall have a known interest in historic preservation and
architectural development within the Town of Penfield.
A. Making recommendations to the Town Board for the employment of
staff and professional consultants as necessary to carry out the duties of
the Board.
B. Promulgating rules and regulations as necessary for the conduct of its
business.
C. Designating structures, property(ies) or resources as landmarks with
the consent of the property owner.
§ 11-32 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 11-35
1:29
§ 11-36. Meetings.
A quorum for the transaction of business shall consist of four members. Less
than a majority of the fully authorized membership may not transact any
business. Board members are expected to attend all scheduled meetings
unless excused by the Chair.
D. Making recommendations to the Town Board for the designation of
structures as landmarks in cases where the owner(s) objects to
designation and the designation of boundaries of historic preservation
overlay districts.
E. Determining applications for certificates of appropriateness and
hardship relief.
F. Providing a source of advice to the Town Board, property owners and to
other governmental agencies concerning historic preservation issues.
§ 11-35 PENFIELD CODE § 11-36
1:30
ARTICLE IX
Conservation Board
[Adopted 12-16-2015 by L.L. No. 3-2015]
§ 11-37. Establishment.
A Conservation Board may be established by resolution of the Town Board
pursuant to Town Law § 51, Subdivision 5. The number of Conservation
Board members and Chair shall be at the discretion of the Town Board.
§ 11-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 11-37
1:31
Chapter 13
CONTRACTS
§ 11-37 PENFIELD CODE § 11-37
1:32
ARTICLE I
Best Value Contracts
[Adopted 10-6-2016 by L.L. No. 2-2016]
§ 13-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Town of Penfield Best Value Contract
Award Law."
§ 13-2. Findings and intent.
A. The State Legislature and Governor amended General Municipal Law
§ 103 (Ao8692/S617) on January 27, 2012, to provide local governments
greater flexibility in awarding contracts by authorizing the award of
purchase contracts, including contracts for service work, on the basis of
best value. The state legislation requires political subdivisions with a
population of less than 1,000,000 to pass a local law authorizing the use
of the best value award process (from Assembly Bill Memo Ao8692)
B. Enactment of this legislation provides additional procurement options
to localities in ways that may expedite the procurement process and
result in cost savings. The "best value" standard for selecting goods and
services vendors, including janitorial and security contracts, is critical
to efforts to use strategic sourcing principles to modernize the supply
chain and ensure that taxpayers obtain the highest quality goods and
services at the lowest potential cost, while also ensuring fairness to all
competitors.
C. Today, the federal government, approximately half of the states and
many localities have added best value selection processes to their
procurement options in recognition of these advantages. With the
increased complexity of the goods and services that municipalities must
obtain in order to serve taxpayers, it is critical to consider selection and
evaluation criteria that measure factors other than cost in the strictest
sense.
D. Taxpayers are not well served when a public procurement results in low
unit costs at the outset, but ultimately engenders cost escalations due
to factors such as inferior quality, poor reliability and difficulty of
maintenance. Best value procurement links the procurement process
directly to the municipality's performance requirements, incorporating
selection factors such as useful lifespan, quality and options and
incentives for more timely performance and/or additional services.
E. Even if the initial expenditure is higher, considering the total value over
the life of the procurement may result in a better value and long-term
investment of public funds. Best value procurement also encourages
competition and, in turn, often results in better pricing, quality and
customer service. Fostering healthy competition ensures that bidders
will continue to strive for excellence in identifying and meeting
municipalities' needs, including such important goals as the
§ 13-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 13-2
1:33
§ 13-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BEST VALUE — The basis for awarding contracts for services to the offerer
which optimizes quality, cost and efficiency among responsive and
responsible offerers. Such basis shall reflect, wherever possible, objective
and quantifiable analysis. Such basis may also identify a quantitative factor
for offerers that are small businesses or certified minority- or women-owned
business enterprises as defined in Subdivisions 1,7,15 and 20 of § 310 of the
Executive Law to be used in evaluation of offers for awarding of contracts
for services.
§ 13-4. Requirements.
participation of small and minority- and women-owned businesses, and
the development of environmentally preferable goods and service
delivery methods. Best value procurement will provide much-needed
flexibility in obtaining important goods and services at favorable prices
and will reduce the time to procure such goods and services.
A. Where the basis for award is the best value offer, the Town Comptroller
shall document, in the procurement record and in advance of the initial
receipt of offers, the determination of the evaluation criteria, which,
whenever possible, shall be quantifiable, and the process to be used in
the determination of best value and the manner in which the evaluation
process and selection shall be conducted.
B. The Town Comptroller shall select a formal competitive procurement
process in accordance with General Municipal Law and Town of
Penfield purchasing policies and document its determination in the
procurement record. The process shall include, but is not limited to, a
clear statement of need; a description of the required specifications
governing performance and related factors; a reasonable process for
ensuring a competitive field; a fair and equal opportunity for offerers to
submit responsive offers; and a balanced and fair method of award.
Where the basis for the award is best value, documentation in the
procurement record shall, where practicable, include a quantification of
the application of the criteria to the rating of proposals and the
evaluation results, or, where not practicable, such other justification
which demonstrates that best value will be achieved.
C. The solicitation shall prescribe the minimum specifications or
requirements that must be met in order to be considered responsive
and shall describe and disclose the general manner in which the
evaluation and selection shall be conducted. Where appropriate, the
solicitation shall identify the relative importance and/or weight of cost
and the overall technical criterion to be considered by the Town of
Penfield in its determination of best value.
§ 13-2 PENFIELD CODE § 13-4
1:34
§ 13-5. Severability.
If any clause, sentence, paragraph, subdivision, section or part of this
chapter or the application thereof to any person, individual corporation,
firm, partnership, entity or circumstance shall be adjudged by any court
of competent jurisdiction to be invalid or unconstitutional, such order or
judgment shall not affect, impair, effect or invalidate the remainder thereof,
but shall be confined in its operation to the clause, sentence, paragraph,
subdivision, section or part of this chapter or in its application to the
person, individual, corporation, firm, partnership, entity or circumstance
directly involved in the controversy in which such order or judgment shall
be rendered.
D. The Town Comptroller shall develop procedures that will govern the
award of contracts on the basis of best value. These procedures shall be
included in the Town of Penfield purchasing policies and reviewed
annually by the Town Board in conjunction with its annual review and
approval of the Town of Penfield purchasing policies.
§ 13-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 13-5
1:35
Chapter 15
DEFENSE AND INDEMNIFICATION
§ 15-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
EMPLOYEE — Any commissioner, member of a public board or commission,
trustee, director, officer, employee, volunteer expressly authorized to
participate in a publicly sponsored volunteer program, or any other person
holding a position by election, appointment or employment in the service
of the Town, whether or not compensated, but shall not include an
independent contractor. The term "employee" shall include a former
employee, his estate or judicially appointed personal
representative.[Amended 12-16-2015 by L.L. No. 3-2015]
TOWN — The Town of Penfield.
§ 15-2. Duty to defend.
A. Upon compliance by the employee with the provisions of § 15-3 of this
chapter, the Town shall provide for the defense of the employee in any
civil action or proceeding in any state or federal court arising out of any
alleged act or omission which occurred or is alleged in the complaint to
have occurred while the employee was acting or in good faith
purporting to act within the scope of his or her public employment or
duties. Such defense shall not be provided where such civil action or
proceeding is brought by or on behalf of the Town.
B. Subject to the conditions set forth in this chapter, the employee shall be
represented by the Town Attorney or an attorney employed or retained
by the Town for the defense of the employee. The Town Board shall
employ or retain an attorney for the defense of the employee whenever
1) the Town does not have a Town Attorney, 2) the Town Board
determines based upon its investigation and review of the facts and
circumstances of the case that representation by the Town Attorney
would be inappropriate or 3) a court of competent jurisdiction
determines that a conflict of interest exists and that the employee
cannot be represented by the Town Attorney. Reasonable attorney's
fees and litigation expenses shall be paid by the Town to such attorney
employed or retained, from time to time, during the pendency of the
civil action or proceeding subject to certification by the Town
Supervisor that the employee is entitled to representation under the
terms and conditions of this chapter. Payment of such fees and expenses
shall be made in the same manner as payment of other claims and
expenses of the Town. Any dispute with respect to representation of
multiple employees by the Town Attorney or by an attorney employed or
retained for such purposes or with respect to the amount of the fees or
expenses shall be resolved by the court.
§ 13-5 PENFIELD CODE § 15-2
1:36
§ 15-3. Conditions of defense.
§ 15-4. Effect on other rights.
The benefits of this chapter will inure only to employees as defined herein
and shall not enlarge or diminish the rights of any other party, nor shall
any provision of this chapter be construed to affect, alter or repeal any
provisions of the Worker's Compensation Law.
§ 15-5. Employees of negotiating units.
The benefits of this chapter shall be extended to an employee of a
negotiating unit for which an agreement has been negotiated pursuant to
Civil Service Law Article 14 only if such agreement expressly so provides.
§ 15-6. Effect on insurance policies.
The provisions of this chapter shall not be construed to impair, alter, limit
or modify the rights and obligations of any insurer under any policy of
insurance.
§ 15-7. Provisions of state or federal law.
As otherwise specifically provided in this chapter, the provisions of this
chapter shall not be construed in any way to impair, alter, limit, modify,
C. Where the employee delivers process and a request for a defense to the
Town Attorney or the Town Supervisor as required by § 15-3 of this
chapter, the Town Attorney or the Supervisor, as the case may be, shall
take the necessary steps, including the retention of an attorney under
the terms and conditions provided in Subsection B of this section, on
behalf of the employee to avoid entry of a default judgment, pending
resolution of any question relating to the obligation of the Town to
provide a defense.
A. The duties to defend provided in this chapter shall be contingent upon:
[Amended 12-16-2015 by L.L. No. 3-2015]
(1) Delivery by the employee to the Town Attorney or, if none, to the
Town Supervisor of a written request to provide for his or her
defense, together with the original or a copy of any summons,
complaint, process, notice, demand or pleading within 10 days
after he or she is served with such document; and
(2) The full cooperation of the employee in the defense of such action
or proceeding and defense of any action or proceeding against the
Town based upon the same act or omission, and in the prosecution
of any appeal.
B. Such delivery shall be deemed a request by the employee that the Town
provide for his or her defense pursuant to this chapter, unless the
employee shall state in writing that a defense is not requested.
§ 15-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 15-7
1:37
abrogate or restrict any immunity available to or conferred upon any unit,
entity, officer or employee of the Town or any right to defense provided for
any governmental officer or employee by, in accordance with, or by reason
of any other provision of state or federal statutory or common law.
§ 15-8. Applicability.
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all actions and proceedings
specified herein which have been commenced, instituted or brought on or
after the effective date of this chapter.
Chapter 22
ETHICS, CODE OF
§ 15-7 PENFIELD CODE § 15-8
1:38
ARTICLE I
Intent of Town Board
§ 22-1. Legislative intent.
The Town Board of the Town of Penfield recognizes that there are state
statutory provisions mandating towns to establish rules and standards of
ethical conduct for public officers and employees which, if observed, can
enhance public confidence in local government. In the light of a tendency
today on the part of some people to downgrade our local governments
and to discredit our public servants and our free institutions generally, it
appears necessary that every effort be made to assure the highest caliber
of public administration of this Town as part of our state's important system
of local government. It is the purpose of this chapter to implement this
objective through the establishment of standards of conduct, to provide for
punishment of violation of such standards and to create a Board of Ethics to
render advisory opinions to the Town's officers and employees as provided
for herein.
§ 22-2. Additional standards.
The standards, prohibited acts and procedures established herein are in
addition to any prohibited acts, conflicts of interest provisions or
procedures prescribed by statute of the State of New York and also in
addition to common law rules and judicial decisions relating to the conduct
of Town officers to the extent that the same are more severe in their
application than this chapter.
§ 22-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 22-2
1:39

ARTICLE II
Code of Ethics
§ 22-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
TOWN — Any board, commission, district, council or other agency,
department or unit of the government of the Town of Penfield.
TOWN EMPLOYEE — Any officer or employee of the Town of Penfield,
whether paid or unpaid, whether serving in a full-time, part-time or advisory
capacity.
§ 22-4. Conflicts of interest.
No Town employee shall have any interest, financial or otherwise, direct or
indirect, or engage in any business or transaction or professional activity or
incur any obligation of any nature which is in substantial conflict with the
proper discharge of his/her duties in the public interest.
§ 22-5. Standards of conduct.
A. No Town employee shall accept other employment which will impair
his/her independence of judgment in the exercise of his/her official
duties.
B. No Town employee shall accept employment or engage in any business
or professional activity which will require him/her to disclose
confidential information which he/she has gained by reason of his/her
official position or authority.
C. No Town employee shall use or attempt to use his/her official position to
secure unwarranted privileges or exemptions for himself/herself or
others.
D. No Town employee shall engage in any transaction as representative or
agent of the Town with any business entity in which he/she has a direct
or indirect financial interest that might reasonably tend to conflict with
the proper discharge of his/her official duties.
E. A Town employee shall not by his/her conduct give reasonable basis for
the impression that any person can improperly influence him/her or
unduly enjoy his/her favor in the performance of his/her official duties,
or that he/she is affected by the kinship, rank, position or influence of
any party or person.
F. Each Town employee shall abstain from making personal investments in
enterprises which he/she has reason to believe may be directly involved
in decisions to be made by him/her or which will otherwise create
substantial conflict between his/her duty in the public interest and his/
her private interest.
§ 22-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 22-5
1:41
G. Each Town employee shall endeavor to pursue a course of conduct
which will not raise suspicion among the public that he/she is likely to
be engaged in acts that are in violation of his/her trust.
H. No Town employee employed on a full-time basis nor any firm or
association of which such employee is a member nor corporation a
substantial portion of the stock of which is owned or controlled directly
or indirectly by such employee, shall sell goods or services to any
person, firm, corporation or association which is licensed or whose
rates are fixed by the Town in which such employee serves or is
employed.
I. Each Town employee shall, to the extent that he/she is cognizant
thereof, disclose any interest he/she may have in legislation before the
Town Board. Any Town employee who has, will have, or later acquires
an interest in or whose spouse has, will have, or later acquires an
interest in any actual or proposed contract, purchase agreement, lease
agreement or other agreement, including oral agreements, with the
Town shall publicly disclose the nature and extent of such interest in
writing to his/her immediate supervisor and to the Town Board as soon
as he/she has knowledge of such actual or prospective interest. Such
written disclosure shall be made part of and set forth in the official
record of the proceedings of such body. [Amended 12-16-2015 by
L.L. No. 3-2015]
J. No Town employee shall directly or indirectly, solicit any gift, or accept
or receive any gift having a value of $75 or more, whether in the form of
money, service, loan, travel, entertainment, hospitality, thing or
promise, or in any other form, under circumstances in which it could
reasonably be inferred that the gift was intended to influence him/her,
or could reasonably be expected to influence him/her, in the
performance of his/her official duties or was intended as a reward for
any official action on his/her part. [Added 12-16-2015 by L.L. No.
3-2015]
K. No Town employee shall disclose confidential information acquired by
him/her in the course of his/her official duties or use such information
to further his/her personal interests. [Added 12-16-2015 by L.L. No.
3-2015]
L. No Town employee shall receive, or enter into any agreement for,
express or implied, compensation for services to be rendered in relation
to any matter before any municipal agency of which he/she is an officer,
member or employee or of any municipal agency over which he/she has
jurisdiction or to which he/she has the power to appoint any member,
officer or employee. [Added 12-16-2015 by L.L. No. 3-2015]
M. No Town employee shall receive, or enter into any agreement for,
express or implied, compensation for services to be rendered in relation
to any matter before any agency of his/her municipality, whereby his/
her compensation is to be dependent or contingent upon any action by
§ 22-5 PENFIELD CODE § 22-5
1:42
§ 22-6. Penalties for offenses.
In addition to any penalty contained in any other provision of law, any such
Town employee who shall knowingly and intentionally violate any of the
provisions of this chapter may be fined, suspended or removed from office
or employment in the manner provided by law.
such agency with respect to such matter, provided that this subsection
shall not prohibit the fixing at any time of fees based upon the
reasonable value of the services rendered. [Added 12-16-2015 by L.L.
No. 3-2015]
§ 22-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 22-6
1:43

ARTICLE III
Board of Ethics
§ 22-7. Establishment; membership.
There is hereby established a Board of Ethics consisting of three members
to be appointed by the Town Board, all of whom shall reside in the Town of
Penfield and who shall serve without compensation and at the pleasure of
the Town Board of the Town of Penfield. A majority of such members shall
be persons other than Town employees, but the Board shall include at least
one member who is an elected or appointed Town employee of the Town of
Penfield.
§ 22-8. Powers and duties.
The Board of Ethics established hereunder shall render advisory opinions
to Town employees on written request and, upon request of the Town
Board, make recommendations to such Town Board as to any amendments
of this chapter. The opinions of the Board of Ethics shall be advisory and
confidential and in no event shall the identity of the Town employee be
disclosed except to authorized persons and agencies. Such opinions shall be
on the advice of counsel employed by the Board of Ethics or, if none, of the
Town Attorney.
§ 22-9. Rules and regulations.
The Board of Ethics, upon its formation, shall promulgate its own rules and
regulations as to its form and procedures and shall maintain appropriate
records of its opinions and proceedings.
§ 22-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 22-9
1:45

ARTICLE IV
Administration
§ 22-10. Distribution and posting.
Upon the adoption of this chapter, the Town Supervisor shall cause a copy
thereof to be distributed to every Town employee. Failure to distribute any
such copy or failure of any Town employee to receive such copy shall have
no effect on the duty of compliance with this code, nor the enforcement of
provisions hereof. The Town Supervisor shall further cause a copy of this
chapter to be kept posted conspicuously in each public building under the
jurisdiction of the Town. Failure to so post this chapter shall have no effect
on the duty of compliance herewith, nor the enforcement provisions hereof.
§ 22-11. Filing with state.
Within 30 days of the adoption of this chapter, the Town Clerk shall file a
copy thereof in the office of the State Comptroller.
§ 22-12. Appropriations.
The Town Board may appropriate moneys from the general Town funds
for the maintenance of and for personnel services to the Board of Ethics
established hereunder, but such Board of Ethics may not commit the
expenditure of Town moneys except within the appropriations provided
herein.
§ 22-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 22-12
1:47
Chapter 38
LEGISLATION, ADOPTION OF
§ 22-12 PENFIELD CODE § 22-12
1:48
ARTICLE I
Summary Publication
[Adopted 3-3-1980 by L.L. No. 1-1980]
§ 38-1. Title.
This article shall be known and may be cited as "Local Law No. 1 of the Year
1980, Pertaining to the Adoption of Ordinances and Local Laws in the Town
of Penfield, New York."
§ 38-2. Legislative intent; Attorney responsibility.
It is the purpose of this article to set forth the procedure for the adoption
of local laws and ordinances in the Town of Penfield, New York, and to
provide for the publishing of an abstract or summary of the same, rather
than the full text thereof, in the effort to better inform the public through
the use of "ordinary language," and in order to reduce the expenditure
of costs to the citizens of the Town of Penfield by reducing the volume
of publication required by law. It shall be the responsibility of the Town
Attorney to summarize said local laws and ordinances.
§ 38-3. Supersession of state law.
This article shall modify and supersede Town Law § 133 (which provides
for the publication of the full text of Town ordinances after their adoption),
and shall also supersede Town Law §§ 264 and 265 (which requires the full
publication of a zoning ordinance or a change in a zoning ordinance after
its adoption).
§ 38-4. Public hearing required; notice.
No local law, or ordinance or amendment thereto shall be adopted by the
Town Board of the Town of Penfield until a public hearing has been held
thereon, not less than five days nor more than 30 days after public notice
has been given of the time and place of the holding of such public hearing.
Such notice shall be given by the Town Clerk by causing the same to be
published once in the official newspaper of the Town of Penfield, as such
may be designated by the Penfield Town Board. Such notice shall contain
the title of the proposed local law, ordinance or amendment thereto, and a
brief explanatory statement thereof.
§ 38-5. Posting of copies.
The Town Clerk shall cause to be printed or otherwise reproduced copies
of such proposed local law, ordinance or amendment thereto, and shall, not
later than the day such notice is published, post one such copy, together
with the notice of hearing, on the official sign board at the office of the Town
Clerk, and shall also make copies of such proposed local law, ordinance or
amendment thereto available at the office of the Town Clerk for inspection
by and distribution to any interested person during business hours.
§ 38-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 38-6
1:49
§ 38-6. Publication and posting upon adoption.
The Town Clerk shall, forthwith upon the adoption of a local law, ordinance
or amendment thereto by the Town Board, post a copy thereof on the official
sign board of the Town Clerk and shall, within 10 days after such adoption,
cause the local law, ordinance or amendment thereto, or an abstract thereof
describing the same in general terms, to be published in the official Town
newspaper, as may be designated from time to time by the Penfield Town
Board.
§ 38-6 PENFIELD CODE § 38-6
1:50
Part II: General Legislation
Chapter 85
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
§ 85-1. Purpose and findings.
It is the purpose of this chapter to protect the public interest, welfare,
health and safety within the Town of Penfield by prohibiting the
consumption of alcoholic beverages in public places within the Town. The
Town Board finds that possession of an open container of alcoholic beverage
in a public place within the Town has led to consumption of the same,
resulting in disorderly conduct, disturbance of the public peace, littering of
the public places and destruction of property. The Town Board finds further
that preservation of the public welfare and prevention of conditions which
lead to conduct disturbing the public peace attributable to consumption of
alcoholic beverages can be accomplished by the prohibition of consumption
of alcoholic beverages in public places, and by restricting the possession of
an open or unsealed container of alcoholic beverages under circumstances
which indicate that the possessor of such open or unsealed container in a
public place intends to consume the same or intends to have it consumed by
another person.
§ 85-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE — Includes alcohol, spirits, liquor, wine, beer, hard
cider and every liquid or solid, patented or not, containing alcohol, spirits,
wine or beer and capable of being consumed by a human being.
CONTAINER — Any bottle, can, glass or other receptacle suitable for, or
used to hold, any liquid.
INTENT TO CONSUME — Includes any of the following:[Added
12-16-2015 by L.L. No. 3-2015]
PUBLIC PLACE — Any highway, street, sidewalk, park, playground, Town
building and curtilage in the Town, public parking area, a place to which the
public or a substantial group of persons has access and includes, but is not
limited to, transportation facilities, schools, places of amusement, stores,
shopping centers, and parking lots in connection therewith and except
A. Drinking from the container.
B. Possession with movement of the container to the mouth.
Any circumstances evidencing an intent to ultimately consume on any
public lands.
C.
§ 38-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 85-2
1:51
those premises duly licensed for the sale and consumption of alcoholic
beverages on the premises.
TOWN — The Town of Penfield.
§ 85-3. Prohibited conduct.
It shall be a violation of this chapter for any person to:
§ 85-4. Exceptions.
The foregoing prohibition shall not apply to consumption of an alcoholic
beverage or possession for the purpose of consumption in any public place
where the same is authorized under the laws and regulations of this state,
county or Town; nor shall such prohibition apply to the possession of an
open or unsealed container of an alcoholic beverage solely for the purpose
of transporting the same without an intent or indication to consume the
same in any public place.
§ 85-5. Applicability to state vehicle violations.
This chapter shall not apply to any person in violation of Vehicle and Traffic
Law § 1227.
§ 85-6. Penalties for offenses.
Each violation of this chapter shall be punishable by a fine not exceeding
$250 for each offense or by imprisonment not exceeding 15 days, or by both
such fine and imprisonment.
Chapter 90
ANIMALS
§ 90-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Dog Licensing and
Animal Control Law of the Town of Penfield, New York."
§ 90-2. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the licensing and identification
of dogs, the control and protection of the dog population and the protection
of people, personal property, domestic animals and deer from dog attack
and damage, and to preserve the public health, safety and welfare by
A. Consume any alcoholic beverage in any public place within the Town.
B. Have in his/her possession an open or unsealed container of any
alcoholic beverage while in any public place for the purpose of and with
the intent to consume such alcoholic beverage by himself/herself or by
another in any public place.
§ 85-2 PENFIELD CODE § 90-2
1:52
enforcing regulations and restrictions on the activities of dogs that are
consistent with the rights and privileges of citizens of the Town.
§ 90-3. Statutory authority.
This chapter is enacted pursuant to the provisions of Article 7 of the
Agriculture and Markets Law and the Municipal Home Rule Law of the
State of New York, as amended by Part T of Chapter 59 of the Laws of 2010,
and as may be subsequently amended and supplemented.
§ 90-4. Definitions and word usage.
All words, terms or phrases used herein shall have the meanings indicated
below or as defined in the Agriculture and Markets Law. If no specific
definition is set forth, all words shall have their usual and customary
meaning in the English language. Words used in the present tense include
the future and the plural includes the singular. The word "shall" is intended
to be mandatory.
ANIMAL/DOG CONTROL OFFICER — Any individual appointed by the Town
Board to assist in the enforcement of this chapter, and for the purposes of
this chapter, such officer shall be deemed a peace officer.2
CLERK — The Town Clerk, or Deputy Town Clerk, of the Town of Penfield or
his/her agent.
DETECTION DOG — Any dog that is trained and is actually used for such
purposes or is undergoing training to be used for the purpose of detecting
controlled substances, explosives, ignitable liquids, firearms, cadavers, or
school or correctional facility contraband.
DOG — Any member of the species canis familiaris.
GUIDE DOG — Any dog that is trained to aid a person who is blind and that
is actually used for such purpose, or any dog owned by a recognized guide
dog training center located within the State of New York during the period
such dog is being trained or bred.
HARBOR — To provide food or shelter to any dog.
HEARING DOG — Any dog that is trained to aid a person with a hearing
impairment and that is actually used for such purpose, or any dog owned
by a recognized training center located within the State of New York during
the period such dog is being trained or bred for such training.
IDENTIFICATION TAG — A tag issued by the Clerk that sets forth an
identification number, as required by the provisions of this chapter.
OWNER — Any person who harbors or keeps any dog.
PERSON WITH A DISABILITY — Any person with a disability as that term is
defined in New York State Executive Law § 292, Subdivision 21.[Amended
12-16-2015 by L.L. No. 3-2015]
2. Editor's Note: See Ch. 11, Boards and Personnel, Art. III.
§ 90-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 90-4
1:53
POLICE WORK DOG — Any dog owned or harbored by any municipal police
department or any state or federal law enforcement agency, which dog has
been trained to aid law enforcement officers and is actually being used for
police work purposes.
SENIOR RESIDENT — Any resident of the Town age 65 or older.
SERVICE DOG — Any dog that has been or is being individually trained
to do work or perform tasks for the benefit of a person with a disability,
provided that the dog is or will be owned by such person or that person's
parent, guardian or other legal representative.
THERAPY DOG — Any dog that is trained to aid the emotional and physical
health of patients in hospitals, nursing homes, retirement homes and other
settings and that is actually used for such purpose, or any dog owned by a
recognized training center located within the State of New York during the
period such dog is being trained or bred for such purpose.
TOWN — The Town of Penfield, including incorporated areas.
WAR DOG — Any dog which has been honorably discharged from the United
States armed services.
WORKING SEARCH DOG — Any dog that is trained to aid in the search
for missing persons and that is actually used for such purposes; provided,
however, that such services provided by said dog shall be performed
without charge or fee.
§ 90-5. Licensing requirements, procedures and fees.
A. License application.
(1) The owner of any dog reaching the age of four months shall
immediately make application for a dog license. No license shall be
required for any dog under the age of four months that is not at
large or that is residing in a pound or shelter maintained by or
under contract or agreement with the state or any county, city,
town or village, any duly incorporated society for the prevention of
cruelty to animals, duly incorporated humane society or duly
incorporated dog protective society.
(2) Application for a dog license shall be made to the Clerk and shall be
accompanied by the appropriate license fee.
(3) The application shall state the sex, actual or approximate year of
birth, breed, color(s), and municipal identification number of the
dog, and other identification marks, if any, and the name, address,
telephone number, county and town of residence of owner, and
such other information as deemed necessary by the Clerk.
(4) In the case of a spayed or neutered dog, every application shall be
accompanied by a certificate signed by a licensed veterinarian
showing that the dog has been spayed or neutered, provided that
§ 90-4 PENFIELD CODE § 90-5
1:54
such certificate shall not be required if the same is already on file
with the Clerk.
(5) The application shall be accompanied by a statement certified by a
licensed veterinarian showing that the dog or dogs have been
vaccinated to prevent rabies or, in lieu thereof, a statement
certified by a licensed veterinarian stating that, because of age or
other reason, the life of the dog or dogs would be endangered by
the administration of vaccine. The Clerk shall make or cause to be
made from such statement a record of such information and file
such record with a copy of the license.
B. License fees. The fee for a dog license shall be as set forth in the fee
schedule annually adopted by the Town Board. Upon submission of
proper documentation, there shall be no fee charged for the license
issued for any detection dog, guide dog, hearing dog, police work dog,
service dog, therapy dog, war dog or working search dog. In addition to
other applicable fees, any person applying for a dog license for a dog
identified as unlicensed during an enumeration shall pay an additional
fee. Such additional fee shall be used to pay the expenses incurred by
the Town in conducting the enumeration. In the event that the
additional fees collected exceed the expenses incurred by the Town in
conducting an enumeration in any year, such excess fees may be used
by the Town for any other lawful purpose. [Amended 12-16-2015 by
L.L. No. 3-2015]
C. Upon validation by the Clerk, the application shall become a license for
the dog described therein. Once an application has been validated, no
refund shall be made.
D. The Clerk shall provide a copy of the license to the owner and retain a
record of the license in either paper or electronic format.
E. A license shall be renewed after a period of one year beginning with the
first day of the month following the date of issuance. Renewal shall be
for a minimum of one year and shall not exceed three years, based on
the validation term of the rabies vaccination.
F. No license shall be transferable. Upon the transfer of ownership of any
dog, the new owner shall immediately make application for a license for
such dog. The original issued identification tag shall remain the same
for the life of the dog.
G. No dog can be adopted out of the Town's animal shelter without first
obtaining a license from the Clerk.
H. Purebred and kennel licenses. The Town shall not issue purebred or
kennel licenses. All dogs shall be licensed individually in accordance
with the fees stated above.
I. Any dog harbored within the Town that is owned by a resident of New
York City or licensed by the City of New York, or which is owned by a
§ 90-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 90-5
1:55
§ 90-6. Identification of dogs.
§ 90-7. Change of ownership; lost, stolen or deceased dogs.
In accordance with the provisions of Agriculture and Markets Law § 112, as
may be amended or renumbered:
nonresident of New York State and licensed by a jurisdiction outside the
State of New York shall, for a period of 30 days, be exempt from the
licensing and identification provisions of this chapter.
A. Each dog licensed shall be assigned, at the time the dog is licensed for
the first time, a permanent municipal identification number. Such
identification number shall be carried by the dog on an identification
tag that shall be affixed to a collar on the dog at all times. A dog
participating in a dog show shall be exempt from the identification
requirement during such participation.
B. The identification number shall constitute the official identification of
the dog to which it is assigned, regardless of changes of ownership, and
the number shall not be reassigned to any other dog during the lifetime
of the dog to which it is assigned.
C. At the time a dog is first licensed, one identification tag shall be
furnished to the owner at no charge. Any replacement tag shall be
obtained by the owner at his/her expense at a fee set forth in the fee
schedule annually adopted by the Town Board. [Amended 12-16-2015
by L.L. No. 3-2015]
D. No tag carrying an official identification number shall be affixed to the
collar of any dog other than the one to which that number has been
assigned.
E. The identification tag shall be imprinted with the words "Penfield, NY,"
a unique identification number, and the telephone number of the Clerk's
office.
A. In the event of a change in ownership of any dog that has been assigned
an identification number or in the address of the owner of record of any
such dog, the owner of record shall, within 10 days of such change,
notify the Clerk.
B. If any dog that has been assigned a municipal identification number is
lost or stolen, the owner of record shall, within 10 days of the discovery
of such loss or theft, notify the Clerk.
C. In the case of a dog's death, the owner of record shall so notify the
Clerk, either prior to the renewal of license or upon the time of such
renewal.
§ 90-5 PENFIELD CODE § 90-8
1:56
§ 90-8. Seizure, confinement, and impoundment.
In accordance with Agriculture and Markets Law § 117, as may be amended
or renumbered:
A. The Animal/Dog Control Officer is hereby authorized to seize or direct
the confinement of:
(1) Any dog which is not licensed, whether on or off the owner's
premises.
(2) Any licensed dog which is not in the control of its owner or
custodian or not on the premises of the dog's owner or custodian, if
there is probable cause to believe the dog is dangerous to persons.
(3) Any dog which poses an immediate threat to the public safety or
which attacks a human being, a companion dog, a farm animal or a
domestic animal as said terms are defined in the New York State
Agriculture and Markets Law.
(4) Any dog in violation of § 90-9 of this chapter.
B. The Animal/Dog Control Officer, when acting pursuant to his/her special
duties, shall make and maintain a complete record of any seizure and
subsequent disposition of any dog. Such record shall include, but not be
limited to, a description of the dog, the date and hour of seizure, the
municipal identification number of the such dog (if any), the location
where seized, the reason for the seizure and the owner's name and
address, if known. The owners will pay seizure fees as set forth in the
fee schedule annually adopted by the Town Board. [Amended
12-16-2015 by L.L. No. 3-2015]
C. Each dog seized in accordance with the provisions of this chapter shall
be properly sheltered, fed and watered for the redemption period as
hereinafter provided.
D. Each dog which is not identified, whether or not licensed, shall be held
for a period of five days from the day seized, during which period the
dog may be redeemed by its owner, provided that such owner produces
proof that the dog has been licensed and has been identified pursuant
to the provisions of this chapter, and further provided that the owner
pays the impoundment fees set forth in the fee schedule annually
adopted by the Town Board. If, upon redemption, any dog received a
rabies vaccination, that charge for such vaccination shall be added to
impoundment fees. [Amended 12-16-2015 by L.L. No. 3-2015]
E. Promptly upon seizure of any identified dog, the owner of record of such
dog shall be notified personally or by certified mail, return receipt
requested, of the facts of seizure and the procedure for redemption. If
notification is personally given, such dog shall be held for a period of
five days after day of notice, during which period the dog may be
redeemed by the owner. If such notification is made by mail, such dog
§ 90-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 90-8
1:57
§ 90-9. Prohibited activities by dogs.
It shall be unlawful for any person who owns, has the care, custody or
control of any dog(s) in the Town to permit or allow such dog(s) to:
shall be held for a period of seven days from the date of mailing, during
which period the dog may be redeemed by the owner. In either case,
the owner may redeem such dog upon payment of the impoundment
fees prescribed by Subsection D of this section and by producing proof
that the dog has been licensed. [Amended 12-16-2015 by L.L. No.
3-2015]
F. If, at the end of the appropriate redemption period, said dog has not
been redeemed by its owner, the owner shall forfeit all title to the dog
and it shall be available for adoption or be released to an authorized
humane society or shelter for adoption or disposal by appropriate
methods of euthanasia.
G. Prior to releasing a dog to its owner the Animal Control Officer will
inform the owner of any seizure fees, medical fees and boarding fees
associated with confinement to be paid at the Town Clerk's office, at
which time such dog may be released to the owner.
A. Be at large or unleashed in said Town, except as permitted by this
chapter. (Hunting is limited to certain parts of the Town.) Further in this
regard:
(1) All dogs in the Town of Penfield are hereby required to be equipped
with a collar or harness to which is attached a leash or retractable
lead of not more than 15 feet in length; both collar, harness, leash
and lead must be of sufficient strength to restrain the dog(s) when
off the owner's premises and must be held by a person having the
ability to control and restrain the dog(s).
(2) Dogs may be unleashed on their owner's premises or when on the
private premises of another with the knowledge, consent and
approval of such person or when hunting in the company of and
under control of a hunter or hunters upon the property of another
with knowledge, consent and approval of the property owner. Dogs
used in law enforcement, rescue or tracking, when working or
training, may be unleashed.
B. Engage in habitual and loud howling, barking, crying or whining or
conduct so as to unreasonably and habitually disturb the comfort of any
person other than the owner of such dog.
C. Uproot, dig, deface or otherwise damage any vegetables, lawns,
flowers, garden beds, or other property without the consent or approval
of the owner of such property.
§ 90-8 PENFIELD CODE § 90-9
1:58
§ 90-10. Penalties for offenses.
Any person violating any provision of this chapter or the Agriculture and
Markets Law, including the failure to license a dog, the failure to have a dog
properly identified or to knowingly affix to any dog any false or improper
identification tag or special identification tag for identifying guide, service
or hearing dogs, shall be subject to a fine, which shall not be less than $25
nor more than $250, except that:
§ 90-11. Effective date.
This chapter shall take effect January 1, 2011, after filing with the Secretary
of State in Albany.
Chapter 94
BUILDING CONSTRUCTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Unsafe buildings — See Ch. 97. Zoning and land use — See Ch. 250.
D. Chase, jump upon or otherwise harass any person in such manner as to
reasonably cause intimidation or fear or to put such person in
reasonable apprehension of bodily harm.
E. Habitually chase, run alongside of or bark at motor vehicles, moving
vehicles, motorcycles or bicycles while on a public street, highway or
place, or upon private property without the consent or approval of the
owner of such property.
F. Create a nuisance by defecating, urinating or digging on public
property or on private property without the consent or approval of the
owner of such property. The dog owner or harborer shall clean up any
waste deposited by the dog.
G. If a female dog, when in heat, be off the owner's premises.
H. Enter public buildings, restaurants, stores or cemeteries, except for
guide dogs.
A. Where the person was found to have violated this chapter within the
preceding five years, the fine shall not be less than $50 nor more than
$500; and
B. Where the person was found to have committed two or more violations
of this chapter within the preceding five years, the fine shall not be less
than $100 nor more than $1,000.
§ 90-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 90-11
1:59

ARTICLE I
Building Code Administration and Enforcement
[Adopted 12-16-2015 by L.L. No. 3-2015]
§ 94-1. Purpose and intent.
This article provides for the administration and enforcement of the New
York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code (the Uniform Code)
and the State Energy Conservation Construction Code (the Energy Code) in
the Town of Penfield. This article is adopted pursuant to Municipal Home
Rule Law § 10. Except as otherwise provided in the Uniform Code, other
state law, or other section of this article, all buildings, structures, and
premises, regardless of use or occupancy, are subject to the provisions this
article.
§ 94-2. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BUILDING PERMIT — A permit issued pursuant to § 94-4 of this article.
The term "building permit" shall also include a building permit which is
renewed, amended or extended pursuant to any provision of this article.
CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY/CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE — A
certificate issued pursuant to § 94-7B of this article.
CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — The Code Enforcement Officer
appointed pursuant to § 94-3B of this article.
CODE ENFORCEMENT PERSONNEL — Includes the Code Enforcement
Officer and all inspectors.
COMPLIANCE ORDER — An order issued by the Code Enforcement Officer
pursuant to § 94-15A of this article.
ENERGY CODE — The State Energy Conservation Construction Code, as
currently in effect and as hereafter amended from time to time.
INSPECTOR — An inspector appointed pursuant to § 94-3D of this article.
OPERATING PERMIT — A permit issued pursuant to § 94-10 of this article.
The term "operating permit" shall also include an operating permit which is
renewed, amended or extended pursuant to any provision of this article.
PERMIT HOLDER — The person to whom a building permit has been issued.
PERSON — Includes an individual, corporation, limited-liability company,
partnership, limited partnership, business trust, estate, trust, association,
or any other legal or commercial entity of any kind or description.
STOP-WORK ORDER — An order issued pursuant to § 94-6 of this article.
TEMPORARY CERTIFICATE — A certificate issued pursuant to § 94-7D of
this article.
TOWN — The Town of Penfield.
§ 94-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 94-2
1:61
UNIFORM CODE — The New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and
Building Code, as currently in effect and as hereafter amended from time to
time.
§ 94-3. Code Enforcement Officer and inspectors.
A. The office of Code Enforcement Officer is hereby created. The Code
Enforcement Officer shall administer and enforce all the provisions of
the Uniform Code, the Energy Code and this article. The Code
Enforcement Officer shall have the following powers and duties:
(1) To receive, review, and approve or disapprove applications for
building permits, certificates of occupancy/certificates of
compliance, temporary certificates and operating permits, and the
plans, specifications and construction documents submitted with
such applications;
(2) Upon approval of such applications, to issue building permits,
certificates of occupancy/certificates of compliance, temporary
certificates and operating permits, and to include in building
permits, certificates of occupancy/certificates of compliance,
temporary certificates and operating permits such terms and
conditions as the Code Enforcement Officer may determine to be
appropriate;
(3) To conduct construction inspections, inspections to be made prior
to the issuance of certificates of occupancy/certificates of
compliance, temporary certificates and operating permits, fire
safety and property maintenance inspections, inspections
incidental to the investigation of complaints, and all other
inspections required or permitted under any provision of this
article;
(4) To issue stop-work orders;
(5) To review and investigate complaints;
(6) To issue orders pursuant to § 94-15A of this article;
(7) To maintain records;
(8) To collect fees as set by the Town Board;
(9) To pursue administrative enforcement actions and proceedings;
(10) In consultation with the Town Attorney, to pursue such legal
actions and proceedings as may be necessary to enforce the
Uniform Code, the Energy Code and this article, or to abate or
correct conditions not in compliance with the Uniform Code, the
Energy Code or this article; and
(11) To exercise all other powers and fulfill all other duties conferred
upon the Code Enforcement Officer by this article.
§ 94-2 PENFIELD CODE § 94-3
1:62
§ 94-4. Building permits.
B. The Code Enforcement Officer shall be appointed by the Town Board.
The Code Enforcement Officer shall possess background experience
related to building construction or fire prevention and shall, within the
time prescribed by law, obtain such basic training, in-service training,
advanced in-service training and other training as the State of New
York shall require for code enforcement personnel, and the Code
Enforcement Officer shall obtain certification from the State Fire
Administrator pursuant to the Executive Law and the regulations
promulgated thereunder.
C. In the event that the Code Enforcement Officer is unable to serve as
such for any reason, an individual shall be appointed by the Town Board
to serve as Acting Code Enforcement Officer. The Acting Code
Enforcement Officer shall, during the term of his/her appointment,
exercise all powers and fulfill all duties conferred upon the Code
Enforcement Officer by this article.
D. One or more inspectors may be appointed by the Town Board to act
under the supervision and direction of the Code Enforcement Officer
and to assist the Code Enforcement Officer in the exercise of the
powers and fulfillment of the duties conferred upon the Code
Enforcement Officer by this article. Each inspector shall, within the
time prescribed by law, obtain such basic training, in-service training,
advanced in-service training and other training as the State of New
York shall require for code enforcement personnel, and each inspector
shall obtain certification from the State Fire Administrator pursuant to
the Executive Law and the regulations promulgated thereunder.
E. The compensation for the Code Enforcement Officer and inspectors
shall be fixed from time to time by the Town Board.
A. Building permits required. Except as otherwise provided in Subsection
B of this section, a building permit shall be required for any work which
must conform to the Uniform Code and/or the Energy Code, including,
but not limited to, the construction, enlargement, alteration,
improvement, removal, relocation or demolition of any building or
structure or any portion thereof, and the installation of a solid-fuelburning
heating appliance, chimney or flue in any dwelling unit. No
person shall commence any work for which a building permit is
required without first having obtained a building permit from the Code
Enforcement Officer.
B. Exemptions. No building permit shall be required for work in any of the
following categories:
(1) Installation of swings and other playground equipment associated
with a one- or two-family dwelling or multiple single-family
dwellings (townhouses);
§ 94-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 94-4
1:63
(2) Installation of swimming pools associated with a one- or two-family
dwelling or multiple single-family dwellings (townhouses) where
such pools are designed for a water depth of less than 24 inches
and are installed entirely above ground;
(3) Installation of fences which are not part of an enclosure
surrounding a swimming pool;
(4) Construction of retaining walls unless such walls support a
surcharge or impound Class I, II or IIIA liquids;
(5) Construction of temporary motion-picture, television and theater
stage sets and scenery;
(6) Installation of window awnings supported by an exterior wall of a
one- or two-family dwelling or multiple single-family dwellings
(townhouses);
(7) Installation of partitions or movable cases less than five feet nine
inches in height;
(8) Painting, wallpapering, tiling, carpeting, or other similar finish
work;
(9) Installation of listed portable electrical, plumbing, heating,
ventilation or cooling equipment or appliances;
(10) Replacement of any equipment, provided the replacement does not
alter the equipment's listing or render it inconsistent with the
equipment's original specifications; or
(11) Repairs, provided that such repairs do not involve:
(a) The removal or cutting away of a load-bearing wall, partition,
or portion thereof, or of any structural beam or load-bearing
component;
(b) The removal or change of any required means of egress, or the
rearrangement of parts of a structure in a manner which
affects egress;
(c) The enlargement, alteration, replacement or relocation of any
building system; or
(d) The removal from service of all or part of a fire protection
system for any period of time.
C. Exemption not deemed authorization to perform noncompliant work.
The exemption from the requirement to obtain a building permit for
work in any category set forth in Subsection B of this section shall not
be deemed an authorization for work to be performed in violation of the
Uniform Code or the Energy Code.
§ 94-4 PENFIELD CODE § 94-4
1:64
D. Applications for building permits. Applications for a building permit
shall be made in writing on a form provided by or otherwise acceptable
to the Code Enforcement Officer. The application shall be signed by the
owner of the property where the work is to be performed or an
authorized agent of the owner. The application shall include such
information as the Code Enforcement Officer deems sufficient to permit
a determination by the Code Enforcement Officer that the intended
work complies with all applicable requirements of the Uniform Code
and the Energy Code. The application shall include or be accompanied
by the following information and documentation:
(1) A description of the proposed work;
(2) The Tax Map number and the street address of the premises where
the work is to be performed;
(3) The occupancy classification of any affected building or structure;
(4) Where applicable, a statement of special inspections prepared in
accordance with the provisions of the Uniform Code; and
(5) At least two sets of construction documents (drawings and/or
specifications) which:
(a) Define the scope of the proposed work;
(b) Are prepared by a New York State registered architect or
licensed professional engineer where so required by the
Education Law;
(c) Indicate with sufficient clarity and detail the nature and extent
of the work proposed;
(d) Substantiate that the proposed work will comply with the
Uniform Code and the Energy Code; and
(e) Where applicable, include a site plan that shows any existing
and proposed buildings and structures on the site, the location
of any existing or proposed well or septic system, the location
of the intended work, and the distances between the buildings
and structures and the lot lines.
E. Construction documents. Construction documents will not be accepted
as part of an application for a building permit unless they satisfy the
requirements set forth in Subsection D(5) of this section. Construction
documents which are accepted as part of the application for a building
permit shall be marked as accepted by the Code Enforcement Officer in
writing or by stamp. One set of the accepted construction documents
shall be retained by the Code Enforcement Officer, and one set of the
accepted construction documents shall be returned to the applicant to
be kept at the work site so as to be available for use by code
enforcement personnel. However, the return of a set of accepted
construction documents to the applicant shall not be construed as
§ 94-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 94-4
1:65
authorization to commence work, nor as an indication that a building
permit will be issued. Work shall not be commenced until and unless a
building permit is issued.
F. Issuance of building permits. An application for a building permit shall
be examined to ascertain whether the proposed work is in compliance
with the applicable requirements of the Uniform Code and Energy
Code. The Code Enforcement Officer shall issue a building permit if the
proposed work is in compliance with the applicable requirements of the
Uniform Code and Energy Code.
G. Building permits to be displayed. Building permits shall be visibly
displayed at the work site and shall remain visible until the authorized
work has been completed.
H. Work to be in accordance with construction documents. All work shall
be performed in accordance with the construction documents which
were submitted with and accepted as part of the application for the
building permit. The building permit shall contain such a directive. The
permit holder shall immediately notify the Code Enforcement Officer of
any change occurring during the course of the work. The building
permit shall contain such a directive. If the Code Enforcement Officer
determines that such change warrants a new or amended building
permit, such change shall not be made until and unless a new or
amended building permit reflecting such change is issued.
I. Time limits. Building permits shall become invalid unless the authorized
work is commenced within six months following the date of issuance.
Building permits shall expire 12 months after the date of issuance. A
building permit which has become invalid or which has expired
pursuant to this subsection may be renewed upon application by the
permit holder, payment of the applicable fee, and approval of the
application by the Code Enforcement Officer.
J. Revocation or suspension of building permits. If the Code Enforcement
Officer determines that a building permit was issued in error because of
incorrect, inaccurate or incomplete information, or that the work for
which a building permit was issued violates the Uniform Code or the
Energy Code, the Code Enforcement Officer shall revoke the building
permit or suspend the building permit until such time as the permit
holder demonstrates that:
(1) All work then completed is in compliance with all applicable
provisions of the Uniform Code and the Energy Code; and
(2) All work then proposed to be performed shall be in compliance with
all applicable provisions of the Uniform Code and the Energy Code.
K. Fee. The fee specified in or determined in accordance with the
provisions set forth in § 94-16 of this article must be paid at the time of
submission of an application for a building permit, for an amended
building permit, or for renewal of a building permit.
§ 94-4 PENFIELD CODE § 94-5
1:66
§ 94-5. Construction inspections.
§ 94-6. Stop-work orders.
A. Work to remain accessible and exposed. Work shall remain accessible
and exposed until inspected and accepted by the Code Enforcement
Officer or by an inspector authorized by the Code Enforcement Officer.
The permit holder shall notify the Code Enforcement Officer when any
element of work described in Subsection B of this section is ready for
inspection.
B. Elements of work to be inspected. The following elements of the
construction process shall be inspected, where applicable:
(1) Work site prior to the issuance of a building permit;
(2) Footing and foundation;
(3) Preparation for concrete slab;
(4) Framing;
(5) Building systems, including underground and rough-in;
(6) Fire-resistant construction;
(7) Fire-resistant penetrations;
(8) Solid-fuel-burning heating appliances, chimneys, flues or gas vents;
(9) Energy Code compliance; and
(10) A final inspection after all work authorized by the building permit
has been completed.
C. Inspection results. After inspection, the work or a portion thereof shall
be noted as satisfactory as completed, or the permit holder shall be
notified as to where the work fails to comply with the Uniform Code or
Energy Code. Work not in compliance with any applicable provision of
the Uniform Code or Energy Code shall remain exposed until such work
shall have been brought into compliance with all applicable provisions
of the Uniform Code and the Energy Code, reinspected, and found
satisfactory as completed.
D. Fee. The fee specified in or determined in accordance with the
provisions set forth in § 94-16 of this article must be paid prior to or at
the time of each inspection performed pursuant to this section.
A. Authority to issue. The Code Enforcement Officer is authorized to issue
stop-work orders pursuant to this section. The Code Enforcement
Officer shall issue a stop-work order to halt:
(1) Any work that is determined by the Code Enforcement Officer to be
contrary to any applicable provision of the Uniform Code or Energy
§ 94-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 94-6
1:67
Code, without regard to whether such work is or is not work for
which a building permit is required, and without regard to whether
a building permit has or has not been issued for such work; or
(2) Any work that is being conducted in a dangerous or unsafe manner
in the opinion of the Code Enforcement Officer, without regard to
whether such work is or is not work for which a building permit is
required, and without regard to whether a building permit has or
has not been issued for such work; or
(3) Any work for which a building permit is required which is being
performed without the required building permit, or under a
building permit that has become invalid, has expired, or has been
suspended or revoked.
B. Content of stop-work orders. Stop-work orders shall:
(1) Be in writing;
(2) Be dated and signed by the Code Enforcement Officer;
(3) State the reason or reasons for issuance; and
(4) If applicable, state the conditions which must be satisfied before
work will be permitted to resume.
C. Service of stop-work orders. The Code Enforcement Officer shall cause
the stop-work order, or a copy thereof, to be served on the owner of the
affected property (and, if the owner is not the permit holder, on the
permit holder) personally or by registered mail/certified mail. The Code
Enforcement Officer shall be permitted, but not required, to cause the
stop-work order, or a copy thereof, to be served on any builder,
architect, tenant, contractor, subcontractor, construction
superintendent, or their agents, or any other person taking part or
assisting in work affected by the stop-work order, personally or by
registered mail/certified mail; provided, however, that failure to serve
any person mentioned in this sentence shall not affect the efficacy of the
stop-work order.
D. Effect of stop-work order. Upon the issuance of a stop-work order, the
owner of the affected property, the permit holder and any other person
performing, taking part in or assisting in the work shall immediately
cease all work which is the subject of the stop-work order.
E. Remedy not exclusive. The issuance of a stop-work order shall not be
the exclusive remedy available to address any event described in
Subsection A of this section, and the authority to issue a stop-work
order shall be in addition to, and not in substitution for or limitation of,
the right and authority to pursue any other remedy or impose any other
penalty under § 94-15 of this article or under any other applicable local
law or state law. Any such other remedy or penalty may be pursued at
§ 94-6 PENFIELD CODE § 94-6
1:68
§ 94-7. Certificates of occupancy/certificates of compliance.
any time, whether prior to, at the time of, or after the issuance of a stopwork
order.
A. Certificates of occupancy/certificates of compliance required. A
certificate of occupancy/certificate of compliance shall be required for
any work which is the subject of a building permit and for all structures
or buildings, or portions thereof, which are converted from one use or
occupancy classification or subclassification to another. Permission to
use or occupy a building or structure, or portion thereof, for which a
building permit was previously issued shall be granted only by issuance
of a certificate of occupancy/certificate of compliance.
B. Issuance of certificates of occupancy/certificates of compliance. The
Code Enforcement Officer shall issue a certificate of occupancy/
certificate of compliance if the work which was the subject of the
building permit was completed in accordance with all applicable
provisions of the Uniform Code and Energy Code and, if applicable, that
the structure, building or portion thereof that was converted from one
use or occupancy classification or subclassification to another complies
with all applicable provisions of the Uniform Code and Energy Code.
The Code Enforcement Officer or an inspector authorized by the Code
Enforcement Officer shall inspect the building, structure or work prior
to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy/certificate of compliance.
In addition, where applicable, the following documents, prepared in
accordance with the provisions of the Uniform Code by such person or
persons as may be designated by or otherwise acceptable to the Code
Enforcement Officer, at the expense of the applicant for the certificate
of occupancy/certificate of compliance, shall be provided to the Code
Enforcement Officer prior to the issuance of the certificate of
occupancy/certificate of compliance:
(1) A written statement of structural observations and/or a final report
of special inspections; and
(2) Flood hazard certifications.
C. Contents of certificates of occupancy/certificates of compliance. A
certificate of occupancy/certificate of compliance shall contain the
following information:
(1) The building permit number, if any;
(2) The date of issuance of the building permit, if any;
(3) The name, address and Tax Map number of the property;
(4) If the certificate of occupancy/certificate of compliance is not
applicable to an entire structure, a description of that portion of the
structure for which the certificate of occupancy/certificate of
compliance is issued;
§ 94-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 94-7
1:69
(5) The use and occupancy classification of the structure;
(6) The type of construction of the structure;
(7) The assembly occupant load of the structure, if any;
(8) If an automatic sprinkler system is provided, a notation as to
whether the sprinkler system is required;
(9) Any special conditions imposed in connection with the issuance of
the building permit; and
(10) The signature of the Code Enforcement Officer issuing the
certificate of occupancy/certificate of compliance and the date of
issuance.
D. Temporary certificate. The Code Enforcement Officer shall be
permitted to issue a temporary certificate allowing the temporary
occupancy of a building or structure, or a portion thereof, prior to
completion of the work which is the subject of a building permit.
However, in no event shall the Code Enforcement Officer issue a
temporary certificate unless the Code Enforcement Officer determines
1) that the building or structure, or the portion thereof covered by the
temporary certificate, may be occupied safely, 2) that any fire- and
smoke-detecting or fire protection equipment which has been installed
is operational, and 3) that all required means of egress from the
building or structure have been provided. The Code Enforcement
Officer may include in a temporary certificate such terms and
conditions as he or she deems necessary or appropriate to ensure safety
or to further the purposes and intent of the Uniform Code. A temporary
certificate shall be effective for a period of time, not to exceed six
months, which shall be determined by the Code Enforcement Officer
and specified in the temporary certificate. During the specified period
of effectiveness of the temporary certificate, the permit holder shall
undertake to bring the building or structure into full compliance with
all applicable provisions of the Uniform Code and the Energy Code.
E. Revocation or suspension of certificates. If the Code Enforcement
Officer determines that a certificate of occupancy/certificate of
compliance or a temporary certificate was issued in error because of
incorrect, inaccurate or incomplete information, and if the relevant
deficiencies are not corrected to the satisfaction of the Code
Enforcement Officer within such period of time as shall be specified by
the Code Enforcement Officer, the Code Enforcement Officer shall
revoke or suspend such certificate.
F. Fee. The fee specified in or determined in accordance with the
provisions set forth in § 94-16 of this article must be paid at the time of
submission of an application for a certificate of occupancy/certificate of
compliance or for a temporary certificate.
§ 94-7 PENFIELD CODE § 94-8
1:70
§ 94-8. Notification regarding fire or explosion.
The chief of any fire department providing fire-fighting services for a
property within the Town shall promptly notify the Code Enforcement
Officer of any fire or explosion involving any structural damage, fuelburning
appliance, chimney or gas vent.
§ 94-9. Unsafe buildings and structures.
Unsafe structures and equipment in the Town shall be identified and
addressed in accordance with the procedures established by Chapter 97 of
the Town Code, as now in effect or as hereafter amended from time to time.
§ 94-10. Operating permits.
A. Permits required.
(1) Operating permits shall be required for conducting the activities or
using the categories of buildings listed below:
(a) Manufacturing, storing or handling hazardous materials in
quantities exceeding those listed in Tables 2703.1.1(1),
2703.1.1(2), 2703.1.1(3) or 2703.1.1(4) in the publication
entitled "Fire Code of New York State" and incorporated by
reference in 19 NYCRR 1225.1;
(b) Hazardous processes and activities, including, but not limited
to, commercial and industrial operations which produce
combustible dust as a by product, fruit and crop ripening, and
waste handling;
(c) Use of pyrotechnic devices in assembly occupancies;
(d) Buildings containing one or more areas of public assembly with
an occupant load of 100 persons or more; and
(e) Buildings whose use or occupancy classification may pose a
substantial potential hazard to public safety, as determined by
resolution adopted by the Town Board.
(2) Any person who proposes to undertake any activity or to operate
any type of building listed in this Subsection A shall be required to
obtain an operating permit prior to commencing such activity or
operation.
B. Applications for operating permits. An application for an operating
permit shall be in writing on a form provided by or otherwise
acceptable to the Code Enforcement Officer. Such application shall
include such information as the Code Enforcement Officer deems
sufficient to permit a determination by the Code Enforcement Officer
that quantities, materials, and activities conform to the requirements of
the Uniform Code. If the Code Enforcement Officer determines that
tests or reports are necessary to verify conformance, such tests or
§ 94-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 94-10
1:71
§ 94-11. Fire safety and property maintenance inspections.
reports shall be performed or provided by such person or persons as
may be designated by or otherwise acceptable to the Code Enforcement
Officer, at the expense of the applicant.
C. Inspections. The Code Enforcement Officer or an inspector authorized
by the Code Enforcement Officer shall inspect the subject premises
prior to the issuance of an operating permit.
D. Multiple activities. In any circumstance in which more than one activity
listed in Subsection A of this section is to be conducted at a location, the
Code Enforcement Officer may require a separate operating permit for
each such activity, or the Code Enforcement Officer may, in his/her
discretion, issue a single operating permit to apply to all such activities.
E. Duration of operating permits. Operating permits shall be issued for
such period of time as shall be determined by the Code Enforcement
Officer to be consistent with local conditions, not to exceed one year.
The effective period of each operating permit shall be specified in the
operating permit. An operating permit may be reissued or renewed
upon application to the Code Enforcement Officer, payment of the
applicable fee, and approval of such application by the Code
Enforcement Officer.
F. Revocation or suspension of operating permits. If the Code
Enforcement Officer determines that any activity or building for which
an operating permit was issued does not comply with any applicable
provision of the Uniform Code, such operating permit shall be revoked
or suspended.
G. Fee. The fee specified in or determined in accordance with the
provisions set forth in § 94-16 of this article must be paid at the time
submission of an application for an operating permit, for an amended
operating permit, or for reissue or renewal of an operating permit.
A. Inspections required. Fire safety and property maintenance inspections
of buildings and structures shall be performed by the Code
Enforcement Officer or an inspector designated by the Code
Enforcement Officer at the following intervals:
(1) Fire safety and property maintenance inspections of buildings or
structures which contain an area of public assembly shall be
performed at least once every 12 months.
(2) Fire safety and property maintenance inspections of buildings or
structures being occupied as dormitories shall be performed at
least once every 12 months.
(3) Fire safety and property maintenance inspections of all multiple
dwellings not included in Subsection A(1) or (2) of this subsection,
and all nonresidential buildings, structures, uses and occupancies
§ 94-10 PENFIELD CODE § 94-11
1:72
not included in Subsection A(1) or (2) of this subsection, shall be
performed at least once every 36 months.
B. Inspections permitted. In addition to the inspections required by
Subsection A of this section, a fire safety and property maintenance
inspection of any building, structure, use, or occupancy, or of any
dwelling unit, may also be performed by the Code Enforcement Officer
or an inspector designated by the Code Enforcement Officer at any time
upon:
(1) The request of the owner of the property to be inspected or an
authorized agent of such owner;
(2) Receipt by the Code Enforcement Officer of a written statement
alleging that conditions or activities failing to comply with the
Uniform Code or Energy Code exist; or
(3) Receipt by the Code Enforcement Officer of any other information,
reasonably believed by the Code Enforcement Officer to be reliable,
giving rise to reasonable cause to believe that conditions or
activities failing to comply with the Uniform Code or Energy Code
exist; provided, however, that nothing in this subsection shall be
construed as permitting an inspection under any circumstances
under which a court order or warrant permitting such inspection is
required, unless such court order or warrant shall have been
obtained.
C. OFPC inspections. Nothing in this section or in any other provision of
this article shall supersede, limit or impair the powers, duties and
responsibilities of the New York State Office of Fire Prevention and
Control (OFPC) and the New York State Fire Administrator under
Executive Law § 156-e and Education Law § 807-b. Notwithstanding
any other provision of this section to the contrary:
(1) The Code Enforcement Officer shall not perform fire safety and
property maintenance inspections of a building or structure which
contains an area of public assembly if OFPC performs fire safety
and property maintenance inspections of such building or structure
at least once every 12 months;
(2) The Code Enforcement Officer shall not perform fire safety and
property maintenance inspections of a building or structure
occupied as a dormitory if OFPC performs fire safety and property
maintenance inspections of such building or structure at least once
every 12 months;
(3) The Code Enforcement Officer shall not perform fire safety and
property maintenance inspections of a multiple dwelling not
included in Subsection A(1) or (2) of this section if OFPC performs
fire safety and property maintenance inspections of such multiple
dwelling at intervals not exceeding the interval specified in
Subsection A(3) of this section; and
§ 94-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 94-11
1:73
§ 94-12. Complaints.
The Code Enforcement Officer shall review and investigate complaints
which allege or assert the existence of conditions or activities that fail
to comply with the Uniform Code, the Energy Code, this article, or any
other local law, ordinance or regulation adopted for administration and
enforcement of the Uniform Code or the Energy Code. The process for
responding to a complaint shall include such of the following steps as the
Code Enforcement Officer may deem to be appropriate:
§ 94-13. Recordkeeping.
(4) The Code Enforcement Officer shall not perform fire safety and
property maintenance inspections of a nonresidential building,
structure, use or occupancy not included in Subsection A(1) or (2)
of this section if OFPC performs fire safety and property
maintenance inspections of such nonresidential building, structure,
use or occupancy at intervals not exceeding the interval specified
in Subsection A(3) of this section.
D. Fee. The fee specified in or determined in accordance with the
provisions set forth in § 94-16 of this article must be paid prior to or at
the time each inspection performed pursuant to this section. This
subdivision shall not apply to inspections performed by OFPC.
A. Performing an inspection of the conditions and/or activities alleged to
be in violation, and documenting the results of such inspection.
B. If a violation is found to exist, providing the owner of the affected
property and any other person who may be responsible for the violation
with notice of the violation and opportunity to abate, correct or cure the
violation, or otherwise proceeding in the manner described in § 94-15 of
this article.
C. If appropriate, issuing a stop-work order.
D. If a violation which was found to exist is abated or corrected,
performing an inspection to ensure that the violation has been abated
or corrected, preparing a final written report reflecting such abatement
or correction, and filing such report with the complaint.
A. The Code Enforcement Officer shall keep permanent official records of
all transactions and activities conducted by all code enforcement
personnel, including records of:
(1) All applications received, reviewed and approved or denied;
(2) All plans, specifications and construction documents approved;
(3) All building permits, certificates of occupancy/certificates of
compliance, temporary certificates, stop-work orders, and
operating permits issued;
§ 94-11 PENFIELD CODE § 94-13
1:74
§ 94-14. Program review and reporting.
§ 94-15. Violations.
(4) All inspections and tests performed;
(5) All statements and reports issued;
(6) All complaints received;
(7) All investigations conducted;
(8) All other features and activities specified in or contemplated by
§§ 94-4 through 94-12, inclusive, of this article; and
(9) All fees charged and collected.
B. All such records shall be public records open for public inspection
during normal business hours. All plans and records pertaining to
buildings or structures, or appurtenances thereto, shall be retained for
at least the minimum time period so required by state law and
regulation.
A. The Code Enforcement Officer shall annually submit to the Town Board
a written report and summary of all business conducted by the Code
Enforcement Officer and the inspectors, including a report and
summary of all transactions and activities described in § 94-13 of this
article and a report and summary of all appeals or litigation pending or
concluded.
B. The Code Enforcement Officer shall annually submit to the Secretary of
State, on behalf of the Town, on a form prescribed by the Secretary of
State, a report of the activities of the Town relative to administration
and enforcement of the Uniform Code.
C. The Code Enforcement Officer shall, upon request of the New York
State Department of State, provide to the New York State Department
of State, from the records and related materials the Town is required to
maintain, excerpts, summaries, tabulations, statistics and other
information and accounts of the activities of the Town in connection
with administration and enforcement of the Uniform Code.
A. Compliance orders. The Code Enforcement Officer is authorized to
order in writing the remedying of any condition or activity found to exist
in, on or about any building, structure, or premises in violation of the
Uniform Code, the Energy Code, or this article. Upon finding that any
such condition or activity exists, the Code Enforcement Officer shall
issue a compliance order. The compliance order shall 1) be in writing; 2)
be dated and signed by the Code Enforcement Officer; 3) specify the
condition or activity that violates the Uniform Code, the Energy Code,
or this article; 4) specify the provision or provisions of the Uniform
Code, the Energy Code, or this article which is/are violated by the
§ 94-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 94-15
1:75
specified condition or activity; 5) specify the period of time which the
Code Enforcement Officer deems necessary for achieving compliance
(30 days); 6) direct that compliance be achieved within the specified
period of time; and 7) state that an action or proceeding to compel
compliance may be instituted if compliance is not achieved within the
specified period of time. The Code Enforcement Officer shall cause
the compliance order, or a copy thereof, to be served on the owner of
the affected property personally or by registered mail/certified mail.
The Code Enforcement Officer shall be permitted, but not required,
to cause the compliance order, or a copy thereof, to be served on
any builder, architect, tenant, contractor, subcontractor, construction
superintendent, or his/her agents, or any other person taking part or
assisting in work being performed at the affected property personally
or by registered mail/certified mail; provided, however, that failure to
serve any person mentioned in this sentence shall not affect the efficacy
of the compliance order.
B. Appearance tickets. The Code Enforcement Officer and each inspector
are authorized to issue appearance tickets for any violation of the
Uniform Code.
C. Civil penalties. In addition to those penalties prescribed by state law,
any person who violates any provision of the Uniform Code, the Energy
Code or this article, or any term or condition of any building permit,
certificate of occupancy/certificate of compliance, temporary
certificate, stop-work order, operating permit or other notice or order
issued by the Code Enforcement Officer pursuant to any provision of
this article, shall be liable to a civil penalty of not more than $200 for
each day or part thereof during which such violation continues. The
civil penalties provided by this subsection shall be recoverable in an
action instituted in the name of the Town.
D. Injunctive relief. An action or proceeding may be instituted in the name
of the Town, in a court of competent jurisdiction, to prevent, restrain,
enjoin, correct, or abate any violation of, or to enforce, any provision of
the Uniform Code, the Energy Code, this article, or any term or
condition of any building permit, certificate of occupancy/certificate of
compliance, temporary certificate, stop-work order, operating permit,
compliance order, or other notice or order issued by the Code
Enforcement Officer pursuant to any provision of this article. In
particular, but not by way of limitation, where the construction or use of
a building or structure is in violation of any provision of the Uniform
Code, the Energy Code, this article, or any stop-work order, compliance
order or other order obtained under the Uniform Code, the Energy
Code or this article, an action or proceeding may be commenced in the
name of the Town, in the Supreme Court or in any other court having
the requisite jurisdiction, to obtain an order directing the removal of
the building or structure or an abatement of the condition in violation of
such provisions. No action or proceeding described in this subsection
§ 94-15 PENFIELD CODE § 94-15
1:76
§ 94-16. Fees.
A fee schedule shall be established by resolution of the Town Board. Such
fee schedule may thereafter be amended from time to time by like
resolution. The fees set forth in, or determined in accordance with, such
fee schedule or amended fee schedule shall be charged and collected for
the submission of applications, the issuance of building permits, amended
building permits, renewed building permits, certificates of occupancy/
certificates of compliance, temporary certificates, operating permits, fire
safety and property maintenance inspections, and other actions of the Code
Enforcement Officer described in or contemplated by this article.
§ 94-17. Intermunicipal agreements.
The Town Board may, by resolution, authorize the Town Supervisor to enter
into an agreement, in the name of the Town, with other governments to
carry out the terms of this article, provided that such agreement does not
violate any provision of the Uniform Code, the Energy Code, 19 NYCRR Part
1203, or any other applicable law.
shall be commenced without the appropriate authorization from the
Town Board.
E. Remedies not exclusive. No remedy or penalty specified in this section
shall be the exclusive remedy or penalty available to address any
violation described in this section, and each remedy or penalty specified
in this section shall be in addition to, and not in substitution for or
limitation of, the other remedies or penalties specified in this section, in
§ 94-6 of this article, in any other section of this article, or in any other
applicable law. Any remedy or penalty specified in this section may be
pursued at any time, whether prior to, simultaneously with, or after the
pursuit of any other remedy or penalty specified in this section, in
§ 94-6 of this article, in any other section of this article, or in any other
applicable law. In particular, but not by way of limitation, each remedy
and penalty specified in this section shall be in addition to, and not in
substitution for or limitation of, the penalties specified in Executive Law
§ 382, Subdivision (2), and any remedy or penalty specified in this
section may be pursued at any time, whether prior to, simultaneously
with, or after the pursuit of any penalty specified in Executive Law
§ 382, Subdivision (2).
§ 94-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 94-17
1:77

ARTICLE II
Electrical Code
[Adopted as Art. XIII of the Zoning Ordinance; amended 3-1-2000]
§ 94-18. Title.
This article shall be known as the "Electrical Code of the Town of Penfield."
§ 94-19. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to regulate the manner in which wiring
is installed, altered or repaired for electric light, heat, power and signal
systems operating on 50 or more volts in or on all real property within the
Town of Penfield.
§ 94-20. Standards. [Amended 12-16-2015 by L.L. No. 3-2015]
All electrical installations referred to in § 94-19 shall be made in conformity
with the requirements of the New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and
Building Code (NYSUFPBC).
§ 94-21. Electrical inspections.
A. Any person or organization (hereafter referred to as "agency") may
apply to the Town Board for permission to conduct electrical
inspections in the Town of Penfield. The application shall be in writing
in such form as may be prescribed by Town Board resolution and shall
be accompanied by a nonrefundable application fee as set forth in the
fee schedule annually adopted by the Town Board, an insurance
certificate showing statutory workers' compensation coverage for its
employees and automobile and public liability coverage for property
damage and personal injury, including wrongful death, in an amount of
at least $10,000,000, with the Town of Penfield named as additional
insured. [Amended 12-16-2015 by L.L. No. 3-2015]
B. The completed application shall be submitted to the Building Inspector,
who shall review the same for accuracy and completeness, and who
shall also make an investigation into the business reputation and
qualifications of the applicant. The Building Inspector shall, within 30
days of the receipt of the application, forward the same, together with
his recommendation as to approval or rejection, to the Town Board for
its determination.
C. Upon approval, the Building Inspector shall issue a letter to the
applicant certifying that the applicant has been approved to conduct
electrical inspections in the Town of Penfield for a probationary period
of one year.
D. After a one-year probationary period, the applicant may apply for
permanent approval from the Town Board. The Building Inspector shall
submit the application, and his recommendation as to approval or
§ 94-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 94-21
1:79
§ 94-22. Standards for electrical inspection agencies.
rejection, to the Town Board. The Town Board shall either approve or
reject the application. Such approval shall be valid until such a time as
it is revoked by the Town Board upon good cause shown after a hearing
before the Town Board, at which hearing the electrical inspector shall
be given an opportunity to be heard and to present evidence in his/her
defense. In the event that the applicant's application is not approved,
he/she shall be given an opportunity to present his/her case to the Town
Board at a hearing to be conducted by the Town Board within 30 days of
such rejection and to present evidence in support of his/her application.
E. Upon approval, the Building Inspector shall issue a letter to the
applicant certifying that the applicant has been approved to conduct
electrical inspections in the Town of Penfield.
F. The Building Inspector shall at all times maintain a list of approved
electrical inspectors with their current business addresses and
telephone numbers.
A. The agency shall be authorized by the State of New York to conduct
business within the boundaries of New York State. The agency
represents that it maintains currently effective insurance, including
statutory worker's compensation insurance for its employees and
workers, public liability insurance for property damage and personal
injury. The agency shall maintain such insurance policies in full force
and effect while performing inspections and submitting certificates.
B. The agency shall furnish the Building Inspector with proof of
responsibility and organizational continuity. The agency shall not solicit
of any person or entity or require as a condition of inspection any
waiver of responsibility for an error, omission, or recommendation
made by its inspectors, or for any other action of its inspectors.
C. The agency shall require all wiring to meet standards of the latest
revision of the National Electric Code and of any applicable code
prescribed by this article.
D. The agency shall not compete with others in any manner which would
cause it to reduce the quality of its inspectors. The agency shall not
knowingly accept an application at any given location from any
applicant who has received notice from another agency.
E. Each agency is required to maintain a file of current inspection charges
with the Building Department. Established charges will be applied
uniformly and will not be discounted. The agency shall ensure that the
inspectors it employs have adequate experience, education and training
as follows. Inspectors shall:
(1) Have a working knowledge of the principles of electricity necessary
to interpret the National Electrical Code and other applicable
requirements.
§ 94-21 PENFIELD CODE § 94-22
1:80
§ 94-23. Violations.
It shall be a violation of this article for any person, firm or corporation
to install or cause to be installed, or to alter or repair electrical wiring
for electric light, heat, power and signal systems operating on 50 or more
volts, in or on properties in the Town of Penfield, until an application for
inspection has been filed with an approved electrical inspector or inspection
agency. It shall be a violation of this article for a person, firm or corporation
to connect or cause to be connected electrical wiring in or on properties
for electric light, heat, power and signal systems operating on 50 or more
volts to any source of electrical energy supply, prior to the issuance of
a temporary certificate or a certificate of compliance by an approved
inspector or inspection agency.
§ 94-24. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 12-16-2015 by L.L. No.
3-2015]
(2) Know the requirements of the National Electrical Code and other
applicable requirements.
(3) Be familiar with the construction practices of the electrical wiring
trade.
(4) Be a master electrician.
F. The agency, its employees, and workers shall comply with all federal,
state and local laws, ordinances, rules and regulations pertaining to any
electrical inspection.
G. The agency agrees to maintain adequate records so that it can provide
the Building Department with records of inspections when requested.
Such records shall be maintained for a minimum of 10 years.
H. The agency will maintain an office in Monroe County staffed to receive
telephone calls during normal business days for a minimum of six hours
a day.
I. The agency shall establish a system to receive applications and issue
inspection reports in accordance with the following:
(1) The agency shall provide an application form, which shall include a
copy for the Building Department.
(2) The agency, in subsequent progressive inspections of the wiring
system, shall establish a procedure for prompt notification of any
noncompliance. This notice shall be served on the Building
Department and the applicant.
(3) Upon a finding of compliance, the agency shall issue a certificate of
final compliance and shall provide a copy of the certificate to the
Building Department and the applicant.
§ 94-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 94-24
1:81
§ 94-25. Article not applicable in certain cases.
The provisions of the article shall not apply to the electrical installation
in mines, ships, railway cars, automotive equipment or the installations or
equipment employed by a railway, electrical or communications utility in
the exercise of its function as a utility, and located outdoors or in buildings
used exclusively for that purpose. This article shall not apply to any work
involved in the manufacture, assembly, test or repair of electrical
machinery, apparatus, materials and equipment by a person, firm or
corporation engaged in electrical manufacturing as his/her principal
business.
§ 94-26. No waiver or assumption of liability.
This article shall not be construed to relieve from or lessen the
responsibility of any person owning, operating, controlling or installing any
electric wiring devices, appliances, or equipment for loss of life or damage
to person or property caused by any defect therein, nor shall the Town of
Penfield or the approved electrical inspector be deemed to have assumed
any such liability by reason of any inspection made pursuant to this article.
A. Any person, firm, company or corporation who or which shall omit,
neglect or refuse to do any act required by this article, or who or which
shall omit, neglect or refuse to do any act or condition imposed by the
Town Board, Zoning Board of Appeals or the Planning Board, or who or
which shall build any structure contrary to the plans or specifications
submitted to the authorized official and certified by him/her as
complying with this article, shall be subject to enforcement and
penalties as set forth in Town Law § 268.
B. Each and every day that a violation of any of the provisions of this
article continues after written notice shall have been served upon the
person in violation of this article pursuant to the Civil Practice Law and
Rules shall constitute a separate violation. In addition to the remedies
set forth, the Town Board may institute an appropriate action to
proceed to abate any violation of the provisions of this article or to
compel compliance therewith.
C. Any person, firm, company or corporation who or which shall fail to
acquire any permit or license herein required within 30 days of the time
that said permit or license should have been acquired under this article
shall pay to the Town Clerk, before the issuance of any said permit or
license, a sum equal to three times the fee set for the issuance thereof.
§ 94-24 PENFIELD CODE § 94-26
1:82
ARTICLE III
Fire Sprinkler Systems
[Adopted 11-4-2015 by L.L. No. 2-2015]
§ 94-27. Title.
This article shall be known as the "Town of Penfield Fire Sprinkler System
Law."
§ 94-28. Purpose and intent.
§ 94-29. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ADDITION — The extension or increase in area, height or equipment of a
structure.
ALTERATION — Any change, rearrangement or addition to a structure,
other than repairs; any modification in construction or in equipment.
APPROVED FIRE SPRINKLER SYSTEM — A fire sprinkler system approved
by Factory Mutual, the National Fire Protection Association, or other
nationally recognized approval organization as determined by the Town
of Penfield Fire Marshal and/or Building Inspector, which approval shall
have been obtained prior to installation. Such system, to be approved,
shall meet all standards of installation and operation as prescribed by such
approval bodies and the manufacturer of the system. Any such installation
and operation thereof shall be subject to the approval of the Town of
Penfield Fire Marshal and/or Building Inspector.
REPAIR — Replacement or renewal, excluding additions, of any part of
a structure, with like to similar materials or parts, for the purpose of
maintenance, preservation or restoration of such materials.
§ 94-30. Fire sprinkler systems required.
A. It is the intent of this article to provide for the installation,
maintenance, approval and compliance of fire sprinkler systems within
the Town of Penfield.
B. The greatest danger from fire is loss of life. The overwhelming number
of lives lost in fires results from the inhalation of toxic fumes and smoke
and not from the flames. It is therefore of extreme importance that fires
are contained in the area of origination and extinguished as rapidly as
possible. A sprinkler system is the most effective, simplest, least
expensive form of fire protection. The installation of a sprinkler system
at the time of construction results in only a minor increase in the total
cost of construction and is a very small price to pay for the potential of
saving of life.
§ 94-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 94-30
1:83
§ 94-31. Compliance required prior to issuance of building permit.
No building permit shall be issued for the construction of any structure
required to have a fire sprinkler system under § 94-30 of this article, unless
plans incorporating such fire sprinkler systems are filed with the Town of
Penfield Fire Marshal's office and Building Department.
§ 94-32. Approval required prior to issuance of certificate of
occupancy.
No certificate of occupancy shall be issued for any structure required to
have a fire sprinkler system under § 94-30 of this article unless the system
is installed, operational, inspected and tested.
A. Any structure constructed after the effective date of this article and
used for the following purposes shall have an approved fire sprinkler
system installed and operational:
(1) Compliance with Section 903 of the New York State Uniform Fire
Prevention and Building Code.
(2) Other uses not enumerated above determined by the Fire Marshal
to represent a high threat of fire, explosion, or the emission of toxic
fumes in the event of fire.
B. Any alteration, addition or repair of a structure wherein the cost of that
alteration, addition, or repair made within any six-month period
exceeds 50% of the value of replacement of the existing structure,
excluding the alteration, addition or repair, shall be considered a
structure "constructed after the effective date of this article" within the
meaning of this section.
C. Any change of use of an existing structure shall be considered a
structure "constructed after the effective date of this article" within the
meaning of this section.
D. Replacement value of the existing structure shall be determined by
equalizing the assessed value of the existing structure based on the
most current tax assessment roll of the Town of Penfield.
§ 94-30 PENFIELD CODE § 94-32
1:84
Chapter 97
BUILDINGS, UNSAFE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 94. Zoning and land use — See Ch. 250.
§ 97-1. Defined; nuisances.
All structures which are structurally unsafe, unsanitary, or not provided
with adequate egress, or which constitute a fire hazard, or are otherwise
dangerous to human life, or which in relation to existing uses constitute
a hazard to safety or health by reason of inadequate maintenance,
dilapidation, obsolescence, or abandonment are, severally, for the purpose
of this chapter, defined as "unsafe structures." All such unsafe structures
are hereby declared to be illegal and shall be abated by repair and
rehabilitation or by demolition in accordance with the procedure of this
chapter. Buildings and structures may become unsafe by reason of damage
by fire, the elements, age or general deterioration. Vacant buildings not
properly secured at doorways and windows also serve as an attractive
nuisance for young children, who may be injured therein, as well as a point
of congregation by vagrants and transients. A dilapidated building may also
serve as a place of rodent infestation thereby creating a health menace to
the community. It is the purpose of this chapter to provide for the safety,
health protection and general welfare of persons and property in the Town
of Penfield by requiring such unsafe buildings to be repaired or demolished
and removed.
§ 97-2. Inspection.
A. The Building and Zoning Administrator shall examine or cause to be
examined every structure which, upon his/her own opinion or upon
receipt of information:
(1) Is or may become dangerous or unsafe to the general public.
(2) Is open at the doorways and windows, making it accessible to and
an object of attraction to minors under 18 years of age, as well as to
vagrants and other trespassers;
(3) Is or may become a place of rodent infestation;
(4) Presents any other danger to the health, safety, morals and general
welfare of the public; or
(5) Is unfit for the purposes for which it may lawfully be used.
B. The Building and Zoning Administrator shall report in writing to the
Town Board his/her findings and recommendations in regard to the
§ 94-32 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 97-2
1:85
§ 97-3. Town Board order to repair or demolish.
§ 97-4. Service and posting of order.
A certified copy of the resolution and order adopted by the Town Board
pertaining to said unsafe structure shall be:
repair or demolition of each structure so examined and found to be an
unsafe structure.
A. The Town Board shall thereafter consider such report and by resolution
determine, if in its opinion the report so warrants, that such structure is
unsafe and dangerous and order its repair if same can be safely
repaired, or its demolition and removal.
B. The resolution ordering repair or demolition of the unsafe structure
shall contain the following:
(1) A description of the premises;
(2) A statement of the particulars in which the building is unsafe or
dangerous;
(3) An order outlining the manner in which the building is to be made
safe and secure, or demolished and removed.
(4) A statement that the securing or removal of such building shall
commence within 30 days of the service of the notice and shall be
completed within 60 days thereafter, unless, for good cause shown,
such time shall be extended;
(5) A date, time and place for a hearing before the Town Board in
relation to such dangerous or unsafe building, which hearing shall
be scheduled not less than five business days from the date of
service of the notice; and
(6) A statement that in the event of neglect or refusal to comply with
the order to secure or demolish and remove the building, the Town
Board is authorized to provide for its demolition and removal, to
assess all expenses thereof against the land on which it is located
and to institute a special proceeding to collect the costs of
demolition, including legal expenses.
A. Served upon the owner, agent, or person in control of such structure in
the same manner as prescribed for the service of a summons pursuant
to the Civil Practice Law and Rules;
B. Posted securely upon or at each entrance to said unsafe structure; and
C. Filed in the office of the Monroe County Clerk.
§ 97-2 PENFIELD CODE § 97-5
1:86
§ 97-5. Removal or demolition by Town.
In the event of the refusal or neglect of the person so notified to comply with
said resolution and order of the Town Board, and after hearing, the Town
Board shall provide for the demolition and removal of such unsafe structure
either by Town employees or by contract. Except for emergency as provided
in § 97-6 of this chapter, any contract for demolition and removal in excess
of $5,000 shall be awarded by competitive bid.
§ 97-6. Emergencies.
Where the Town Board determines that there is a clear and imminent
danger to the life, safety or health of persons and/or property unless an
unsafe structure is immediately repaired and secured or demolished and
removed, the Town Board may, by resolution, authorize the enforcement
officer to immediately cause the repair or demolition of such unsafe
structure. The expenses of any repair and securing or demolition and
removal shall be a charge against the real property upon which such unsafe
building is located and shall be assessed, levied and collected as provided
in § 97-7. In an emergency situation, the authorized official shall have the
authority to have the structure secured immediately.
§ 97-7. Assessment of expenses.
All costs and expenses incurred by the Town in connection with proceedings
set forth in this chapter, including the cost of actually making safe, securing
or removing said dangerous and unsafe condition, shall be assessed against
the land on which the dangerous or unsafe condition is or was located.
Chapter 101
CABLE AND VIDEO SYSTEMS
§ 97-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 97-7
1:87

ARTICLE I
Video Standards
§ 101-1. Purpose.
The Town finds that the development of a cable (television) or video
programming (distribution) system, operated by program suppliers, and
related services have a potential to greatly benefit and impact the people
of the Town. Because of the complex and rapidly changing technology
associated with cable/video programming services, the Town further finds
that the public convenience, safety and general welfare can best be served
by establishing regulatory powers that are vested in the Town or such
persons as the Town shall designate. It is the intent of this chapter, and
subsequent amendments, to provide for and specify the means to attain the
best possible public interest and public purpose in these matters, and any
franchise issued pursuant to this chapter shall be deemed to include this
finding as an integral part of the franchise. Further, it is recognized that
cable/video systems have the capacity to provide not only entertainment
and information services to the Town's residents, but can provide a variety
of broadband, interactive communications services to institutions and
individuals. Many of these services involve Town agencies and other public
institutions. For these purposes, the following goals underlie the regulations
contained in this chapter:
§ 101-2. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning or unless otherwise provided
by federal or state law:
BASIC CABLE/VIDEO PROGRAMMING SERVICES — Any service tier,
which includes the retransmission of local television broadcast signals;
public, educational and government access cable/video programming
services and local programming originating within the greater metropolitan
A. Satisfy present and future needs. The cable/video system should
accommodate both the present and foreseeable future communications
needs of Town residents.
B. State of the art. The cable/video system must be improved and
upgraded during the franchise term to keep pace with technological
innovation and meet the future community needs of the community.
C. Diverse information sources. The cable/video system authorized by this
chapter shall be responsive to the needs and interests of the local
community, and shall provide for the widest possible diversity of
information sources to, between and among the public.
D. Condition of grant. Each of the goals enumerated in Subsections A
through C above shall be considered when awarding or renewing a
cable television franchise agreement.
§ 101-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 101-2
1:89
area. Basic services may be further defined in the franchise to include
specific services or types of services to be provided by the grantee.
CABLE SYSTEM or VIDEO SYSTEM or VIDEO PROGRAMMING SYSTEM
— A facility consisting of a set of closed transmission paths and associated
signal generation, reception, and control equipment that is intended to
provide programming to multiple locations.
CABLE/VIDEO PROGRAMMING SERVICES — Any and all activities related
to providing video content, including any ancillary audio or control signals,
regardless of content or protocol or delivery technology.
CHANNEL — A portion of the electromagnetic spectrum (bandwidth) used
to deliver a television (video and audio) signal or video programming
service.
COMMUNICATIONS POLICY ACT or CABLE ACT — The Cable
Communications Policy Act of 1984.
DROP — A connection from the public way to the subscriber/user receiver
(television or radio) or other terminal device.
EDUCATIONAL ACCESS — Any bandwidth specifically designated or
dedicated for education access video programming services.
ENCROACHMENT AGREEMENT FOR CABLE/VIDEO SYSTEMS — A permit
to place private facilities in the public way for a specified period of time.
FCC — The Federal Communications Commission.
FRANCHISE — The nonexclusive rights granted pursuant to this chapter
to construct, operate and maintain a cable/video system along the public
ways within all or a specified area in the Town. Any such authorization,
in whatever form granted, shall not mean or include any license or permit
required for the privilege of transacting and carrying on a business within
the Town as required by other ordinances and regulations.
FRANCHISE FEE — The percentage, as specified by the Town, of the
grantee's gross annual revenues in exchange for the rights granted
pursuant to this chapter and the subsequent franchise agreement for use of
the public way.[Amended 12-16-2015 by L.L. No. 3-2015]
GOVERNMENT ACCESS — Any bandwidth specifically designated or
dedicated for government access video programming services.
GRANTEE — The natural person, partnership, domestic and foreign
corporation, association, joint venture or organization of any kind that has
been legally granted a franchise by the Town, and its lawful successor,
transferee or assignee.
GRANTOR — The Town as represented by the Town Board acting within the
scope of its jurisdiction.
GROSS REVENUES — Any and all revenue, whether realized directly or
indirectly, that is derived from or occasioned by the grant of municipal
consent to use and occupy the public rights-of-way for commercial
§ 101-2 PENFIELD CODE § 101-2
1:90
purposes, without which consent and use or occupation the revenue would
not have been derived.
MULTICHANNEL VIDEO PROGRAM DISTRIBUTOR or VIDEO PROGRAM
DISTRIBUTOR — A person such as, but not limited to, a cable/video system
operator, an open video system operator, a video provider, or a video
programming services supplier as defined below, a multichannel multipoint
distribution service, a direct broadcast satellite service, or a television
receive-only satellite program distributor, who makes available multiple
video programming services for purchase by subscribers or customers.
PUBLIC ACCESS — Bandwidth specifically designated for use by the
general public or organization for the purpose of providing cable/video
programming services without charge and over which the grantee has no
editorial control.
RIGHT-OF-WAY or PUBLIC WAY — The surface, the air space above the
surface, and the area below the surface of any public street, highway,
lane, path, alley, sidewalk, boulevard, drive, bridge, tunnel, park, parkways,
waterways, utility easements or other public rights-of-way now or hereafter
held by the Town which shall entitle the Town and the company to the use
thereof for the purpose of installing and maintaining the cable/video system.
No reference in this chapter or in any franchise to the "public way" shall
be deemed to be a representation or guarantee by the Town that its title to
any property is sufficient to permit its use for such purpose, and the grantee
shall, by its use of such terms, be deemed to gain only such rights to use
property in the Town as the Town may have the undisputed right and power
to give.
SERVICE AREA or FRANCHISE AREA — The geographic area defined by
the franchise agreement.
TOWN BOARD — The elected officials comprising the body politic of the
Town of Penfield, New York.
VIDEO PROVIDER or CABLE/VIDEO PROGRAMMING SERVICES
SUPPLIER or PROVIDER — Any person, company, or service which provides
one or more cable/video programming services, including any
communications that are ancillary, necessary or common to the use and
enjoyment of the video programming, to or from a business, home,
condominium, or apartment, where some fee is paid, whether directly or
indirectly in dues or rental charges for that service, whether or not public
rights-of-way are used in the delivery of the video programming or
communications. A video provider or video programming services supplier
includes, but is not limited to, a multichannel video programming
distributor [as defined in 47 U.S.C. § 522(13)] and a supplier of open video
systems (OVS); cable television; master antenna television; satellite master
antenna television; multichannel multipoint distribution services (MMDS);
cable/video programming services over internet protocol (including, but not
limited to, broadcasting and video-on-demand); direct broadcast satellite
to the extent federal law permits taxation of its cable/video programming
services, now or in the future; and other suppliers of video programming
§ 101-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 101-2
1:91
or communications (including two-way communications), whatever their
technology.
§ 101-3. Franchise application.
§ 101-4. Qualifications.
A. Any person desiring a franchise for a cable/video system shall file an
application with the Town in accordance with the provisions of this
section.
B. Required. An application for an initial franchise for a cable/video
system shall contain, where applicable:
(1) A statement as to the proposed franchise and service area.
(2) A resume of the prior history of the applicant, including the legal,
technical and financial expertise of the applicant.
(3) A list of the partners, general and limited, of the applicant, if a
partnership, or the percentage of stock owned or controlled by
each shareholder, if a corporation.
(4) A list of the officers, directors and managing employees of the
applicant, together with a description of the background of each
such person.
(5) The names and addresses of any parent or subsidiary of the
applicant or any other business entity owning or controlling the
applicant in whole or in part, or owned or controlled in whole or in
part by the applicant.
(6) A current financial statement of the applicant verified by a CPA
audit or otherwise certified to be complete and correct to the
reasonable satisfaction of the Town.
(7) A proposed construction and service schedule.
(8) Any additional information that the Town deems reasonably
necessary to determine whether the applicant has to construct,
operate, and maintain a cable/video system and provide services in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
(9) A nonrefundable application fee as set forth in the fee schedule
annually adopted by the Town Board shall accompany the
application. Such application fee shall not be deemed to be
"franchise fees" within the meaning of Section 622 of the Cable Act
(47 U.S.C. § 542), and such payments shall not be deemed to be
"payments in kind" or any involuntary payments chargeable against
the compensation to be paid to the Town by a grantee pursuant to
provisions of a franchise agreement. [Amended 12-16-2015 by
L.L. No. 3-2015]
§ 101-2 PENFIELD CODE § 101-4
1:92
A. Examination of qualifications. Upon receipt of an application for a
franchise in accordance with the provisions of § 101-3, the Town Board
shall determine the applicant's qualifications to construct, operate, and
maintain a cable/video system and to provide cable/video programming
services in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. If the Town
Board determines that the applicant is not so qualified, it may refuse to
grant the requested franchise. If the Town Board determines that the
applicant is so qualified, it may, by ordinance, grant a franchise to such
applicant, to be effective as provided in this section. No provision of this
chapter may be deemed or construed to require the granting of a
franchise when the Town Board determines that to do so would not be
in the public interest.
B. Acceptance. Within 30 days after the Town Board has taken final action
to approve the granting of a franchise, the grantee shall file with the
Town Clerk a written acceptance of the conditions required for the
franchise, acknowledged before a notary public. Such acceptance shall
acknowledge that the grantee agrees to be bound by and to comply with
the provisions of this chapter and the franchise.
C. Letter of credit. Concurrently with the filing of the written acceptance,
the grantee shall file with the Town Clerk the letter of credit and
insurance policies required by Article IV of this chapter.
D. Effective date. The effective date of any franchise granted shall be the
date on which the grantee files the acceptance, letter of credit and
proofs of insurance as required herein. However, if any of the material
required to be filed with the acceptance or the acceptance itself is
defective or fails to meet with approval, the franchise shall not be
effective until such defect is cured or such approval is obtained.
E. Failure to provide information. If the grantee fails to accept the
franchise and file the information required under this section within the
time limit set forth in Subsection B, the Commission may, at any time
thereafter before acceptance, summarily revoke the franchise. Written
notice of such revocation shall be sent to the grantee forthwith.
§ 101-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 101-4
1:93

ARTICLE II
Grant of Franchise
§ 101-5. Grant.
§ 101-6. Anti-competitive practices.
No franchise issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be
deemed to expressly or impliedly authorize the grantee to utilize its cable/
video system to provide any service in such manner as to unlawfully damage
any business competitor or other third party or violate any statutes or
regulations of the United States or the State of New York; nor shall any
grantee, by act or omission, engage in any anti-competitive practice in
violation of any statutes or regulations of the United States or the State of
New York. The provisions of this section shall be enforceable in courts of
competent jurisdiction against a grantee by any party who alleges injury as
a result of an alleged violation thereof.
A. Franchise not exclusive. Upon issuance of a nonexclusive, revocable
franchise to construct, operate and maintain a cable/video system
within the Town to a grantee, the franchise shall constitute both a right
and an obligation to provide the service of a cable/video system as
regulated by the provisions of this chapter and the franchise.
B. Additional franchise grants. The grant of an additional franchise may
include an area for cable/video programming services similar to that in
an existing franchise or another area that the Town determines is
necessary or desirable to meet the current and future needs of Town
residents.
C. Statutory requirements control. The franchise shall be granted under
the terms and conditions contained in this chapter, consistent with and
subject to federal or state statutory requirements. In the event of
conflict between the terms and conditions of this chapter, the franchise,
or the terms and conditions on which the Town can grant a franchise,
the statutory requirements of this chapter shall control, unless
otherwise specified by state or federal law.
D. No fee waiver. Any franchise granted by the Town is hereby made
subject to the general ordinance provisions of general applicability now
in effect and hereafter made effective. Nothing in the franchise shall be
deemed to waive the requirements of the various codes and ordinances
of the Town regarding permits, fees to be paid or manner of
construction.
E. Franchise area. The franchise area hereby granted by the Town shall be
a geographic area located within the Town limits.
§ 101-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 101-7
1:95
§ 101-7. Use of public right-of-way.
For the purpose of operating and maintaining a cable or video system in the
Town, the grantee may erect, install, construct, repair, replace, reconstruct
and retain in, on, over, under, upon, across and along the public streets and
ways within the Town such wires, cables, fiber, conductors, ducts, conduits,
vaults, manholes, amplifiers, appliances, pedestals, attachments and other
property and equipment as are necessary to the operation of a cable or
video system; provided, however, that the grantee complies with all design,
construction, safety and performance provisions contained in this chapter,
the franchise and other applicable state, federal and local regulations.
§ 101-8. Franchise required.
No cable or video system shall be permitted to operate without a franchise
or encroachment agreement. At the minimum, the franchise shall contain
representations by the grantee that:
§ 101-9. Term of franchise.
The term of any franchise granted pursuant to this chapter shall be stated
in the franchise agreement and shall not exceed 10 years or other term limit
provided by state and is limited to a single six-month extension, whereupon
it shall expire.
§ 101-10. Time of the essence in performing required acts.
Whenever this chapter or the franchise shall set forth any time for an act to
be performed by or on behalf of the grantee, such time shall be deemed of
the essence.
A. It accepts and agrees to all of the provisions of this chapter, and any
supplementary specifications, including and not limited to construction,
operation or maintenance of the cable/video system, which the Town
may include in the franchise.
B. It has examined all of the provisions of this chapter and waives any
claims that any provision of this chapter is unreasonable, arbitrary or
void (except where voided by federal or state law).
C. It recognizes and agrees that the Town shall in no way be bound to
renew the franchise at the end of any franchise term.
D. It acknowledges that its rights under this chapter are subject to the
police power of the Town to adopt and enforce general ordinances
necessary to assure the safety and welfare of the public; and it agrees
to comply with all applicable general laws enacted by the Town
pursuant to such power.
§ 101-7 PENFIELD CODE § 101-11
1:96
§ 101-11. State law governs disputes.
In any controversy or dispute under this chapter, the law of the state shall
apply (Title 9 of the Official Compiled Codes, Rules and Regulations of the
State of New York, Parts 589, 590 through 599 and 894) and is hereby
incorporated by reference.
§ 101-12. Transfer of ownership or control.
A. Transfer of franchise. No franchise granted under this chapter shall be
sold, transferred, leased, assigned or disposed of, including, but not
limited to, transfer by force or voluntary sale, merger, consolidation,
receivership or other means, nor shall the control of the grantee be
changed, without the prior consent of the Town and then only under
such public interest conditions as the Town may establish.
B. Applicability. The provisions of this section shall only be applied to the
sale or transfer of all or a majority of the grantee's assets, merger
(including any parent and its subsidiary corporation), consolidation or
sale or transfer of stock in grantee so as to create a new controlling
interest. The term "controlling interest" as used herein is not limited to
majority stock ownership, but includes actual working control in
whatever manner exercised. The parties to the sale shall make a written
request to the Town for its approval of a sale or transfer.
C. Rebuttable presumption. A rebuttable presumption that a transfer of
control has been activated shall arise upon the disposal by the grantee,
directly or indirectly, by gift, assignment, voluntary sale, merger,
consolidation or otherwise, of 10% or more at one time of the ownership
or controlling interest in the system, or 15% cumulatively over the term
of the franchise of such interests to a corporation, partnership, limited
partnership, trust or association, or person or group of persons acting
in concert, none of which already own or control 10% interest in the
system.
D. Notice required. If the grantee decides to sell, transfer, lease, assign or
dispose of the franchise by any means or method or change the control
of the grantee, it shall first give written notice to the Town of the
proposed change, transfer or acquisition, including the name and
address of the prospective transferee or controlling party, and shall
furnish such additional information as the Town may chose to request
regarding, but not limited to, the legal, financial, character, technical
and other public interest qualifications of such party. Failure to provide
all information requested by the Town as a part of the inquiry shall be
grounds for denial of the proposed change, transfer or acquisition of
control.
E. Cancellation-termination. Every change, transfer or acquisition of
control of the grantee shall make the franchise subject to cancellation
unless and until the Town shall have consented thereto, which consent
shall not be unreasonably withheld.
§ 101-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 101-12
1:97
§ 101-13. Franchise renewal.
Upon completion of the term of any franchise granted under this chapter,
and following good faith franchise renewal negotiations with the grantee,
the Town may, at its sole discretion, grant or deny renewal of the franchise
of the grantee in accordance with applicable federal provisions of the Cable
Act and state law. The grantee shall own the cable/video system, but shall
have no property right in the public rights-of-way upon the completion of
the franchise term.
§ 101-14. Franchise fee.
F. Assumption of control. The Town agrees that any financial institution
having a pledge of the franchise or its assets for the advancement of
money for the construction and/or operation of the franchise shall have
the right to notify the Town that it, or a designee satisfactory to the
Town, will take control and operate the cable/video system. Further, the
financial institution shall also submit a plan for such operation that will
ensure continued service and compliance with all franchise obligations
during the term the financial institution exercises control over the
cable/video system. The financial institution shall not exercise control
over the cable/video system for a period exceeding one year, unless
extended by the Town at its discretion, and during that period of time it
shall have the right to petition for transfer of the franchise to another
grantee. If the Town finds that such transfer satisfies the Town's public
interest requirements, the Town will transfer and assign the rights and
obligations of the franchise.
G. The consent or approval of the Town to any transfer of the grantee shall
not constitute a waiver or release of rights of the Town in and to the
public way, and any transferee shall, by its terms, be expressly subject
to the terms and conditions of this chapter and the franchise.
H. Approval. Any approval by the Town of transfer of ownership or control
shall be contingent upon the prospective controlling party becoming a
signatory to the franchise.
A. Required. Because the administration of this chapter and the franchise
imposes upon the Town additional regulatory responsibility and
expense, the grantee of any franchise under this chapter shall pay to
the Town a franchise fee in an amount as designated in the franchise,
but in no event less than 5% of the gross annual revenues or, upon
written notification of the Town, the maximum amount permitted under
applicable federal, state or local law, if such maximum is greater than
5%. The annual franchise payment shall be in addition to any other fee
lawfully imposed and shall commence as of the effective date of the
franchise. The Town shall be furnished a statement of the payment,
certified by the grantee's chief financial officer, reflecting the total
amounts of annual gross revenues pursuant to this chapter, the law of
the state shall apply (Title 9 of the Official Compiled Codes, Rules and
§ 101-12 PENFIELD CODE § 101-14
1:98
Regulations of the State of New York, Part 599.4000) and computations
for the period.
B. Franchise fee in lieu of public rights-of-way use fee. The franchise fee
levied on the gross revenues derived by the grantee from the provision
of cable/video programming services are in lieu of an annual rights-ofway
use rental fee as set forth in the fee schedule annually adopted by
the Town Board for placement of the grantee's facilities, regardless of
service category, in the right-of-way. In the absence of a franchise fee,
the annual right-of-way use fee shall be remitted to the Town each
January 1 for the new calendar year. [Amended 12-16-2015 by L.L.
No. 3-2015]
C. Franchise fee additional to other tax or payment. This payment of the
franchise fee shall be in addition to any other payment owed to the
Town or other taxing jurisdiction by the grantee. The payment of the
franchise fee made by the grantee to the Town shall not be considered
in the nature of a tax, but shall be in addition to any and all taxes which
are now or may be required hereafter to be paid by any federal, state or
local law.
D. Acceptance by Town. No acceptance of any payment by the Town shall
be construed as a release or as an accord and satisfaction of any claim
the Town may have for further or additional sums payable as a franchise
fee under this chapter or for the performance of any other obligation of
the grantee.
E. Failure to make required payment. If any franchise payment or
recomputed amount is not made on or before the dates specified in this
section, the grantee shall pay, as additional compensation, an interest
charge computed from the due date, at the annual rate equal to the
commercial prime interest rate of the Town's primary depository bank
during the period during which such unpaid amount is owed.
F. Payments to be made quarterly. The franchise fee shall be payable
quarterly. The grantee shall file a complete and accurate verified
statement of all gross revenues within the franchise area during the
period for which the quarterly payment is made, and the payment shall
be made to the Town no later than 45 days following the end of each
calendar quarter. Quarterly computation dates are March 31, June 30,
September 30 and December 31.
G. Town's right of inspection. The Town shall have the right to inspect the
grantee's financial records and the right to audit and to recalculate any
amounts determined to be payable under this chapter. The Town shall
be reimbursed for the audit expense, if the additional amount due is
greater than 5% of the amount paid. Any additional amount due the
Town as a result of the audit shall be paid within 30 days following
written notice to the grantee by the Town, which notice shall include a
copy of the audit report. The grantee shall provide a statement,
certified by the chief financial officer of the grantee, that all subscribers
§ 101-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 101-14
1:99
§ 101-15. Forfeiture or revocation.
in the Town are included in the franchise fee, and the number of such
subscribers, itemized by service category, within 30 days of a request
for such statement.
A. Grounds for revocation. In accordance with the procedures set forth in
this section, the Town reserves the right to revoke any franchise
granted under this chapter and rescind all rights and privileges
associated with the franchise in the following circumstances, each of
which shall represent a default and breach under this chapter and the
franchise:
(1) If the grantee shall default in the performance of any of the
obligations under this chapter or under such documents, contracts
and other terms and provisions entered into by and between the
Town and the grantee.
(2) If the grantee shall fail to provide or maintain in full force and
effect the liability and indemnification coverage as required in this
chapter.
(3) If the grantee shall violate any orders or rulings of any regulatory
body having jurisdiction over the grantee relative to this chapter or
the franchise, and after notice of the violation shall continue the
violation and not remedy it within 30 days.
(4) If the grantee attempts to evade any of the provisions of this
chapter or the franchise or practices any fraud or deceit upon the
Town or cable subscribers.
(5) If the grantee becomes insolvent, unable or unwilling to pay its
debts or is adjudged bankrupt.
(6) Failure to restore service after 96 consecutive hours of interrupted
service, except when approval of such interruption is obtained from
the Town.
(7) Misrepresentation of facts in the application for or negotiation of
the franchise or any extension or renewal thereof.
(8) If the grantee ceases to provide cable/video programming services
for any reason.
(9) Consistent failure to provide subscribers or users with adequate
services as provided by this chapter and the franchise.
B. Effect of circumstances beyond control of grantee. The grantee shall
not be declared in default or be subject to any sanctions under any
provision of this chapter or the franchise in any case in which
performance of such provision is prevented by circumstances beyond
the control of the grantee and not caused or contributed to in whole or
in substantial part by the grantee. Such circumstances shall include,
§ 101-14 PENFIELD CODE § 101-15
1:100
but not be limited to, unique or severe disruption of nature, strikes,
fire, flood, explosion, riot, war, sabotage or action of governmental
authorities having jurisdiction over the grantee; provided, however,
that prompt written notice of such delay or failure (including a
statement of the circumstances causing the delay or failure) shall be
given to the Town, and provided further that the grantee shall be
diligent in attempting to remove the cause of such delay or failure. The
grantee shall continue to be bound by all of the terms and conditions
of this chapter and the franchise, but the performance of any obligation
beyond the control of the grantee, as provided in this subsection, shall
be suspended during the existence of such cause.
C. Pending litigation or appeal. Pending litigation or any appeal to any
regulatory body or court having jurisdiction over the grantee shall not
excuse the grantee from the performance of its obligations under this
chapter or the franchise unless otherwise provided by court or
regulatory order. Failure of the grantee to perform such obligations
because of pending litigation or petition may result in forfeiture or
revocation pursuant to the provisions of this section.
D. Procedure prior to revocation.
(1) The Town shall make written demand that the grantee comply with
any such requirement, limitation, term, condition, rule or
regulation or correct any action deemed cause for revocation. If the
failure, refusal or neglect of the grantee continues for a period of
30 days following such written demand, the Town shall place its
request for termination of the franchise upon a regular Town Board
meeting agenda. The Town shall cause to be served upon the
grantee at least seven days prior to the date of such meeting a
written notice of this intent to request termination, and the time
and place of the meeting, notice of which shall be published by the
Town at least once, seven days before such meeting, in a
newspaper of general circulation within the Town.
(2) The Town Board shall hear any persons interested therein, and
shall determine, in its discretion, whether or not any failure, refusal
or neglect by the grantee was with just cause.
(3) If such failure, refusal or neglect by the grantee was with just
cause, as defined by the Town, the Town Board shall direct the
grantee to comply within such time and manner and upon such
terms and conditions as are reasonable.
(4) If the Town Board shall determine such failure, refusal or neglect
by the grantee was without just cause, the Board shall, by
resolution, declare that the franchise of the grantee shall be
terminated and the letter of credit forfeited unless there is
compliance by the grantee within 90 days.
E. Restoration of property. In removing its plant, structures and
equipment, the grantee shall promptly backfill, at its own expense, any
§ 101-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 101-15
1:101
§ 101-16. Receivership and foreclosure.
excavation that shall be made by it and shall leave all public ways and
places in as good condition or better as then prevailing prior to the
grantee's removal of its equipment and appliances (reasonable wear
and tear excepted) without affecting the electrical or telephone wires or
attachments. The Town shall inspect and approve the condition of the
public ways and public places and cable, wires, attachments and poles
after removal. The grantee guarantees that the liability, indemnity,
insurance, and letter of credit as provided in this chapter shall continue
in full force and effect during the period of removal and until full
compliance by the grantee as determined by the Town with the terms
and conditions of this subsection, this chapter and the franchise is
achieved.
F. Restoration by Town. In the event of a failure by the grantee to
complete any other work required by Town ordinance or regulation
within the time as may be established and to the satisfaction of the
Town, the Town may cause such work to be done and the grantee shall
reimburse the Town the costs of the work within 30 days after receipt of
an itemized list of such costs or the Town may recover such costs
through the letter of credit provided by the grantee. In addition, the
Town shall be permitted to seek legal and equitable relief to enforce the
provisions of this section.
A. Termination by insolvency. The franchise granted under this chapter
shall, at the option of the Town, cease and terminate 120 days after the
appointment of a receiver or trustee to take over and conduct the
business of the grantee, whether in a receivership, reorganization,
bankruptcy or other action or proceeding, unless such receivership or
trusteeship shall have been vacated prior to the expiration of the 120
days.
B. Termination by judicial action. In the case of a foreclosure or other
judicial sale of the plant, property and equipment of the grantee or any
part thereof, including or excluding the franchise, the Town may serve
notice of termination upon the grantee and the successful bidder at
such sale, in which event the franchise and all rights and privileges of
the grantee granted under this chapter shall cease and terminate 30
days after service of such notice, unless:
(1) The Town shall have approved the transfer of the franchise, in the
manner this chapter provides; and
(2) The successful bidder shall have covenanted and agreed with the
Town to assume and be bound by all the terms and conditions of the
franchise.
§ 101-15 PENFIELD CODE § 101-17
1:102
§ 101-17. Equal opportunity policy.
Equal opportunity employment shall be afforded by all operators of cable/
video systems to all qualified persons, and no person shall be discriminated
against in employment because of race, color, religion, age, national origin,
sex or physical handicap. Grantee shall comply with all equal opportunity
provisions enacted by federal, state and local authorities, as well as all such
provisions contained in this chapter and the franchise.
§ 101-18. Notices; local office.
All notices from the grantee to the Town pursuant to this chapter and
the franchise shall be to the Town Administrator or his/her designee.
Throughout the term of the franchise, the grantee shall maintain within the
Rochester metropolitan area an address for service of notices by mail and a
local office and telephone number for the conduct of matters related to the
franchise during normal business hours. The grantee shall advise the Town
of such address(es) and telephone numbers and any changes 30 days prior
to such effect.
§ 101-19. Failure of Town to enforce franchise does not waive
terms.
The grantee shall not be excused from complying with any of the terms and
conditions of this chapter or the franchise by any failure of the Town upon
any one or more occasions to insist upon or to seek compliance with any
such terms or conditions.
§ 101-20. Rights reserved to grantor.
A. Right of inspection of records. The Town shall have the right to inspect
all books, records, reports, map plans, financial statements, and other
like materials of the grantee, at any time during normal business hours.
The grantee shall provide such information in the format required by
the Town.
B. Right of inspection of construction. The Town shall have the right to
inspect all construction work performed and make such tests as it shall
find necessary to ensure compliance with the terms of this chapter and
other pertinent provisions of federal, state or local regulation.
C. Right of inspection. The grantee shall permit examination by any duly
authorized representative of the Town of its cable/video system,
together with any appurtenant property or facilities of the grantee
situated within or without the Town.
D. Right of intervention. The Town shall have the right of intervention in
any suit or proceeding to which the grantee is party, and the grantee
shall not oppose such intervention by the Town.
E. Right to require removal of property. Upon denial of renewal of the
franchise, or upon its revocation or expiration, the Town shall have the
§ 101-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 101-20
1:103
§ 101-21. No recourse against grantor.
The grantee shall have no recourse whatsoever against the Town or its
officials, boards, commissions, agents or employees for any loss, cost,
expense or damage arising out of any provision or requirements of the
franchise or because of the legal enforcement of this chapter or the
franchise.
right to require the grantee to remove, at its own expense, all portions
of the cable/video system required by public necessity from all streets
and public ways within the Town.
F. Expense reimbursement to the Town. On a request of the Town, the
grantee shall pay the Town a sum of money which will, when added to
any application fees received, reimburse all reasonable costs and
expenses incurred by the Town in connection with preparation of this
chapter, the franchise and the grant, extension, transfer or renewal of a
franchise; provided, however, the Town shall submit a detailed schedule
of all such costs. Such payment shall be made within 30 days after the
Town furnished the grantee with a written statement of such expenses.
§ 101-20 PENFIELD CODE § 101-21
1:104
ARTICLE III
Regulation of Franchise
§ 101-22. Regulatory authority.
§ 101-23. Supervision of franchise.
A. Exercise appropriate regulatory. The Town shall exercise appropriate
regulatory authority under the provisions of this chapter and applicable
law. This authority shall be vested in the Town Board and administered
through the Town Administrator or his/her designee to provide day-today
administration and enforcement of the provisions of this chapter
and any franchise granted under this chapter, and to carry out the
Town's responsibilities.
B. Compliance with all laws. The grantee shall at all times comply with all
laws and regulations of the local, state and federal government.
C. Plenary authority. The Town reserves the right to exercise the maximum
plenary authority.
A. The Town shall exercise all regulatory responsibility as permitted under
current federal, state and local regulations, including, but not limited
to:
(1) Administration and enforcement of the provisions of this chapter
and any franchise granted under this chapter.
(2) Award renewal, an extension or terminate a franchise pursuant to
the provisions of this chapter, the franchise and other applicable
law.
(3) Consent prior to sale or transfer of any franchise granted under
this chapter.
(4) The performance of grantee pursuant to the terms of this chapter
and the franchise.
(5) Applicable rate regulation.
B. The Town also reserves the right to perform the following functions:
(1) Develop objective and coordinate activities related to the operation
of public, educational and government access cable/video
programming services.
(2) Coordinate plans for expansion, interconnection and growth of
cable/video programming services.
(3) Formulate and recommend long-range telecommunications policy
for the Town, and determine the Town's view of the future cablerelated
needs and interests of the community.
§ 101-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 101-23
1:105
§ 101-24. Rates and charges.
(4) Provide the administrative effort necessary to conduct periodic
grantee performance evaluations, and any other activities required
for the administration of the franchise.
(5) Monitor the grantee's process for handling citizen complaints and
periodically inspect and analyze the record related to such
complaints.
(6) Receive applications for rate increases if applicable and provide
staff assistance in the analysis and recommendations thereto.
(7) Monitor the grantee's adherence to operational standards, service
requirements and line extension policies.
(8) Ensure compliance with applicable laws and ordinances.
(9) Arrange tests and analysis of equipment and performance, as
needed to ensure compliance with this chapter and the franchise.
(10) Ensure cable/video programming services continuity.
(11) Receive for examination all data and reports required by this
chapter.
A. Rate schedule required. The grantee shall file with the Town schedules
that describe all services offered, all rates and charges of any kind, and
all terms and conditions relating thereto. No rates or charges shall be
effective except as they appear on a schedule so filed. The grantee shall
notify subscribers in writing by mail at least 30 days prior to the
implementation of any change in services offered, rates charged or
terms and conditions related thereto.
B. Uniform rates required. The grantee shall establish rates that are
uniform to all subscribers in the franchise area for all services. Nothing
contained in this section shall prohibit the grantee from offering
discounts to commercial and multiple-family dwelling subscribers billed
on a bulk basis, promotional discounts or reduced installation rates for
subscribers who have multiple services. The grantee shall send a
complete list of its charges and rates for all tiers and services annually
to all subscribers.
C. Authorization to regulate rates. The Town shall have the right to
exercise rate regulation to the full extent authorized by federal, state or
local law or regulation, or to refrain from exercising such regulation for
any period of time, at the sole discretion of the Town.
D. FCC rate-making rules. If and when exercising rate regulation, the
Town shall exercise its regulatory authority consistent with the Federal
Communication Commission's (FCC) rate regulation rules.
§ 101-23 PENFIELD CODE § 101-24
1:106
§ 101-25. Performance evaluation.
§ 101-26. Penalties for offenses.
E. Exclusive programming agreements prohibited. Unless approved by the
Town and to the extent consistent with federal law, a grantee must not,
in its rates or charges, or in the availability of the services or facilities of
its system, or in any other respect, grant undue preferences or
advantages to any subscriber or potential subscriber, or to any user or
potential user, nor subject any of these persons to any undue prejudice
or any disadvantage.
F. Service discrimination. A grantee must not deny, delay, or otherwise
discriminate against subscribers or users on the basis of age, race,
religion, color, sex, sexual orientation, handicap, national origin, or
marital status, except for a discount of 40% to elderly and handicapped
residents whose eligibility is certified by the Town and whose income
falls below the federal income poverty level established for Monroe
County, New York.
A. Performance evaluation. At its discretion, the Town shall conduct
performance evaluations of the grantee once every five years. All such
evaluation sessions shall be open to the public.
B. Special session authorized. Special evaluation sessions regarding the
grantee's performance pursuant to this chapter, franchise and the
public may be held at any time during the term of the franchise at the
request of the Town.
C. Public notice required. All grantee evaluation sessions shall be open to
the public and announced in a newspaper of general circulation in
accordance with public notice.
D. Topics. Topics which may be discussed at any scheduled or special
evaluation session may include, but not be limited to, system
performance and construction, grantee compliance with this chapter
and the franchise, customer service and complaint response, subscriber
privacy, services provided, programming offered, service rate
structures, franchise fees, penalties, free or discounted services,
applications of new technologies, judicial and FCC filings, and cable/
video system extensions.
E. Grantee cooperation required. During the review and evaluation by the
Town, the grantee shall fully cooperate with the Town and shall provide
such information and documents as the Town may need to reasonably
perform its review.
A. Penalties. In addition to any other remedies provided for in this chapter
or otherwise available by law, the Town shall have the power to impose
monetary penalties in the event a grantee violates any provision of this
§ 101-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 101-26
1:107
chapter, a franchise, or any rule or regulation adopted hereunder and
shall conform to the following principles:
(1) Penalties shall exceed the financial benefits to a grantee delaying
or failing to comply with the applicable requirement;
(2) Even where such benefits are not easily discernible, the penalties
shall be large enough to have a significant deterrent effect on a
grantee; and
(3) Penalties shall be sufficient to protect the Town and other affected
parties against loss of revenues resulting from violations.
B. Other monetary sanctions. A franchise shall also provide for fines,
liquidated damages and other monetary sanctions, the amounts of
which shall also reflect the foregoing principles.
C. Private suit against grantee. Any person or organization adversely
affected by a violation, or by a pattern and practice of violations, shall
have the right to sue a grantee in a court of competent jurisdiction for
damages and for injunctive and other relief to require enforcement of
the franchise. Organizations shall be entitled to sue on behalf of
themselves or their members. The remedy herein provided shall be in
addition to any remedies provided by law. Except in emergency
situations in which immediate relief is required, private litigants shall
notify the Town Attorney not fewer than 10 days prior to filing suit.
However, a suit by the Town shall not preempt the private litigant's
right to proceed.
§ 101-26 PENFIELD CODE § 101-26
1:108
ARTICLE IV
Letter of Credit; Insurance; Indemnifications
§ 101-27. Letter of credit.
A. Letter of credit. The franchisee shall, concurrently with its acceptance
of the franchise, file with the Town a letter of credit in an amount to be
determined by the Town, in a bank or savings and loan association in
the Town.
B. Conditions. The letter of credit shall provide the following conditions:
(1) There shall be recoverable by the Town, jointly and severally
against the letter of credit for the following: any and all fines,
penalties and liquidated damages due to the Town for any and all
damages, losses, costs and expenses suffered or incurred by the
Town resulting from the failure of the grantee to faithfully comply
with the provisions of this chapter and the franchise; pay fees due
to the Town; pay any claims, liens or taxes due the Town which
arise by reason of the construction, operation, maintenance or
repair of the cable/video system. Such losses, costs and expenses
shall include but not be limited to attorney's fees and other
associated expenses. The total amount of the letter of credit shall
be forfeited in favor of the Town if:
(a) The grantee abandons the cable/video system at any time
during the term of the franchise or any extension thereto.
(b) The grantee assigns the franchise without the express written
consent of the Town.
(2) Claim. Prior to filing a claim upon the letter of credit for the
purposes described in this section, the Town shall demand that the
grantee perform its obligations, and if the grantee fails to do so
within 30 days, the Town shall notify the grantee in writing that
payment is due and demand complete payment. If the grantee does
not make the payment within 10 days, the Town may claim the
amount thereof, with interest and penalties, from the letter of
credit.
(3) Replenishment. No later than 30 days after any reduction of any
amount of the letter of credit, the grantee shall replenish the
instrument in an amount equal to the amount so withdrawn.
(4) Nonrenewal, alteration, cancellation. The letter of credit required
in this section shall be in a form satisfactory to the Town and shall
require 30 days' written notice to both the Town and grantee of any
nonrenewal, alteration or cancellation. The grantee shall, in the
event of any such cancellation notice, obtain, pay all premiums for,
and file with the Town written evidence of the issuance of a
replacement letter of credit within 30 days following receipt by the
Town or the grantee of any such notice of cancellation.
§ 101-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 101-27
1:109
§ 101-28. Liability and insurance.
(5) Increase in amount. To offset the effects of inflation, the amounts of
the letter of credit provided for in this section are subject to
reasonable increases at the end of every three-year period of the
franchise, applicable to the next three-year period, upon the
determination of the Town.
A. Certificate of insurance. Prior to commencement of construction, but in
no event later than 60 days after the effective date of the franchise and
thereafter continuously throughout the duration of the franchise and
any extensions or renewals of the franchise, the grantee shall furnish to
the Town certificates of insurance, approved by the Town, for all types
of insurance required under this section. Failure to furnish the
certificates of insurance in a timely manner shall constitute a violation
of this chapter.
B. Required provisions. The grantee shall furnish the Town a certificate as
the evidence of insurance coverage required by these provisions. The
certificate shall include a thirty-day notification to the Town in the event
of cancellation, exhaustion of policy aggregates, nonrenewal or
reduction of coverage of policy limits. Language on the certificate that
relieves the insurance company and its agents from liability for failure
to provide such notice shall be deleted. The endorsement required by
Subsection D of this section shall be attached to the certificate. The
Town reserves the right to require a complete, certified copy of the
required insurance policy, at any time. The grantee shall provide
certificates annually after renewal of coverage.
C. Liability waiver not authorized. Neither the provisions of this section
nor any damages recovered by the Town under this section shall be
construed to limit the liability of the grantee under any franchise issued
under this chapter for damages.
D. Endorsement. All insurance policies maintained pursuant to this
chapter or the franchise shall contain the following, or a comparable,
endorsement: "The Town is recognized as an insured for the purpose of
receiving 30 days' notice of nonrenewal, reduction of coverage or policy
limits, exhaustion of policy limits or cancellation for any reason, and the
company shall agree to provide such notice."
E. Hold harmless. All contractual liability insurance policies maintained
pursuant to this chapter or the franchise shall include the following
hold-harmless clause: "The grantee agrees to indemnify, save harmless
and defend the Town, its officials, agents, servants and employees, and
each of them from and against and hold each of them harmless from any
and all lawsuits, claims (including without limitation workers'
compensation claims against the Town or others), demands, liabilities,
losses and judgments for personal injury, death, property damage, or
the infringement of rights, arising out of or in any way related to the
construction, operation, maintenance or ownership of the cable/video
§ 101-27 PENFIELD CODE § 101-28
1:110
system, or otherwise from the exercise or performance of any actions
taken, or alleged to have been taken under the franchise or this
chapter." This indemnity shall apply in any and all cases, save and
except only those cases in which the injury, death, damage, loss, claim
or demand is caused by, or results from, the direct negligence or
intentional conduct of the Town, its agents, public officials or
employees.
F. Authorized insurers. All insurance policies provided under provisions of
this chapter or the franchise shall be written by a company or
companies authorized to do business in the state, and approved by the
State Department of Insurance.
G. Additional named insured. At any time during the time of the franchise,
the Town may request the grantee, and the grantee shall comply with
such request, to name the Town as an additional named insured for all
insurance policies, except worker's compensation, written under the
provision of this chapter or the franchise.
H. Inflation adjustment required. To offset the effects of inflation and to
reflect changing liability limits, all of the coverage, limits and amounts
of the insurance provided for in this section are subject to reasonable
increases at the end of every three-year period of the franchise,
applicable to the next three-year period, in an amount determined by
the Town.
I. General liability insurance.
(1) The grantee shall maintain, and by its acceptance of any franchise
granted under this chapter specifically agrees that it will maintain
throughout the term of the franchise, general liability insurance
insuring the grantee in the minimum of:
(a) For property damage, per occurrence: $2,000,000.
(b) For property damage, aggregate: $2,000,000.
(c) For personal bodily injury or death to any one person:
$5,000,000.
(d) Bodily injury or death, aggregate, per single accident or
occurrence: $10,000,000.
(2) Coverage. Such general liability insurance must include coverage
for all of the following: comprehensive form, premises-operations,
explosion and collapse hazard, underground hazard, products/
completed operations hazard, contractual insurance, broad form
property damage and personal injury.
J. Automobile liability insurance. The grantee shall maintain, and by its
acceptance of any franchise granted under this chapter specifically
agrees that it will maintain throughout the term of the franchise,
automobile liability insurance for owned, or leased, or rented vehicles
§ 101-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 101-28
1:111
§ 101-29. Indemnification.
in the minimum amount of $2,000,000 combined single limit per
accident for bodily injury and property damage.
K. Umbrella/Excess liability. At the option of the grantee, the limits of the
primary general liability and auto liability may be less than stipulated in
this section, with an excess policy providing the additional limits
needed. This form of coverage must be approved by the Town and will
only be acceptable when excess coverage is at least as broad as the
primary policy.
L. Worker's compensation and employer's liability insurance. The grantee
shall maintain, and by its acceptance of any franchise granted under
this chapter specifically agrees that it will maintain throughout the
term of the franchise, worker's compensation and employer's liability,
valid in the state, in the minimum amount of:
(1) Statutory limit for worker's compensation.
(2) Employee liability with limits of $500,000 for each accident;
$500,000 bodily injury or disease policy limit.
A. Indemnification required. The grantee shall, as its sole cost and
expense, fully indemnify, defend and hold harmless the Town, its
officials, agents, servants and employees from and against any and all
lawsuits, claims, causes of action, liability and judgments for injury or
damages (including but not limited to expenses for reasonable legal
fees and disbursements and liabilities assumed by the Town in
connection therewith):
(1) To persons or property, in any way arising out of or through the acts
or omissions of the grantee, its servants, agents or employees, to
which the grantee's negligence shall in any way contribute, unless
caused by negligence or other fault of the Town, its agents,
servants or employees, or any other person indemnified under this
chapter.
(2) Arising out of any claim for invasion of the right of privacy, for
defamation of any person, or the violation or infringement of any
copyright, trademark, trade name, service mark or patent, or any
other right of any person, but excluding claims arising out of or
related to Town programming.
(3) Arising out of the grantee's failure to comply with the provisions of
any federal, state or local statute, ordinance or regulation
applicable to the grantee in its business under this chapter.
B. The foregoing indemnity is conditioned upon the following: The Town
shall give the grantee prompt notice of any claim or the commencement
of any action, suit or other proceeding covered by the provisions of this
section. Nothing in this section shall be deemed to prevent the Town
§ 101-28 PENFIELD CODE § 101-29
1:112
from cooperating with the grantee and participating in the defense
of any litigation by its own counsel at its sole cost and expense. No
recovery by the Town of any sum by reason of the liquidated damages
required by the franchise shall be subject to litigation by the grantee,
except that any sum so received by the Town shall be deducted from
any recovery that the Town might have against the grantee under the
terms of this section.
§ 101-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 101-29
1:113

ARTICLE V
Fines and Penalties
§ 101-30. Penalty amounts.
For failure to comply with any provisions of this chapter, the Town Board
may impose the following penalties:
A. First noncompliance: $750 per day.
B. Second noncompliance within two consecutive calendar quarters:
$1,500 per day.
C. Third and subsequent noncompliances within four consecutive calendar
quarters: $3,000 per day.
§ 101-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 101-30
1:115

ARTICLE VI
System Design and Construction
§ 101-31. Authority to construct.
Within 30 days after completion of the make-ready survey identifying the
routes of the cable/video system, the grantee shall apply for all additional
licenses from the state or other necessary parties, such as the railroads for
crossing under or over the property. In any event, all necessary applications
for permits, licenses, certificates and authorizations shall be applied for in
a timely fashion so that such filing and processing shall not interfere with
or cause delay with construction scheduled as outlined in the franchise.
Failure to make such timely application and timely filing shall constitute a
material violation of this chapter.
§ 101-32. Construction and technical standards.
A. Compliance with construction and technical standards. The grantee
shall construct, install, operate and maintain its system in a manner
consistent with all laws, ordinances, construction standards,
governmental requirements and FCC technical standards. The grantee,
through the cable/video system, shall provide uniform signals that are
free from any distortion and interference. The cable/video system shall
be designed, constructed, operated and maintained continuously 24
hours a day. The cable/video system shall produce, for reception on
subscribers' receivers, either analog or digital images that are free
from interference or distortion that would cause any material
degradation of picture or audio quality.
B. State of the art. The grantee shall construct, install, operate and
maintain its system in accordance with the highest standards of the art
of cable/video programming services. The grantee shall periodically
upgrade its facilities, equipment and service so that its cable/video
system remains current with the state of broadband technology. The
grantee shall activate additional capacity as required to maintain
broadband capacity in excess of demand. The Town Board shall order
the grantee to comply with this section upon investigation of consumer
complaints or on its own motion.
C. Submittal of description of proposed facilities. Prior to the erection of
any towers, poles or conduits or the upgrade or rebuild of the cable/
video system under this chapter, the grantee shall first submit to the
Town and other designated parties for approval a concise description of
the facilities proposed to be erected or installed, together with a
coverage map. No tower, pole, underground, conduit or fixture or any
rebuild or upgrade to the cable/video system shall be commenced by
any person until approval has been received from the Town.
D. Contractor qualifications. Any contractor proposed for work of
construction, installation, operation, maintenance and repair of system
§ 101-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 101-32
1:117
§ 101-33. System construction schedule.
The franchise shall specify the construction schedule.
§ 101-34. System extension.
equipment must be properly licensed under laws of the state and all
local ordinances.
E. Location of equipment. The grantee's system and associated equipment
erected by the grantee within the Town shall be so located as to cause
minimum interference with the proper use of roads, and other public
ways and places, and to cause minimum interference with the rights
and reasonable convenience of property owners who adjoin any of the
roads or other public ways and places. No pole or other fixtures placed
in any public ways by the grantee shall be placed in such a manner as to
interfere with normal travel on such public way.
F. Manner of performing work. Construction, installation, operation and
maintenance of the cable/video system shall be performed in an orderly
and workmanlike manner, in accordance with then-current
technological standards. All cables and wires shall be installed, where
possible, parallel with electric and telephone lines. Multiple cable
configurations shall be arranged in parallel and bundled with due
respect for engineering considerations.
G. Compliance with all applicable regulations. The grantee shall at all
times comply with:
(1) National Electrical Safety Code (National Bureau of Standards).
(2) National Electrical Code (National Bureau of Fire Underwriters).
(3) Bell System Code of Pole Line Construction.
(4) Occupational Safety and Health Administration (U.S. Department
of Labor).
(5) Applicable FCC or other federal, state and local regulations, and
standards as set forth in the franchise.
H. Standby power. The grantee shall maintain equipment capable of
providing continuous standby power for the head end and twenty-fourhour
standby power for the distribution system and at the premises for
any optical network terminal (ONT) device.
A. Extension due to annexation. A franchised cable operator shall extend
cable/video programming services beyond its initial or, in the case of
renewal, present service area to any household that is annexed into the
Town within 120 days from the date of annexation.
B. Extension due to development. In all areas where new residential
development or redevelopment is to be constructed and to be served in
§ 101-32 PENFIELD CODE § 101-34
1:118
§ 101-35. Facilities in public way.
whole or in part by underground power and telephone, and only in
areas where both utilities are placed underground, the owner or
developer shall provide all grantees reasonable advance notice of not
less than 30 days, at no expense to the franchisee, an easement or
access to a co-utility service location trench in which to place the
franchisee's facilities.
A. Aerial installations. All aerial installations shall comply with the
National Electric Safety Code (NESC), as amended. It is the grantee's
responsibility to make certain its facilities remain in compliance with
the NESC. Failure to comply with this provision constitutes a violation
of this chapter and is subject to the penalties provided herein.
B. Underground installations. All underground installations shall comply
with the National Electric Safety Code (NESC), as amended.
Installations shall be underground in those areas where telephone and
electric service are underground. All cable passing under the roadway
shall be installed in conduit and conform to NYDOT standards.
C. Filing of plans; use agreements; permits. Prior to construction or
alteration, however, the grantee shall in each case file plans with the
appropriate agencies, complete use agreements with the utility
companies, obtain all construction permits and receive written
approval.
D. Interference with persons, improvements, public and private property
and utilities. The grantee's system and facilities, including poles, lines,
equipment and all appurtenances, shall be located, erected and
maintained so that such facilities shall, to the extent reasonably
possible:
(1) Not endanger or interfere with the health, safety or lives of
persons.
(2) Not interfere with any improvements the Town or state may deem
proper to make.
(3) Not interfere with the free and proper use of public streets, alleys,
bridges, easements or other public ways, places or property, except
to the minimum extent possible during actual construction or
repair.
(4) Not interfere with the rights and reasonable convenience of private
property owners, except to the minimum extent possible during
actual construction or repair.
(5) Not obstruct, hinder or interfere with any gas, electric, sewer,
water or telephone facilities or other utilities located within the
Town.
§ 101-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 101-35
1:119
§ 101-36. Tests and performance monitoring.
E. Restoration. In case of any disturbance of pavement, sidewalk,
driveway or other surfacing, the grantee shall, as its own cost and
expense, replace and restore all paving, sidewalk, driveway,
landscaping or surface of any street or alley disturbed, in as good a
condition as, or better than, before the work was commenced and in a
good workmanlike and timely manner. Such restoration shall be
consistent with the practices of other area utility providers.
F. Relocation of facilities. If at any time during the period of the franchise
the Town or state shall lawfully elect to alter or change the grade of any
street, alley or other public way, the grantee, upon reasonable notice by
the proper authority, shall remove or relocate as necessary its poles,
wires, cables, underground conduits, manholes and other fixtures at its
own expense.
G. Tree trimming. The grantee shall have the authority to trim any trees
upon and overhanging public rights-of-way so as to prevent the
branches of the trees from contact with the cable/video system.
A. Test points. Cable/Video system monitor test points shall be established
at the cable/video system's extremities. Such periodic proof of
performance tests shall be conducted at the test points, or other
locations determined by the Town.
B. Copy to the Town. A copy of all technical performance test reports shall
be submitted to the Town within 30 days.
C. Right to compel testing. Whenever there have been similar complaints
made or when there exists other evidence that in the judgment of the
Town casts doubt on the reliability or quality of the grantee's cable/
video system, the Town shall have the right and authority to compel the
grantee to test, analyze and report on the performance of its system.
The Town may require additional testing; full or partial repeat tests,
different test procedures, or tests involving a specific subscriber's
terminal. Reports on such tests shall be delivered to the Town no later
than 14 days after the Town formally notifies the grantee to conduct
such tests and shall include the following information: the nature of the
complaints which precipitated the special tests; what system
component was tested; the equipment used, and procedures employed
in the testing; the results of the test; and methods by which the
complaints were resolved. The tests and analyses shall be supervised by
a professional engineer, who shall sign all records of the special tests
and forward them to the Town with a report interpreting the test results
and recommended action. All such tests shall be performed at the
expense of the grantee.
§ 101-35 PENFIELD CODE § 101-36
1:120
ARTICLE VII
Service Standards
§ 101-37. Service to customers.
A. Programming required. Concurrently with the activation of the cable/
video system, the grantee shall provide at a minimum the following:
(1) The system shall carry the broad categories of programming and
services listed in the franchise. Should the grantee desire to
change the selection of programs or services offered on any of the
tiers, it shall maintain the mix, quality and level of services
provided over the system. Any such change in programs or services
offered shall comply with the conditions and procedures contained
in the franchise and shall be reported to the Town at least 30 days
prior to the proposed implementation. The grantee shall use its
best efforts to ensure diversity of programming.
(2) A basic service tier, a "lifeline" service consisting of local broadcast
television stations plus public, education and government access
cable/video programming services, shall be provided, without
exception, to all the grantee's cable/video programming services
customers in the Town.
(3) At a minimum, the grantee shall provide and maintain bandwidth
for the provision of public, education and government access cable/
video programming services.
(a) Twelve MHz for government access, which shall be specifically
designated for local government use.
(b) Eighteen MHz for education access, which shall be specifically
designated for use by local public and private school
authorities, and shall be managed, scheduled and programmed
exclusively by them.
(c) Twelve MHz for public access, which shall be specifically
designated for use by the public on a nondiscriminatory basis.
(d) The grantee, as specified in the Cable Act, shall not exercise
any editorial control over the use of bandwidth for public,
education or government cable/video programming services.
B. Access support. Upon request of the Town, a franchised video provider
shall pay an annual fee to the town in an amount equivalent to 2% of the
grantee's gross revenues to pay for public, government and education
access cable/video programming services. These revenues shall be
deposited in a special revenue fund and dispersed only for this purpose.
C. Lease bandwidth.
§ 101-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 101-37
1:121
§ 101-38. Standard of customer service and care.
(1) The grantee shall make available to residents and businesses, at its
marginal rate, 10% of its cable/video system bandwidth to ensure
that diverse information/programming is distributed to the public.
(2) The provisions of the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984 or
other applicable federal or state law shall determine the number of
such leased access bandwidth. Notwithstanding changes in
applicable law, the grantee shall make available at least six MHz
throughout the life of the franchise to accommodate those persons
seeking use of this bandwidth and publish a rate card
conspicuously on its website.
D. Local program schedule on EPG. The grantee shall produce and carry
on a designated channel, on a daily basis, an electronic program guide
(EPG) containing information describing at a minimum, the programs
offered on each the public, education and government cable/video
programming services.
E. Emergency override. The grantee shall install and maintain an
emergency alert system (EAS) pursuant to the FCC's rules. The
grantor's public safety communication center shall be provided with
access to the system so Town officials can communicate emergency
messages and alerts to Town residents.
A. Courtesy. All employees of the cable operator shall be courteous,
knowledgeable and helpful and shall provide effective and satisfactory
service in all contacts with subscribers.
B. Service center. The cable operator shall provide at least one customer
service center or business office (the "service center") within the
Rochester metropolitan area. At a minimum, the service center shall be
open Monday through Friday from 8:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m., and shall be
open from 9:00 a.m. to 1:00 p.m. on Saturdays. The service center shall
be fully staffed, during the hours noted above, with trained and
experienced customer service representatives and shall offer services
including, but not limited to: bill payment, equipment exchange,
processing of change of service requests, and response to subscriber
inquiries and requests. The grantee shall post a sign at each service
center advising customers of its hours of operation and of the addresses
and telephone numbers at which to contact the cable operator if the
office is closed. The hours of operation and location of the service
center shall also be printed prominently on all billing statements.
C. Telephones. The cable operator shall maintain local telephones and
access lines that are available 24 hours a day, seven days a week for
service/repair requests and billing inquiries. The grantee shall have
customer service technicians on call 24 hours a day, seven days a week,
including legal holidays, to respond to urgent and emergency service
and repair calls after hours. The grantee shall retain sufficient
§ 101-37 PENFIELD CODE § 101-38
1:122
customer service representatives and telephone line capacity to ensure
that all telephone calls, regardless of nature, are answered within 30
seconds or less, and that a transfer to a customer service agent is
completed within the subsequent 30 seconds. These standards shall be
met no less than 90% of the time, measured monthly. The percentage of
calls receiving busy signals shall not exceed 3% of the total telephone
monthly call volume. The call abandonment rate shall not exceed 3%
of the total telephone call volume. Reports of total calls received each
month, total busy signals per month and the connection time to reach
a CSR per month will be submitted to the Town Administrator on
a quarterly basis. All customer service representatives shall identify
themselves by name to callers immediately following the greeting
during each telephone contact with the public. Customer service
telephone numbers and hours of operation shall be printed prominently
on all billing statements.
D. Facsimile machine ("FAX"). The grantee shall maintain, 24 hours per
day and seven days per week, a facsimile machine accessible via a local
telephone number which subscribers may use to convey service and
repair requests to the grantee's customer service department. Such
requests received by FAX shall be processed and handled in the same
manner as subscriber service requests that are received by telephone.
The FAX access lines shall be subject to the same capacity and
requirements as mentioned above for telephone services shall be
measured, similarly, on a monthly basis. Customer service FAX numbers
and hours of operation shall be printed prominently on all billing
statements.
E. Electronic mail ("e-mail"). The grantee shall maintain, 24 hours per day
and seven days per week, an e-mail address accessible via the internet
which subscribers may use to convey service and repair requests to the
grantee's customer service department. Such requests received by email
shall be processed and handled in the same manner as customer
service requests that are received by telephone. Customer service email
addresses and hours of operation shall be printed prominently on
all billing statements.
F. Minimum compensation to customer for noncompliance.
(1) Responsiveness; guaranteed seven-day residential installation and
service. Grantee shall provide cable/video programming services to
its customers within seven business days following order
placement. Free installation or, if the installation fee has been
waived for promotional reasons, a one-month service credit shall be
awarded to the customer.
(2) Grantee shall provide customers seeking custom installations with
a cost estimate and a projected completion date. Free installation
or, if the installation fee has been waived for promotional reasons,
then a one-month service credit shall be awarded to the customer.
§ 101-38 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 101-38
1:123
(3) All underground cable drops shall be buried no less than 12 inches
deep, and work shall be completed in no more than two calendar
weeks from the installation date. For grantee's failure to bury the
drop, $100 shall be paid by the grantee to the customer.
G. Residential installation and service appointments.
(1) Customers who have ordered cable/video programming services
may choose any available two-hour time block between 8:00 a.m.
and 6:00 p.m. Monday through Saturday. For grantee's failure to
comply, a credit of $25 shall be awarded to the customer.
(2) The grantee may not cancel an appointment with a customer after
5:00 p.m. on the day before the scheduled appointment. For
grantee's failure to comply, a credit of $25, or the guarantee
offered by the grantee, shall be awarded to the customer.
(3) If the grantee cannot make an appointment for any reason, the
grantee shall contact the customer before the end of the scheduled
appointment and reschedule at the convenience of the customer.
For failure to comply, a credit of $25, or if greater, the guarantee
offered by the grantee, shall be awarded to the customer.
(4) If the grantee technician arrives within the agreed-upon time, and
the customer is absent, the technician shall leave written
notification of arrival and return time, and the grantee shall contact
the customer within 48 hours to reschedule. For failure to contact
the customer within 48 hours, a credit of $10 shall be awarded to
the customer.
H. TV Reception difficulties and cable modem internet connection
problems.
(1) Outage, planned. Grantee shall make repairs promptly and
interrupt service only for good cause, during periods of minimum
use (12:00 midnight to 6:00 a.m.), except when unavoidable.
(2) Outage, unplanned. The value of one day's service for interruptions
exceeding one hour shall be automatically awarded each customer
by the grantee in the affected area.
(3) Distortion-free cable/video programming services. Grantee shall
provide clear television reception. The value of one day's service
for any portion of the day where picture quality fails to meet FCC
standards or, in the absence of FCC standards, is considered
unacceptable by the Town shall be automatically awarded by the
grantee to each customer in the area experiencing this failure.
(4) Internet service. All grantees shall satisfy all specifications
advertised for internet and voice-over-internet protocol telephone
service. The value of one day's service for interruptions exceeding
one hour in a day, or where advertised performance criteria are not
§ 101-38 PENFIELD CODE § 101-38
1:124
met, shall be automatically awarded by the grantee to each
customer in the affected area.
(5) Prompt repair. If a customer experiences poor video or audio
reception due to grantee's equipment, the grantee shall repair the
problem no later than the next day, unless otherwise agreed to with
the customer. Regardless, the value of one day's service for each
day the problem remains uncorrected shall be automatically
awarded by the grantee to each customer in the affected area.
(6) Problem resolution. The grantee shall be able to provide credit,
waive fees, schedule appointments and change billing cycles to
accommodate customers within the limits specified in this section.
Difficulties that cannot be resolved by the grantee's customer
service representatives shall be referred to a supervisor, who shall
fix the problem within 24 hours. For grantee's failure to comply, a
credit of $10 shall be awarded by the grantee to the customer.
(7) Extraordinary problems. In the case of difficulties that cannot be
resolved, the supervisor shall contact the customer within four
hours and resolve the problem within 48 hours or within such other
time frame as is acceptable to the customer and grantee. For
grantee's failure to comply, a credit of $10 shall be awarded by the
grantee to the customer.
I. Billing; credits and refunds. Customers shall receive a clear and concise
bill monthly. The grantee shall respond to a customer's billing inquiry
made by telephone or e-mail within 48 hours, and to a written billing
inquiry within two weeks of receipt of the inquiry. For grantee's failure
to comply, a credit of $10 shall be awarded by the grantee to the
customer.
J. Administrative fee cap. All grantees shall allow 30 days from the date a
subscriber bill is mailed before imposing an administrative fee not to
exceed $1.50 per bill. For grantee's failure to comply, a credit of $10
shall be awarded by the grantee to the customer.
K. Billing ceases on disconnection notification date. If a customer requests
disconnection of any or all services, billing for affected services shall
end on the same day, or on the future date for which the disconnect is
ordered by the customer. All grantees shall issue a credit or refund
within 15 business days after the close of the customer's billing cycle
following the return of the equipment and request for disconnection.
For grantee's failure to comply, a credit of $10, or refund if the
customer's account has closed, shall be awarded by the grantee to the
customer.
L. Deposits shall accrue interest at fair market rate. Within 10 days after
termination of service for any reason, the grantee shall repay any
deposit with a statement showing accrued interest to the customer less
any sums owed to the grantee. For grantee's failure to comply, a credit
§ 101-38 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 101-38
1:125
of $10, or refund if the customer's account has closed, shall be awarded
by the grantee to the customer.
M. Respectful treatment of property. Grantees shall replace any trees or
shrubs damaged during any installation or repair. For grantee's failure
to comply, a credit of $25 plus reimbursement for the cost for repairs
and landscaping shall be paid by the grantee to the property owner.
N. Property restoration. Grantees shall restore any damaged property to
the same condition it was before damage occurred. For grantee's
failure to comply, a credit of $25 plus reimbursement for the cost to
repair damaged property shall be awarded by the grantee to the
property owner.
O. Advance notice required. Grantees will give notice to property owners
before entering premises, specifying the work to be done. In the event
of an emergency, the grantee shall attempt to contact the property
owner or legal tenant in person, and shall leave a door hanger notice in
the event personal contact is not made. For grantee's failure to comply,
a credit of $25 shall be awarded by the grantee to the customer.
P. Proper disposal of refuse. Grantee personnel shall remove debris
caused by the grantee agent's activities at a work site and properly
dispose of the materials. For grantee's failure to comply, a credit of $15
plus reimbursement for the cost for debris disposal shall be awarded by
the grantee to the property owner.
Q. Services for customers with disabilities. Grantee will deliver and pick
up converters at the home of customers with disabilities. In the case of
a malfunctioning converter, the technician shall provide another
converter, install and test it to ensure it is functioning properly. For
grantee's failure to comply, a credit of $25 shall be awarded by the
grantee to the customer.
R. TTY required. Grantee will provide TDD/TTY service through trained
operators who can provide any assistance regularly available from a
CSR at no charge. For grantee's failure to comply, a credit of $25 shall
be awarded by the grantee to the customer.
S. Closed-captioning device. Grantee will install, at no charge, any closedcaptioning
device purchased by a hearing-impaired customer for use on
the grantee's cable/video system. For grantee's failure to comply, a
credit of $25 shall be awarded by the grantee to the customer.
T. Customer information.
(1) Upon installation, or at a customer's request, grantee will provide
the following requested information/services:
(a) Products and services offered;
(b) Complete range of service options and prices;
§ 101-38 PENFIELD CODE § 101-38
1:126
(c) Customer service standards;
(d) Instruction on use of cable/video programming services and
related terminal equipment, either company- or subscriberowned;
(e) Billing, collection and disconnect policies;
(f) Customer privacy requirements;
(g) Complaint procedure, containing the designated Town agency
to which the complaints should be addressed;
(h) Use and availability of parental control/lock-out devices;
(i) Special services for customers with visual, hearing or mobility
disabilities;
(j) Days, times of operation, and locations of the service centers;
and
(2) Upon grantee's failure to provide the customer with the
information in Subsection T(1)(a) through (j), a credit of $10 shall
be awarded by the grantee to the customer.
U. Rate change notification required. Grantees shall provide customers
and the Town with written notification of any change in rates,
programming, or channels at least 30 days before the date of the
change. For grantee's failure to comply, a credit of $10 shall be
automatically awarded by grantee to each affected customer.
V. Photo identification required. All officers, agents, customer service
representatives (CSR) and employees of the grantee, its contractors
and subcontractors in personal contact with the customer shall have a
visible identification card with their name and photograph and shall
orally identify themselves upon first contact with the customer. For
grantee's failure to comply, credit of $10 shall be awarded by grantee to
the customer.
W. Oral identification required. All customer service representatives shall
identify themselves orally to callers immediately following the greeting
during each telephone contact with the public. For grantee's failure to
comply, a credit of $10 shall be awarded by grantee to the customer.
X. Estimate required. Each CSR, technician, or employee of the grantee in
each contact with a customer shall state the estimated cost of the
service, repair, or installation orally prior to delivery of the service or
before any work is performed, and shall provide the customer with an
oral statement of the total charges before terminating the telephone
call or before leaving the location at which the work was performed. For
grantee's failure to comply, a credit of $10 shall be awarded by grantee
to the customer.
§ 101-38 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 101-38
1:127
Y. Customer privacy. For any violation of privacy per federal law or Town
Code by the grantee, the grantee shall credit all affected customer
accounts $150 per incident.
Z. Safety. When the grantee receives notice that an unsafe condition exists
with respect to its equipment, grantee shall investigate such condition
immediately, and shall take such measures as are necessary to remove
or eliminate any unsafe condition. For grantee's failure to comply, the
grantee shall credit the customer's account $40 a day for each twentyfour-
hour period, all or in part, for grantee's failure to remedy the
customer's safety concerns.
AA. Satisfaction guaranteed. Grantees will guarantee customer satisfaction
that every customer who requests a new service shall receive a pro rata
credit in an amount equal to the pro rata charge for the remaining days
of service being disconnected if the customer is dissatisfied with the
service, except where a free promotion has been offered, there shall be
no charge of any kind for the service or for disconnection of the service.
The customer will have the opportunity to cancel service within 30
days.
§ 101-38 PENFIELD CODE § 101-38
1:128
ARTICLE VIII
Books, Records and Reports
§ 101-39. Books and records available to Town.
§ 101-40. Reporting.
The grantee shall file with the Town:
A. Material misrepresentations. Any material misrepresentation made by
the grantee in any report required by this chapter shall subject the
grantee to the penalty provisions of this chapter and shall subject the
grantee to all remedies available to the Town by law.
B. Books and records inspection. The grantee shall maintain an office
within the franchise territory and manage all of its operations in
accordance with a policy of totally open books and records. The Town
shall have the right to inspect at any time during normal business hours
all books, records, maps, plans, income tax returns, financial
statements, service complaint logs, performance test results and other
like materials of the grantee which relate to the operation of the
franchise. Access to the aforementioned records shall not be denied by
the grantee on the basis that the records contain proprietary
information. The Town shall hold all such information reasonably
designated by the grantee as confidential.
C. Authorized inspectors. The grantee shall permit any duly authorized
representative of the Town to examine and copy or transcribe any and
all maps and other records kept or maintained by the grantee or under
its control concerning the operations, affairs, transactions or property
of the grantee. If any such maps or records are not kept in the Town, or
upon reasonable request made available in the Town, and if the Town
shall determine that an examination of such maps or records is
necessary or appropriate to the performance of any of its duties, all
travel and maintenance expenses necessarily incurred in making such
examination shall be paid by the grantee.
A. Facilities report. An annual report, on a form provided by the Town,
setting forth the physical miles of plant construction and plant in
operation during the fiscal year must be submitted to the Town. Such
report shall also contain any revisions to the system as-built maps filed
with the Town.
B. Construction reports. Construction reports shall be sent to the Town 30
days after construction commences and monthly thereafter until the
Town has determined that construction is completed.
C. Proof of performance tests. Proof of performance test results shall be
supplied to the Town when sections of the system are rebuilt or
upgraded and semi-annually as required by the FCC.
§ 101-39 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 101-40
1:129
§ 101-41. Reports provided on request.
The grantee shall file the following reports on request by the Town within
30 days unless otherwise specified:
D. Tests required by Town. Tests required by the Town as specified in
§ 101-36 shall be submitted within 14 business days of notification.
E. Change in service. A report on any change in programming or service
offered on the grantee's channels shall be provided to the Town 30 days
prior to implementation.
F. Letter of credit and proof of insurance. The grantee shall submit to the
Town the required letter of credit as well as copies of certificates of
insurance for all policies as evidence of payment that these
requirements have been satisfied.
G. Operational reports. The following system and operational reports shall
be submitted upon request to the Town:
(1) An annual summary of the previous year's activities, including, but
not limited to, subscriber totals for each category of service
offered, including average number of pay units, new services
offered, and the amount collected annually from other users of the
system and the character and extent of the service rendered
thereto.
(2) An annual summary of service complaints received and handled in
addition to any reports required in the franchise.
(3) An annual projection of system expansion and service plans for the
future.
H. Financial and ownership reports. The grantee shall provide annual
financial and ownership reports to the Town which include:
(1) An ownership report, indicating all persons who at any time during
the preceding year did control or benefit from an interest in the
franchise of 1% or more.
(2) A fully audited statement of gross annual revenues verifying all
revenues from the Town franchise as certified by a certified public
accountant. Additional information showing subscriber revenue
from each category of service, line item operating expenses,
depreciation expense, interest expense and taxes paid shall be
provided by the grantee upon request.
(3) A current annual statement of all capital expenditures, including
the cost of construction and of equipment.
(4) An annual list of officers and members of the board of the grantee
and of any parent corporation.
§ 101-40 PENFIELD CODE § 101-41
1:130
§ 101-42. Additional reports.
Upon request, the grantee shall prepare and furnish to the Town at the
times and in the form prescribed such additional reports with respect to its
operation, affairs, transactions of property as may be reasonably necessary
and appropriate to the performance of any of the rights, functions or duties
of the Town in connection with this chapter or the franchise.
§ 101-43. Records required.
A. Regulatory communication. All reports related to the franchise required
by the Federal Communications Commission (FCC), including, but not
limited to, annual proof of performance test and results, and equal
employment opportunity (EEO) reports, and all petitions, applications
and communications of all types submitted by the grantee to the FCC,
the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) or any other federal or
state regulatory commission or agency having jurisdiction over any
matter affecting operation of the grantee's system shall be submitted
simultaneously to the Town by delivery to the Town Administrator.
B. Grantee rules. The grantee's schedule of charges, contract or
application forms of regular subscriber service policy regarding the
processing of subscriber complaints, delinquent subscriber disconnect
and reconnect procedures and any other terms and conditions adopted
as the grantee's policy in connection with its subscribers shall be filed
with the Town and conspicuously posted on the grantee's website. All
such terms and conditions, including schedule of charges, must have
been filed with the Town prior to their becoming effective. Such rules,
regulations, terms and conditions shall not be in conflict with the
provisions of this chapter or applicable state and federal laws, rules or
regulations.
C. Operational reports. The following system and operational reports shall
be submitted annually to the Town:
(1) A report on the cable/video system's technical tests and
measurements as set forth in this chapter and in the franchise.
(2) A report on programs and services offered by the grantee,
including public, educational, government and leased access.
A. Mandatory records. The grantee shall at all times maintain:
(1) A record of all complaints received and interruptions or
degradation of service experienced for the preceding period prior
to a performance review or every three years, whichever is shorter.
(2) A full and complete set of plans, records, and as-built maps showing
the exact location of all cable/video system aerial and underground
fiber and cable routes, and underground equipment locations in
Town rights-of-way, exclusive of service drops. These documents
shall be furnished to the Town upon five days' notice.
§ 101-41 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 101-43
1:131
B. Other records. The Town may impose requests for additional
information, records and documents from time to time.
§ 101-43 PENFIELD CODE § 101-43
1:132
Chapter 116
FIREARMS
§ 116-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Firearms Ordinance of the Town of
Penfield."
§ 116-2. Prohibitions. [Amended 9-6-1977, 6-4-1984, 11-19-1984,
3-6-1989; 6-1-1990; 12-16-2015 by L.L. No. 3-2015]
§ 116-3. Exceptions.
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to:
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge any shotgun, revolver,
pistol or rifle within the area of the Town set forth on the Official Town
Map.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge any shotgun, revolver,
pistol or rifle:
(1) Within 500 feet of any dwelling house, school building, school
playground or any other occupied structure.
(2) Within 1,000 feet of any dwelling house, school building, school
playground or any other occupied structure in the case of a rifle of
.22 caliber or more.
A. Any peace officer while engaged in carrying out his/her duties.
B. Any resident of the Town of Penfield or any person authorized in writing
by such resident while engaged in exterminating wildlife or vermin that
is damaging the crops on such resident's land, such land consisting of
not less than five acres. [Amended 6-1-1990]
C. The regulated use of a pistol, rifle or target range operated and
maintained by any duly organized membership corporation.
D. Programs conducted by public schools offering instruction and training
in the use of firearms or longbow. [Added 12-7-1970]
E. Programs conducted by the Town Recreation Department or by persons
certified by the National Rifle Association and approved by the New
York State Department of Environmental Conservation offering
instruction and training in the use of firearms; provided, however, that
no person shall discharge a firearm in such a way as will result in the
load passing over a public highway, or any part thereof, or discharge a
firearm within 500 feet of a dwelling house, farm building or farm
structure actually occupied or used, school building, school playground
§ 101-43 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 116-3
1:133
§ 116-4. Posting of notice.
Signs giving notice prohibiting the discharge of firearms in the area
described in § 116-2A of this chapter shall be posted along each highway at
the entrance to that area.
§ 116-5. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 12-7-1970]
Any violation of this chapter is hereby declared to be a misdemeanor,
punishable as follows:
Chapter 120
FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 94.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 198.
Zoning and land use — See Ch. 250.
or occupied factory or church. [Added 12-7-1970; amended
12-16-2015 by L.L. No. 3-2015]
A. For a first conviction, by a fine of not less than $25 nor more than $100.
B. For a second conviction within five years of a previous conviction, by a
fine of not less than $50 nor more than $150.
C. For a third or subsequent conviction within five years of the first two or
more previous convictions, by a fine of not less than $100 nor more than
$200 or by imprisonment not to exceed 15 days, or both. [Amended
12-16-2015 by L.L. No. 3-2015]
§ 116-3 PENFIELD CODE § 116-5
1:134
ARTICLE I
Statutory Authorization and Purpose
§ 120-1. Findings. [Amended 12-16-2015 by L.L. No. 3-2015]
The Town Board of the Town of Penfield finds that the potential and/
or actual damages from flooding and erosion may be a problem to the
residents of the Town of Penfield and that such damages may include, but
are not limited to, destruction or loss of private and public housing, damage
to public facilities, both publicly and privately owned, and injury to and loss
of public and private property or human life. In order to minimize the threat
of such damages and to achieve the purposes and objectives hereinafter set
forth, this chapter is adopted.
§ 120-2. Statement of purpose. [Amended 12-16-2015 by L.L. No.
3-2015]
It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety, and
general welfare, and to minimize public and private losses due to flooding
by provisions designed to:
§ 120-3. Objectives.
The objectives of this chapter are:
A. Regulate uses which are dangerous to health, safety and property due
to water or erosion hazards, which result in increases in erosion or in
flood heights or velocities;
B. Require that all new uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which
serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial
construction;
C. Control the alteration of floodplains, stream channels, and protective
barriers which are involved in the accommodation of floodwaters;
D. Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may
increase erosion or flood damages;
E. Regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert
floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands; and
F. Qualify for and maintain participation in the National Flood Insurance
Program.
A. To protect human life and health;
B. To minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control
projects;
C. To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with
flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;
§ 120-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-3
1:135
D. To minimize prolonged business interruptions;
E. To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and
gas mains, electric, telephone, sewer lines, streets and bridges located
in areas of special flood hazard;
F. To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and
development of areas of special flood hazard so as to minimize future
flood blight areas;
G. To provide that developers are notified that property is in an area of
special flood hazard; and
H. To ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard
assume responsibility for their actions.
§ 120-3 PENFIELD CODE § 120-3
1:136
ARTICLE II
Definitions
§ 120-4. Terms defined.
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter
shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common
usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application.
APPEAL — A request for a review of the local administrator's interpretation
of any provision of this chapter or a request for a variance.
AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING — A designated AO, AH or VO Zone on
a community's Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) with a one-percent or
greater annual chance of flooding to an average annual depth of one foot to
three feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path
of flooding is unpredictable and where velocity flow may be evident. Such
flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow.
AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD — The land in the floodplain within
a community subject to a one-percent or greater chance of flooding in any
given year. This area may be designated as Zone A, AE, AH, AO, A1-A30,
A99, V, VO, VE, or V1-V30. It is also commonly referred to as the "base
floodplain" or "one-hundred-year floodplain." For purposes of this chapter,
the term "special flood hazard area (SFHA)" is synonymous in meaning with
the phrase "area of special flood hazard."
BASE FLOOD — The flood having a one-percent chance of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year.
BASEMENT — That portion of a building having its floor subgrade (below
ground level) on all sides.
BUILDING — See "structure."
CELLAR — Has the same meaning as "basement."
CRAWL SPACE — An enclosed area beneath the lowest elevated floor, 18
inches or more in height, which is used to service the underside of the
lowest elevated floor. The elevation of the floor of this enclosed area, which
may be of soil, gravel, concrete or other material, must be equal to or above
the lowest adjacent exterior grade. The enclosed crawl space area shall be
properly vented to allow for the equalization of hydrostatic forces which
would be experienced during periods of flooding.
CUMULATIVE SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Any reconstruction,
rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure that equals
or exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure at the time of the
improvement or repair when counted cumulatively for 10 years.
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real
estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining,
dredging, filling, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of
equipment or materials.
§ 120-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-4
1:137
ELEVATED BUILDING — A nonbasement building built, in the case of a
building in Zone A1-A30, AE, A, A99, AO, AH, B, C, X, or D, to have the top
of the elevated floor, or in the case of a building in Zone V1-V30, VE, or V, to
have the bottom of the lowest horizontal structure member of the elevated
floor, elevated above the ground level by means of pilings, columns (posts
and piers), or shear walls parallel to the flow of the water and adequately
anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of the building during
a flood of up to the magnitude of the base flood. In the case of Zone A1-A30,
AE, A, A99, AO, AH, B, C, X, or D, "elevated building" also includes a
building elevated by means of fill or solid foundation perimeter walls with
openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movement of floodwaters.
In the case of Zone V1-V30, VE, or V, "elevated building" also includes
a building otherwise meeting the definition of "elevated building," even
though the lower area is enclosed by means of breakaway walls that meet
the federal standards.
FEDERAL EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY — The federal agency
that administers the National Flood Insurance Program.
FLOOD BOUNDARY AND FLOODWAY MAP (FBFM) — An official map of the
community published by the Federal Emergency Management Agency as
part of a riverine community's Flood Insurance Study. The FBFM delineates
a regulatory floodway along watercourses studied in detail in the Flood
Insurance Study.
FLOOD ELEVATION STUDY — An examination, evaluation and
determination of the flood hazards and, if appropriate, corresponding water
surface elevations, or an examination, evaluation and determination of
flood-related erosion hazards.
FLOOD HAZARD BOUNDARY MAP (FHBM) — An official map of a
community, issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, where
the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard have been designated as
Zone A but no flood elevations are provided.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM) — An official map of a community,
on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated both
the areas of special flood hazard and the risk-premium zones applicable to
the community.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY — See "flood elevation study."
FLOOD or FLOODING —
A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of
normally dry land areas from:
(1) The overflow of inland or tidal waters;
The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters
from any source.
(2)
A.
The collapse or subsidence of land along the shore of a lake or other
body of water as a result of erosion or undermining caused by waves
B.
§ 120-4 PENFIELD CODE § 120-4
1:138
FLOODPLAIN or FLOOD-PRONE AREA — Any land area susceptible to
being inundated by water from any source. (See definition of "flooding.")
FLOODPROOFING — Any combination of structural and nonstructural
additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate
flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary
facilities, structures and their contents.
FLOODWAY — Has the same meaning as "regulatory floodway."
FUNCTIONALLY DEPENDENT USE — A use which cannot perform its
intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to
water, such as a docking or port facility necessary for the loading and
unloading of cargo or passengers, shipbuilding, and ship repair facilities.
The term does not include long-term storage, manufacturing, sales, or
service facilities.
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE — The highest natural elevation of the ground
surface, prior to construction, next to the proposed walls of a structure.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE — Any structure that is:
LOCAL ADMINISTRATOR — The person appointed by the community to
administer and implement this chapter by granting or denying development
permits in accordance with its provisions. This person is often the Building
or currents of water exceeding anticipated cyclical levels or suddenly
caused by an unusually high water level in a natural body of water,
accompanied by a severe storm, or by an unanticipated force of nature,
such as a flash flood or an abnormal tidal surge, or by some similarly
unusual and unforeseeable event which results in flooding as defined in
Subsection A above.
Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing
maintained by the Department of the Interior) or preliminarily
determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the
requirements for individual listing on the National Register;
A.
Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior
as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic
district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify
as a registered historic district;
B.
Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states
with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the
Secretary of the Interior; or
C.
Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities
with historic preservation programs that have been certified either:
By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of
the Interior; or
(1)
Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved
programs.
(2)
D.
§ 120-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-4
1:139
Inspector, Code Enforcement Officer, or employee of an engineering
department.
LOWEST FLOOR — The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement or cellar). An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, usable
solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or storage in an area other
than a basement area, is not considered a building's lowest floor; provided
that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of
the applicable nonelevation design requirements of this chapter.
MANUFACTURED HOME — A structure, transportable in one or more
sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used with
or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities.
The term does not include a recreational vehicle.
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A parcel (or
contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home
lots for rent or sale.
MEAN SEA LEVEL — For purposes of the National Flood Insurance
Program, the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929, the North
American Vertical Datum of 1988 (NAVD 88), or other datum to which base
flood elevations shown on a community's Flood Insurance Rate Map are
referenced.
MOBILE HOME — Has the same meaning as "manufactured home."
NEW CONSTRUCTION — Structures for which the start of construction
commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain management
regulation adopted by the community and includes any subsequent
improvements to such structure.
ONE-HUNDRED-YEAR FLOOD or 100-YEAR FLOOD — Has the same
meaning as "base flood."
PRINCIPALLY ABOVE GROUND — At least 51% of the actual cash value of
the structure, excluding land value, is above ground.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — A vehicle which is:
REGULATORY FLOODWAY — The channel of a river or other watercourse
and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge
the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation
more than a designated height as determined by the Federal Emergency
A. Built on a single chassis;
Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest
horizontal projections;
B.
Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-duty
truck; and
C.
Not designed primarily for use as a permanent dwelling but as
temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal
use.
D.
§ 120-4 PENFIELD CODE § 120-4
1:140
Management Agency in a Flood Insurance Study or by other agencies as
provided in § 120-13B of this chapter.
START OF CONSTRUCTION —
STRUCTURE — A walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid
storage tank, that is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured
home.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE — Damage of any origin sustained by a structure
whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged condition
would equal or exceed 50% of the market value of the structure before the
damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Any reconstruction, rehabilitation,
addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals
or exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure before the start
of construction of the improvement. Substantial improvement also means
"cumulative substantial improvement." The term includes structures which
have incurred substantial damage, regardless of the actual repair work
performed. The term does not, however, include either:
VARIANCE — A grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter which
permits construction or use in a manner that would otherwise be prohibited
by this chapter.
The date of permit issuance for new construction and substantial
improvements to existing structures, provided that the actual start of
construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition placement,
or other improvement is within 180 days after the date of issuance. The
"actual start of construction" means the first placement of permanent
construction of a building (including a manufactured home) on a site,
such as the pouring of a slab or footings, installation of pilings or
construction of columns.
A.
Permanent construction does not include land preparation (such as
clearing, excavation, grading, or filling), or the installation of streets or
walkways, or excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations,
or the erection of temporary forms, or the installation of accessory
buildings such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units
or not part of the main building. For a substantial improvement, the
"actual start of construction" means the first alteration of any wall,
ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that
alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.
B.
Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations
of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which
have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which
are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or
A.
Any alteration of an historic structure, provided that the alteration
will not preclude the structure's continued designation as an historic
structure.
B.
§ 120-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-4
1:141
WATERCOURSE — Those watercourses within the Town of Penfield with
identified areas of special flood hazard, as shown on the Flood Insurance
Rate Maps.
§ 120-4 PENFIELD CODE § 120-4
1:142
ARTICLE III
General Provisions
§ 120-5. Applicability.
This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the
jurisdiction of the Town of Penfield, Monroe County.
§ 120-6. Basis for establishing areas of special flood hazard.
§ 120-7. Interpretation and conflict with other laws.
§ 120-8. Penalties for offenses.
No structure in an area of special flood hazard shall hereafter be
constructed, located, extended, converted, or altered and no land shall be
excavated or filled without full compliance with the terms of this chapter
and any other applicable regulations. Any infraction of the provisions of
A. The areas of special flood hazard for the Town of Penfield, Community
Number 360426, are identified and defined on the following documents
prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency:
(1) Flood Insurance Rate Map panel numbers: 36055C0209G,
36055C0216G, 36055C0217G, 36055C0219G, 36055C0228G,
36055C0229G, 36055C0233G, 36055C0234G, 36055C0238G,
36055C0240G, 36055C0241G, 36055C0242G, 36055C0243G,
36055C0244G, 36055C0265G, 36055C0357G, 36055C0376G,
36055C0377G, 36055C0381G, 36055C0382G, 36055C0401G, the
effective date of which is August 28, 2008, and any subsequent
revisions to these map panels that do not affect areas under the
community's jurisdiction.
(2) A scientific and engineering report entitled "Flood Insurance Study,
Monroe County, New York, All Jurisdictions," dated August 28,
2008.
B. The above documents are hereby adopted and declared to be a part of
this chapter. The Flood Insurance Study and/or maps are on file at:
Planning Department, Penfield Town Hall, 3100 Atlantic Avenue,
Penfield, NY 14526.
A. This chapter includes all revisions to the National Flood Insurance
Program through October 27, 1997, and shall supersede all previous
laws adopted for the purpose of flood damage prevention.
B. In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter
shall be held to be minimum requirements, adopted for the promotion
of the public health, safety, and welfare. Whenever the requirements of
this chapter are at variance with the requirements of any other lawfully
adopted rules, regulations, or ordinances, the most restrictive, or that
imposing the higher standards, shall govern.
§ 120-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-8
1:143
this chapter by failure to comply with any of its requirements, including
infractions of conditions and safeguards established in connection with
conditions of the permit, shall constitute a violation. Any person who
violates this chapter or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall,
upon conviction thereof, be fined no more than $250 or imprisoned for not
more than 15 days, or both. Each day of noncompliance shall be considered
a separate offense. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the Town of
Penfield from taking such other lawful action as necessary to prevent or
remedy an infraction. Any structure found not compliant with the
requirements of this chapter for which the developer and/or owner has
not applied for and received an approved variance under Article VI will
be declared noncompliant and notification sent to the Federal Emergency
Management Agency.
§ 120-9. Warning and disclaimer of liability.
The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and
engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare
occasions. Flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes.
This chapter does not imply that land outside the area of special flood
hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or
flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the
Town of Penfield, any officer or employee thereof, or the Federal Emergency
Management Agency for any flood damages that result from reliance on this
chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder.
§ 120-8 PENFIELD CODE § 120-9
1:144
ARTICLE IV
Administration
§ 120-10. Designation of local administrator.
The Building and Zoning Administrator is hereby appointed local
administrator to administer and implement this chapter by granting or
denying floodplain development permits in accordance with its provisions.
§ 120-11. Floodplain development permit.
§ 120-12. Application for permit.
The applicant shall provide the following information as appropriate.
Additional information may be required on the permit application form.
A. Purpose. A floodplain development permit is hereby established for all
construction and other development to be undertaken in areas of
special flood hazard in this community for the purpose of protecting its
citizens from increased flood hazards and ensuring that new
development is constructed in a manner that minimizes its exposure to
flooding. It shall be unlawful to undertake any development in an area
of special flood hazard, as shown on the Flood Insurance Rate Map
enumerated in § 120-6, without a valid floodplain development permit.
Application for a permit shall be made on forms furnished by the local
administrator and may include, but not be limited to: plans, in
duplicate, drawn to scale and showing the nature, location, dimensions,
and elevations of the area in question; existing or proposed structures,
fill, storage of materials, drainage facilities, and the location of the
foregoing.
B. Fees. All applications for a floodplain development permit shall be
accompanied by an application fee as determined by the Penfield Town
Board from time to time. In addition, the applicant shall be responsible
for reimbursing the Town of Penfield for any additional costs necessary
for review, inspection and approval of this project. The local
administrator, Town Board or the Planning Board, as the case may be,
may require the submission of a letter of credit to cover these additional
costs.
A. The proposed elevation, in relation to mean sea level, of the lowest floor
(including basement or cellar) of any new or substantially improved
structure to be located in Zone A1-A30, AE or AH, or Zone A if base
flood elevation data are available. Upon completion of the lowest floor,
the permittee shall submit to the local administrator the as-built
elevation, certified by a licensed professional engineer or surveyor.
B. The proposed elevation, in relation to mean sea level, to which any new
or substantially improved nonresidential structure will be floodproofed.
Upon completion of the floodproofed portion of the structure, the
§ 120-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-12
1:145
§ 120-13. Duties and responsibilities of local administrator.
Duties of the local administrator shall include, but not be limited to, the
following:
permittee shall submit to the local administrator the as-built
floodproofed elevation, certified by a professional engineer or surveyor.
C. A certificate from a licensed professional engineer or architect that any
utility floodproofing will meet the criteria in § 120-15C, Utilities.
D. A certificate from a licensed professional engineer or architect that any
nonresidential floodproofed structure will meet the floodproofing
criteria in § 120-17, Nonresidential structures.
E. A description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or
relocated as a result of proposed development. Computations by a
licensed professional engineer must be submitted that demonstrate
that the altered or relocated segment will provide equal or greater
conveyance than the original stream segment. The applicant must
submit any maps, computations or other material required by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) to revise the
documents enumerated in § 120-6, when notified by the local
administrator, and must pay any fees or other costs assessed by FEMA
for this purpose. The applicant must also provide assurances that the
conveyance capacity of the altered or relocated stream segment will be
maintained.
F. A technical analysis, by a licensed professional engineer, if required by
the local administrator, which shows whether proposed development to
be located in an area of special flood hazard may result in physical
damage to any other property.
G. In Zone A, when no base flood elevation data are available from other
sources, base flood elevation data shall be provided by the permit
applicant for subdivision proposals and other proposed developments
(including proposals for manufactured home and recreational vehicle
parks and subdivisions) that are greater than either 50 lots or five
acres.
A. Permit application review. The local administrator shall conduct the
following permit application review before issuing a floodplain
development permit:
(1) Review all applications for completeness, particularly with the
requirements of § 120-12, Application for permit, and for
compliance with the provisions and standards of this chapter.
(2) Review subdivision and other proposed new development,
including manufactured home parks, to determine whether
proposed building sites will be reasonably safe from flooding. If a
proposed building site is located in an area of special flood hazard,
§ 120-12 PENFIELD CODE § 120-13
1:146
all new construction and substantial improvements shall meet the
applicable standards of Article V, Construction Standards, and, in
particular, § 120-14A, Subdivision proposals.
(3) Determine whether any proposed development in an area of special
flood hazard may result in physical damage to any other property
(e.g., stream bank erosion and increased flood velocities). The local
administrator may require the applicant to submit additional
technical analyses and data necessary to complete the
determination. If the proposed development may result in physical
damage to any other property or fails to meet the requirements of
Article V, Construction Standards, no permit shall be issued. The
applicant may revise the application to include measures that
mitigate or eliminate the adverse effects and resubmit the
application.
(4) Determine that all necessary permits have been received from
those governmental agencies from which approval is required by
state or federal law.
B. Use of other flood data.
(1) When the Federal Emergency Management Agency has designated
areas of special flood hazard on the community's Flood Insurance
Rate Map (FIRM) but has neither produced water surface elevation
data (these areas are designated Zone A or V on the FIRM) nor
identified a floodway, the local administrator shall obtain, review
and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data
available from a federal, state or other source, including data
developed pursuant to § 120-12G, as criteria for requiring that new
construction, substantial improvements or other proposed
development meet the requirements of this chapter.
(2) When base flood elevation data are not available, the local
administrator may use flood information from any other
authoritative source, such as historical data, to establish flood
elevations within the areas of special flood hazard, for the purposes
of this chapter.
C. Alteration of watercourses. The local administrator shall:
(1) Notify adjacent communities and the New York State Department
of Environmental Conservation prior to permitting any alteration or
relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such
notification to the Regional Director, Region II, Federal Emergency
Management Agency.
(2) Determine that the permit holder has provided for maintenance
within the altered or relocated portion of said watercourse so that
the flood-carrying capacity is not diminished.
D. Construction stage.
§ 120-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-13
1:147
(1) In Zones A1-A30, AE and AH, and also Zone A if base flood
elevation data are available, upon placement of the lowest floor or
completion of floodproofing of a new or substantially improved
structure, the local administrator shall obtain from the permit
holder a certification of the as-built elevation of the lowest floor or
floodproofed elevation, in relation to mean sea level. The certificate
shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a licensed
land surveyor or professional engineer and certified by same. For
manufactured homes, the permit holder shall submit the certificate
of elevation upon placement of the structure on the site. A
certificate of elevation must also be submitted for a recreational
vehicle if it remains on a site for 180 consecutive days or longer
(unless it is fully licensed and ready for highway use).
(2) Any further work undertaken prior to submission and approval of
the certification shall be at the permit holder's risk. The local
administrator shall review all data submitted. Deficiencies detected
shall be cause to issue a stop-work order for the project unless
immediately corrected.
E. Inspections. The local administrator and/or the developer's engineer or
architect shall make periodic inspections at appropriate times
throughout the period of construction in order to monitor compliance
with permit conditions and enable said inspector to certify, if requested,
that the development is in compliance with the requirements of the
floodplain development permit and/or any variance provisions.
F. Stop-work orders.
(1) The local administrator shall issue, or cause to be issued, a stopwork
order for any floodplain development found ongoing without a
development permit. Disregard of a stop-work order shall subject
the violator to the penalties described in § 120-8 of this chapter.
(2) The local administrator shall issue, or cause to be issued, a stopwork
order for any floodplain development found noncompliant
with the provisions of this chapter and/or the conditions of the
development permit. Disregard of a stop-work order shall subject
the violator to the penalties described in § 120-8 of this chapter.
G. Certificate of compliance.
(1) In areas of special flood hazard, as determined by documents
enumerated in § 120-6, it shall be unlawful to occupy or to permit
the use or occupancy of any building or premises, or both, or part
thereof hereafter created, erected, changed, converted or wholly or
partly altered or enlarged in its use or structure until a certificate
of compliance has been issued by the local administrator or his/her
designee stating that the building or land conforms to the
requirements of this chapter.
§ 120-13 PENFIELD CODE § 120-13
1:148
(2) A certificate of compliance shall be issued by the local
administrator or his/her designee upon satisfactory completion of
all development in areas of special flood hazard.
(3) Issuance of the certificate shall be based upon the inspections
conducted as prescribed in Subsection E, Inspections, and/or any
certified elevations, hydraulic data, floodproofing, anchoring
requirements or encroachment analyses which may have been
required as a condition of the approved permit.
H. Information to be retained. The local administrator shall retain and
make available for inspection, copies of the following:
(1) Floodplain development permits and certificates of compliance;
(2) Certifications of as-built lowest floor elevations of structures,
required pursuant to Subsection D(1) and (2), and whether or not
the structures contain a basement;
(3) Floodproofing certificates required pursuant to Subsection D(1),
and whether or not the structures contain a basement;
(4) Variances issued pursuant to Article VI, Variance Procedures; and
(5) Notices required under Subsection C, Alteration of watercourses.
§ 120-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-13
1:149

ARTICLE V
Construction Standards
§ 120-14. General standards.
The following standards apply to new development, including new and
substantially improved structures, in the areas of special flood hazard
shown on the Flood Insurance Rate Map designated in § 120-6.
A. Subdivision proposals. The following standards apply to all new
subdivision proposals and other proposed development in areas of
special flood hazard (including proposals for manufactured home and
recreational vehicle parks and subdivisions):
(1) Proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood
damage;
(2) Public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and
water systems shall be located and constructed so as to minimize
flood damage; and
(3) Adequate drainage shall be provided to reduce exposure to flood
damage.
B. Encroachments.
(1) Within Zones A1-A30 and AE, on streams without a regulatory
floodway, no new construction, substantial improvements or other
development (including fill) shall be permitted unless:
(a) The applicant demonstrates that the cumulative effect of the
proposed development, when combined with all other existing
and anticipated development, will not increase the water
surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any
location; or
(b) The Town of Penfield agrees to apply to the Federal Emergency
Management Agency (FEMA) for a conditional FIRM revision,
FEMA approval is received and the applicant provides all
necessary data, analyses and mapping and reimburses the
Town of Penfield for all fees and other costs in relation to the
application. The applicant must also provide all data, analyses
and mapping and reimburse the Town of Penfield for all costs
related to the final map revision.
(2) On streams with a regulatory floodway, as shown on the Flood
Boundary and Floodway Map or the Flood Insurance Rate Map
adopted in § 120-6, no new construction, substantial improvements
or other development in the floodway (including fill) shall be
permitted unless:
§ 120-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-14
1:151
§ 120-15. Standards for all structures.
(a) A technical evaluation by a licensed professional engineer
shows that such an encroachment shall not result in any
increase in flood levels during occurrence of the base flood; or
(b) The Town of Penfield agrees to apply to the Federal Emergency
Management Agency (FEMA) for a conditional FIRM and
floodway revision, FEMA approval is received and the
applicant provides all necessary data, analyses and mapping
and reimburses the Town of Penfield for all fees and other costs
in relation to the application. The applicant must also provide
all data, analyses and mapping and reimburse the Town of
Penfield for all costs related to the final map revisions.
(3) Whenever any portion of a floodplain is authorized for
development, the volume of space occupied by the authorized fill or
structure below the base flood elevation shall be compensated for
by an excavated area that is 1.25 times the hydraulic equivalent
volume (ratio of 1:1.25) of fill placed within the floodplain. This
shall be from below the base flood elevation at or adjacent to the
development site. All such excavations shall be constructed to drain
freely to the watercourse. No area below the water line of a pond or
other body of water can be credited as a compensating excavation.
A. Anchoring. New structures and substantial improvement to structures
in areas of special flood hazard shall be anchored to prevent flotation,
collapse, or lateral movement during the base flood. This requirement is
in addition to applicable state and local anchoring requirements for
resisting wind forces.
B. Construction materials and methods.
(1) New construction and substantial improvements to structures shall
be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to
flood damage.
(2) New construction and substantial improvements to structures shall
be constructed using methods and practices that minimize flood
damage.
(3) For enclosed areas below the lowest floor of a structure within
Zone A1-A30, AE or AH, and also Zone A if base flood elevation data
are available, new and substantially improved structures shall have
fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are usable solely for
parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other
than a basement, and which are subject to flooding, designed to
automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by
allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters.
§ 120-14 PENFIELD CODE § 120-15
1:152
§ 120-16. Elevation of residential structures.
The following standards apply to new and substantially improved residential
structures located in areas of special flood hazard, in addition to the
requirements in § 120-14A, Subdivision proposals, and § 120-14B,
Encroachments, and § 120-15, Standards for all structures.
(a) Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified
by a licensed professional engineer or architect or meet or
exceed the following minimum criteria:
[1] A minimum of two openings having a total net area of not
less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed
area subject to flooding; and
[2] The bottom of all such openings no higher than one foot
above the lowest adjacent finished grade.
(b) Openings may be equipped with louvers, valves, screens or
other coverings or devices, provided they permit the automatic
entry and exit of floodwaters. Enclosed areas subgrade on all
sides are considered basements and are not permitted.
C. Utilities.
(1) New and replacement electrical equipment, heating, ventilating,
air-conditioning, plumbing connections, and other service
equipment shall be located at or above the base flood elevation or
be designed to prevent water from entering and accumulating
within the components during a flood and to resist hydrostatic and
hydrodynamic loads and stresses. Electrical wiring and outlets,
switches, junction boxes and panels shall be elevated to or above
the base flood elevation unless they conform to the appropriate
provisions of the electrical part of the Building Code of New York
State or the Residential Code of New York State for location of such
items in wet locations;
(2) New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system;
(3) New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed
to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters. Sanitary sewer
and storm drainage systems for buildings that have openings below
the base flood elevation shall be provided with automatic backflow
valves or other automatic backflow devices that are installed in
each discharge line passing through a building's exterior wall; and
(4) On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid
impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding.
A. Within Zones A1-A30, AE and AH, and also Zone A if base flood
elevation data are available, new construction and substantial
§ 120-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-16
1:153
§ 120-17. Nonresidential structures.
The following standards apply to new and substantially improved
commercial, industrial and other nonresidential structures located in areas
of special flood hazard, in addition to the requirements in § 120-14A,
Subdivision proposals, and § 120-14B, Encroachments, and § 120-15,
Standards for all structures.
improvements shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated
to or above two feet above the base flood elevation.
B. Within Zone A, when no base flood elevation data are available, new
and substantially improved structures shall have the lowest floor
(including basement) elevated at least three feet above the highest
adjacent grade.
C. Within Zone AO, new and substantially improved structures shall have
the lowest floor (including basement) elevated above the highest
adjacent grade at least as high as two feet above the depth number
specified in feet on the community's Flood Insurance Rate Map
enumerated in § 120-6 (at least two feet if no depth number is
specified).
D. Within Zones AH and AO, adequate drainage paths are required to
guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures on
slopes.
A. Within Zones A1-A30, AE and AH, and also Zone A if base flood
elevation data are available, new construction and substantial
improvements of any nonresidential structure, together with attendant
utility and sanitary facilities, shall either:
(1) Have the lowest floor, including basement or cellar, elevated to or
above two feet above the base flood elevation; or
(2) Be floodproofed so that the structure is watertight below two feet
above the base flood elevation with walls substantially
impermeable to the passage of water. All structural components
located below the base flood level must be capable of resisting
hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effects of buoyancy.
B. Within Zone AO, new construction and substantial improvements of
nonresidential structures shall:
(1) Have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated above the
highest adjacent grade at least as high as two feet above the depth
number specified in feet on the community's FIRM (at least two
feet if no depth number is specified); or
(2) Together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, be
completely floodproofed to that level to meet the floodproofing
standard specified in Subsection A(2).
§ 120-16 PENFIELD CODE § 120-17
1:154
§ 120-18. Manufactured homes and recreational vehicles.
The following standards, in addition to the standards in § 120-14, General
standards, and § 120-15, Standards for all structures, apply, as indicated,
in areas of special flood hazard to manufactured homes and to recreational
vehicles which are located in areas of special flood hazard.
C. If the structure is to be floodproofed, a licensed professional engineer
or architect shall develop and/or review structural design,
specifications, and plans for construction. A floodproofing certificate or
other certification shall be provided to the local administrator that
certifies that the design and methods of construction are in accordance
with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions of
Subsection A(2), including the specific elevation (in relation to mean
sea level) to which the structure is to be floodproofed.
D. Within Zones AH and AO, adequate drainage paths are required to
guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures on
slopes.
E. Within Zone A, when no base flood elevation data are available, the
lowest floor (including basement) shall be elevated at least three feet
above the highest adjacent grade.
A. Recreational vehicles.
(1) Recreational vehicles placed on sites within Zones A1-A30, AE and
AH shall either:
(a) Be on site fewer than 180 consecutive days;
(b) Be fully licensed and ready for highway use; or
(c) Meet the requirements for manufactured homes in Subsections
B, C and D.
(2) A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels
or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick-disconnect
type utilities and security devices and has no permanently attached
additions.
B. A manufactured home that is placed or substantially improved in Zones
A1-A30, AE and AH shall be elevated on a permanent foundation such
that the lowest floor is elevated to or above two feet above the base
flood elevation and is securely anchored to an adequately anchored
foundation system to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement.
C. Within Zone A, when no base flood elevation data are available, new
and substantially improved manufactured homes shall be elevated such
that the manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced piers or
other foundation elements of at least equivalent strength that are no
less than 36 inches in height above grade and are securely anchored to
§ 120-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-18
1:155
an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse
or lateral movement.
D. Within Zone AO, the floor shall be elevated above the highest adjacent
grade at least as high as the depth number specified on the Flood
Insurance Rate Map enumerated in § 120-6 (at least two feet if no depth
number is specified).
§ 120-18 PENFIELD CODE § 120-18
1:156
ARTICLE VI
Variance Procedure
§ 120-19. Appeals board.
A. The Zoning Board of Appeals as established by the Town of Penfield
shall hear and decide appeals and requests for variances from the
requirements of this chapter.
B. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall hear and decide appeals when it is
alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision, or determination
made by the local administrator in the enforcement or administration of
this chapter.
C. Those aggrieved by the decision of the Zoning Board of Appeals may
appeal such decision to the Supreme Court pursuant to Article 78 of the
Civil Practice Law and Rules.
D. In passing upon such applications, the Zoning Board of Appeals, shall
consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, standards
specified in other sections of this chapter and:
(1) The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the
injury of others;
(2) The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;
(3) The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood
damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner;
(4) The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to
the community;
(5) The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where
applicable;
(6) The availability of alternative locations for the proposed use which
are not subject to flooding or erosion damage;
(7) The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated
development;
(8) The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan
and floodplain management program of that area;
(9) The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary
and emergency vehicles;
(10) The costs to local governments and the dangers associated with
conducting search and rescue operations during periods of
flooding;
§ 120-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-19
1:157
§ 120-20. Conditions for variances.
(11) The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment
transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if
applicable, expected at the site; and
(12) The costs of providing governmental services during and after
flood conditions, including search and rescue operations,
maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as
sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems and streets and bridges.
E. Upon consideration of the factors of Subsection D and the purposes of
this chapter, the Zoning Board of Appeals may attach such conditions to
the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes
of this chapter.
F. The local administrator shall maintain the records of all appeal actions,
including technical information, and report any variances to the Federal
Emergency Management Agency upon request.
A. Generally, variances may be issued for new construction and
substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of 1/2 acre or less in
size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures
constructed below the base flood level, provided items (1) through (12)
in § 120-19D have been fully considered. As the lot size increases
beyond the 1/2 acre, the technical justification required for issuing the
variance increases.
B. Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic
structures upon a determination that:
(1) The proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the
structure's continued designation as an historic structure; and
(2) The variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic
character and design of the structure.
C. Variances may be issued by a community for new construction and
substantial improvements and for other development necessary for the
conduct of a functionally dependent use, provided that:
(1) The criteria of Subsections A, D, E and F of this section are met;
and
(2) The structure or other development is protected by methods that
minimize flood damages during the base flood and create no
additional threat to public safety.
D. Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any
increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result.
E. Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is
the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief.
§ 120-19 PENFIELD CODE § 120-20
1:158
F. Variances shall only be issued upon receiving written justification of:
(1) A showing of good and sufficient cause;
(2) A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in
exceptional hardship to the applicant; and
(3) A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in
increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety,
extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or
victimization of the public or conflict with existing local laws or
ordinances.
G. Notification.
(1) Any applicant to whom a variance is granted for a building with the
lowest floor below the base flood elevation shall be given written
notice over the signature of a community official that:
(a) The issuance of a variance to construct a structure below the
base flood level will result in increased premium rates for flood
insurance; and
(b) Such construction below the base flood level increases risks to
life and property.
(2) Such notification shall be maintained with the record of all variance
actions as required in § 120-13H of this chapter.
§ 120-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-20
1:159
Chapter 125
GAMES OF CHANCE
§ 125-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as "Local Law No. 3 of the
Year 1978, Regulating Games of Chance in the Town of Penfield, New York."
§ 125-2. Legislative intent.
It is the purpose of this chapter to permit and to regulate the conducting of
games of chance within the boundaries of the Town of Penfield, New York,
by authorized organizations, in a manner consistent with this chapter and
Article 9-A of the General Municipal Law of the State of New York.
§ 125-3. Definitions.
A. Specific terms. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have
the meanings indicated:
AUTHORIZED ORGANIZATIONS —
BOARD — The New York State Racing and Wagering Board.
GAMES OF CHANCE — Include specific games of chance, in which
prizes are awarded on the basis of a designated winning number or
numbers, color or colors, symbol or symbols determined by chance, but
not including games commonly known as "bingo" or "lotto," which are
controlled under Article 14-H of the General Municipal Law, and also
not including "slot machines," "bookmaking," and "policy or numbers
Includes any bona fide religious or charitable organization or bona
fide educational, fraternal or service organization or bona fide
organization of veterans or volunteer firefighters, which by its
charter, certificate of incorporation, constitution, or Act of the
Legislature shall have among its dominant purposes one or more
of the lawful purposes as defined in Article 9-A of the General
Municipal Law, provided that each shall operate without profit
to its members, and provided that each such organization has
engaged in serving one or more of the lawful purposes as defined in
Article 9-A of the General Municipal Law for a period of three years
immediately prior to applying for a license to the Town Clerk of the
Town of Penfield. [Amended 12-16-2015 by L.L. No. 3-2015]
(1)
No organization shall be deemed an authorized organization which
is formed primarily for the purpose of conducting games of chance
and the distribution of the proceeds thereof to itself or any other
organization and which does not devote at least 75% of its activities
to other purposes set forth in General Municipal Law § 186. No
political party shall be deemed an authorized organization.
(2)
§ 120-20 PENFIELD CODE § 125-3
1:160
§ 125-4. Games of chance authorized.
Authorized organizations may, upon the attainment of a license from the
Town Clerk, conduct games of chance within the Town of Penfield as
provided in Article 9-A of the General Municipal Law and as provided in this
chapter. Such games of chance shall be conducted in accordance with state
law and with the rules and regulations of the Board and the provisions of
this chapter.
§ 125-5. Restrictions upon conduct.
The conduct of games of chance authorized by this chapter shall be subject
to the following restrictions:
games" as defined in Penal Law § 225.00. No game of chance shall
involve wagering of money by one player against another player.
TOWN — The Town of Penfield in the County of Monroe and State of
New York.
B. Other terms. All other terms used in this chapter shall have, for the
purposes of this chapter, the meanings respectively ascribed to them by
General Municipal Law § 186.
A. No person, firm, association, corporation or organization, other than a
licensee under the provisions of this chapter, shall conduct such games
or shall lease or otherwise make available for conducting games of
chance a hall or other premises for any consideration whatsoever,
direct or indirect, except as provided in General Municipal Law § 190.
B. No game of chance shall be held, operated or conducted on or within
any leased premises if rental under such lease is to be paid, wholly or
partly, on the basis of a percentage of the receipts or net profits derived
from the operation of such game.
C. No authorized organization licensed under the provisions of this
chapter shall purchase, lease or receive any supplies or equipment
specifically designed or adapted for use in the conduct of games of
chance from other than a supplier licensed by the Board or from
another authorized organization. Lease terms and conditions shall be
subject to rules and regulations promulgated by the Board. The
provisions of this subsection shall not be construed to authorize or
permit an authorized organization to engage in the business of leasing
games of chance supplies, or equipment. Furthermore, no organization
shall purchase bell jar tickets or deals of bell jar tickets from any other
person or organization other than those specifically authorized under
General Municipal Law §§ 195-n and 195-o. [Amended 12-16-2015 by
L.L. No. 3-2015]
D. The entire net proceeds of any game of chance and of any rental shall
be exclusively devoted to the lawful purposes of the organization
permitted to conduct the same.
§ 125-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 125-5
1:161
§ 125-6. Incorporation of statutory provisions.
This chapter shall be deemed to include all of the provisions of Article 9-A
of the General Municipal Law, except as otherwise provided in this chapter,
and any amendment to the provisions in such Article 9-A to the extent such
provisions and amending acts are otherwise applicable to games of chance
authorized under this chapter.
§ 125-7. Sunday games.
Games of chance on the first day of the week, commonly known as "Sunday,"
may not be conducted pursuant to this chapter, and appropriate statute and
regulation.
E. No prize in any operation or conducting of a single game of chance or
single wager shall exceed the sum or value set forth in General
Municipal Law § 186. [Amended 4-16-1979 by Res. No. 205;
12-16-2015 by L.L. No. 3-2015]
F. No series of prizes on any one occasion of games of chance shall
aggregate more than the amount set forth in General Municipal Law
§ 186. [Amended 12-16-2015 by L.L. No. 3-2015]
G. No person, except a bona fide member of any such organization, its
auxiliary or affiliated organization, shall participate in the management
or operation of such game, as set forth in General Municipal Law
§ 195-c.
H. No person shall receive any remuneration for participating in the
management or operation of any such game.
I. No person under the age of 18 years shall be permitted to play any
game of chance or conduct or assist in the conducting of any game of
chance conducted pursuant to this chapter.
J. No game of chance shall be conducted under any license issued
pursuant to the provisions of this chapter more often than 12 times in
any calendar year. Games shall be conducted only between the hours of
12:00 noon and 12:00 midnight on Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday and
Thursday and only between the hours of 12:00 noon on Friday and 2:00
a.m. Saturday and only between the hours of 12:00 noon on Saturday
and 2:00 a.m. Sunday. Standard time shall govern the hours as provided
in this subsection, except that daylight savings time shall apply during
the portion of the year that such time is generally applicable in the
State of New York.
K. No games of chance shall be conducted on Christmas Day, New Year's
Eve or New Year's Day. [Amended 12-16-2015 by L.L. No. 3-2015]
L. The unauthorized conduct of a game of chance shall constitute and be
punishable as a misdemeanor.
§ 125-5 PENFIELD CODE § 125-8
1:162
§ 125-8. Enforcement. [Amended 7-7-1980 by Res. No. 243]
The Sheriff of the County of Monroe is the chief law enforcement officer for
purposes of exercising control over and supervision of all games of chance
conducted under an appropriately issued license. Such Sheriff shall have all
those powers and duties as set forth in Article 9-A of the General Municipal
Law.
§ 125-9. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 12-16-2015 by L.L. No.
3-2015]
Any person, firm or corporation violating or permitting the violation of any
provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a violation and shall be subject to
a fine of not more than $250 and/or to imprisonment of not more than 15
days.
§ 125-10. When effective.
This chapter shall take effect immediately upon filing with the Secretary of
State's office following its approval at referendum by a majority of qualified
voters voting thereon at the Special Election held on December 5, 1978,
pursuant to the provisions of Municipal Home Rule Law § 23.
Chapter 144
NOTIFICATION OF DEFECTS
§ 144-1. Limitations on liability.
A. No civil action shall be maintained against the Town of Penfield or the
Town of Penfield Superintendent of Highways for damages or injuries to
person or property sustained by reason of any highway, bridge or
culvert being defective, out of repair, unsafe, dangerous or obstructed
unless written notice of such defective, unsafe, dangerous or
obstructed condition of such highway, bridge or culvert was actually
given to the Town Clerk or Town Superintendent of Highways, and
there was a failure or neglect within a reasonable time after the giving
of such notice to repair or remove the defect, danger or obstruction
complained of, or in the absence of such notice, unless such defective,
unsafe, dangerous or obstructed condition existed for so long a period
that the same should have been discovered and remedied in the
exercise of reasonable care and diligence; but no such action shall be
maintained for damages or injuries to person or property sustained
solely in consequence of the existence of snow or ice upon any highway,
bridge or culvert, unless written notice thereof, specifying the
particular place, was actually given to the Town Clerk or Town
Superintendent of Highways and there was a failure or neglect to cause
such snow or ice to be removed, or to make the place otherwise
reasonably safe, within a reasonable time after the receipt of such
notice.
§ 125-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 144-1
1:163
§ 144-2. Record of notices.
The Town Superintendent of Highways shall transmit in writing to the Town
Clerk, within 10 days after the receipt thereof, all written notices received
by him/her pursuant to this chapter and Town Law § 65-a, Subdivisions
1 and 2. The Town Clerk shall cause all written notices received by him/
her pursuant to this chapter and Town Law § 65-a, Subdivision 2, to be
presented to the Town Board within five days of the receipt thereof or at the
next succeeding Town Board meeting, whichever shall be sooner.
§ 144-3. Supersession of state law.
This chapter shall supersede in its application to the Town of Penfield Town
Law § 65-a, Subdivisions 1 and 3.
Chapter 162
PEDDLING AND SOLICITING
§ 162-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Penfield License Ordinance."
§ 162-2. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter shall be to preserve the public peace and good
order in the Town of Penfield and to contribute to the peace, welfare and
good order of its people by licensing such occupations as are herein defined
and thereby identifying and regulating the conduct of persons engaged in
the same.
§ 162-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
B. No civil action shall be maintained against the Town of Penfield or the
Town Superintendent of Highways for damages or injuries to person or
property sustained by reason of any defects in its sidewalks, or in
consequence of the existence of snow or ice upon such sidewalks,
unless such sidewalks have been constructed or are maintained by the
Town or the Superintendent of Highways of the Town pursuant to
statute, nor shall any action be maintained for damages or injuries to
person or property sustained by reason of such defect or in
consequence of such existence of snow or ice unless written notice
thereof, specifying the particular place, was actually given to the Town
Clerk or the Town Superintendent of Highways and there was a failure
or neglect to cause such defect to be remedied, such snow or ice to be
removed, or to make the place otherwise reasonably safe within a
reasonable time after the receipt of such notice.
§ 144-1 PENFIELD CODE § 162-3
1:164
ITINERANT VENDOR — A person who engages in the act or occupation of
selling or offering for sale from a fixed location or locations at times, and
from time to time, goods, wares or merchandise, meats, fish and produce,
from any portable cart, stand, vehicle or display device of any nature.
PEDDLER or HUCKSTER — A person who engages in the act or occupation
of selling or offering for sale, in permitted places by going from house to
house, store to store or place of business to place of business, goods, wares
or merchandise, meats, fish or produce.
PERMITTED PLACE —
PLACE-TO-PLACE SALESPERSON — A person who engages in the act or
occupation of selling or offering for sale, or soliciting contracts to sell or
lease in the future, in permitted places by going from house to house,
store to store or place of business to place of business, any item for
future delivery, such as, but not limited to, goods, wares or merchandise,
meats, fish or produce, personal services and subscriptions to books and
magazines.
SOLICITOR — A person who engages in the act or occupation of requesting
the donation of money or goods for any purpose in permitted places, by
going from door to door, store to store or place of business to place of
business, or by requesting the donation of money or goods from any single
place or places.
§ 162-4. License required.
It shall be hereafter unlawful for any person, firm, association or
corporation to carry on any occupation as defined in § 162-3 hereof without
having first obtained the license prescribed by this chapter.
§ 162-5. License application and term; fees.
A peddler, huckster, place-to-place salesperson and solicitor may
perform his/her respective acts and occupations at any place in the
Town of Penfield, except on property owned by the Town of Penfield
or any district thereof, or on property owned by any school district, or
otherwise prohibited by the owner of private property.
A.
An itinerant vendor may perform his/her acts and occupation only on
privately owned property, with permission of the property owner, and
in the areas of the Town of Penfield zoned General Business, Business
Non-Retail and Limited Business except on property therein owned by
the Town of Penfield or any district thereof, or on property owned by a
school district. [Amended 12-16-2015 by L.L. No. 3-2015]
B.
A. An application and nonrefundable fee must be submitted to the Town
Clerk. Said fee shall be established from time to time by resolution of
the Town Board. [Amended 8-19-1998]
§ 162-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 162-5
1:165
§ 162-6. Form and issuance of licenses.
B. A license pursuant to this chapter shall be issued for a period of not
more than one year and shall in any event expire on the 31st day of
December following the date of its issuance.
C. A license pursuant to this chapter shall be issued by the Town Clerk,
who shall keep an accurate and permanent record of the name, address
and occupation of the licensee, the date of issuance and expiration of
the license and fees received therefor.
D. All application fees and license fees received by the Town Clerk
hereunder shall be paid over to the Supervisor to become part of the
general fund of the Town of Penfield. Fees for licenses hereunder shall
be established by resolution from time to time by the Penfield Town
Board. [Amended 8-19-1998]
A. The form for license applications for peddlers, hucksters and place-toplace
salespersons, and the licenses, shall be promulgated by the
Penfield Town Clerk.
B. A license may be refused to the applicant if he/she shall have been
convicted of a misdemeanor or felony which, in the judgment of the
Town Clerk, renders the applicant unfit or undesirable to carry on the
occupation of peddling, soliciting or huckstering. The Town Clerk may
also refuse a license to any person who, in his/her judgment, shall be an
undesirable person or unable to properly conduct soliciting,
huckstering or peddling within the Town of Penfield. [Amended
8-19-1998]
C. Any applicant who has been refused by the Town Clerk may apply to the
Town Board therefor; and the same may be granted or refused by the
Board. [Amended 8-19-1998]
D. The Town Clerk may conduct an investigation into any of the above
matters to enable him/her to determine the advisability of issuing a
peddler's license to the applicant, and said Town Clerk shall have a
minimum period of two weeks to conduct said investigation. The
issuance of the license shall be delayed for such period of two weeks
and for a longer period of time, if necessary, to complete said
investigation. [Amended 8-19-1998]
E. Itinerant vendors.
(1) No license for an itinerant vendor shall be issued until the applicant
has been obtained and furnished to the Town Clerk:
(a) Written consent of the property owner of the location where
such activity will occur.
(b) Written recommendation of the Zoning Board of Appeals after
public hearing that such license be issued. Said
§ 162-5 PENFIELD CODE § 162-6
1:166
§ 162-7. License rules and regulations.
recommendation may be issued with conditions and, if so, such
conditions shall be incorporated into the license to be issued.
(2) The Zoning Board of Appeals shall recommend the issuance of a
license to an itinerant vendor only if it finds:
(a) That the proposed use will create no risk of danger or danger
to persons or property.
(b) That the proposed use will not create an increase in vehicular
traffic or interfere in any manner with pedestrians or vehicles
lawfully on the roadways.
(c) That the proposed use will have no detrimental effect on
adjacent property, nor interfere with the lawful enjoyment of
adjacent property.
(d) That the proposed use will not create noise or litter.
F. No license shall be issued until the fee therefor has been paid in full to
the Town Clerk.
A. Each person engaged in any activity defined in this chapter shall be
separately licensed, and each location for an itinerant vendor shall be
separately licensed. Licenses shall not be transferable and must be
carried by the licensee at any and all times licensee is engaged in any
activity defined in this chapter.
B. Any person licensed under this chapter shall produce and exhibit his/
her license upon the request of any person desiring inspection thereof.
C. No person licensed under this chapter shall falsely or fraudulently
misrepresent the quality, quantity or character of any products offered
for sale, or offer for sale any unwholesome, tainted or diseased
provisions or merchandise.
D. None of the foregoing licensees shall use any of the public streets or
government property within the Town of Penfield as standing places for
their vehicles, handcarts or pushcarts for the conduct of their business.
Any person licensed under this chapter shall only be permitted to
conduct business between 10:00 a.m. and sunset, as determined by the
National Weather Service. [Amended 8-19-1998; 12-16-2015 by L.L.
No. 3-2015]
E. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed so as to prevent the sale and/
or inspection of milk or ice and such articles which are governed by the
provisions of the statutes of the State of New York and the health
ordinances of the Town of Penfield, County of Monroe, State of New
York.
§ 162-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 162-7
1:167
§ 162-8. Revocation of license. [Amended 12-16-2015 by L.L. No.
3-2015]
Any license issued hereunder may be revoked by the Town Board after a
hearing on five days' notice to the licensee upon proof that such licensee
has violated any of the regulations of this chapter or any conditions upon
which this license was issued.
§ 162-9. Exceptions.
§ 162-10. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 12-16-2015 by L.L. No.
3-2015]
F. Any person licensed pursuant to General Business Law § 32 shall
comply with the provisions of this chapter as mandated in General
Business Law § 32(8).
A. Any person engaging in the activity of solicitor as defined in this
chapter on behalf of a bona fide and duly organized not-for-profit
corporation or association, religious corporation or local chapter of a
national service organization shall be exempt from the requirements of
this chapter.
B. Any person engaged in the activity of an itinerant vendor defined in this
chapter on behalf of a bona fide and duly organized not-for-profit
corporation or association, religious corporation or local chapter of a
national service organization shall be exempt from the requirements of
this chapter, except that such activity shall take place only in a
permitted place, as defined in § 162-3, and said organization must have
written consent from the property owner of the location where such
activity will occur.
A. Any person, firm, association, or corporation who or which shall violate
any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a violation as defined in
the Criminal Procedure Law of New York, punishable by a fine of not
more than $250 or by imprisonment not to exceed 15 days, or by both
such fine and imprisonment. Each day that a violation of any of the
provisions of this chapter occurs shall be deemed a separate offense.
B. In addition to the foregoing, there may be recovered from such person,
firm, association or corporation found to be violating this chapter a
penalty of $25 for each day such violation continues, not exceeding in
all the sum of $500, to be recovered by the Town of Penfield in a civil
action.
C. It shall be the duty of the Building Department and Department of
Public Works to enforce the provisions of this chapter.
§ 162-7 PENFIELD CODE § 162-10
1:168
Chapter 180
SEWERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 94.
Storm sewers — See Ch. 194.
Zoning and land use — See Ch. 250.
§ 162-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 162-10
1:169

ARTICLE I
Sewer Rents
§ 180-1. Authority and purpose.
Pursuant to the authority of the Sewer Rent Law, Article 14-F of the General
Municipal Law of the State of New York, and any and all amendments
thereto, the Town of Penfield hereby establishes this sanitary sewer rent
article. With this article and the authority granted the Town Board, sewer
rents shall be calculated and levied on an annual basis as a means of
producing revenue for all sanitary sewer districts and/or extensions thereof.
§ 180-2. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PART — As used in relation to the term "sewer system," shall mean all
main, branch or trunk sewers, interceptor sewers, lateral, manholes, pump
stations, valve pits, and/or appurtenances associated therewith.
SEWAGE — The water-carried human wastes which are discharged from
sanitary conveniences located within dwellings or businesses, including
but not limited to houses, apartments, group homes, nursing facilities,
commercial businesses, hotels and/or industrial facilities, etc.
SEWER DISTRICT LEVY — That portion of the annual sewer budget which
is to be raised through annual sewer charges against real property within
the sewer district. There shall be a separate levy for operation and
maintenance and debt service.
SEWER RATE — A unit charge that when multiplied by the total number of
units within the consolidated sewer district equals the total annual tax levy
of the district.
SEWER RENT — A scale of charges established annually by the Town Board
and levied on properties within the aforementioned sewer district(s), or
extensions thereof, for the use of the sewer system or any part or parts
thereto.
SEWER SYSTEM — All sewer pipes, manholes, pump stations, valves and
other appurtenances which are used or useful in whole or in part in
connection with the collection of sewage, water, industrial waste and other
wastes and which are owned, operated or maintained by said sewer
districts, or extensions thereof.
SEWER UNIT — The uniform basis of assigning benefit of either having
access to or use of the sanitary sewer system within the Town of Penfield.
Sewer units will be calculated based on the criteria listed in § 180-3 below.
SPECIAL DISTRICT ROLL (SEWER) — A listing of all parcels within the
Penfield Consolidated Sanitary Sewer Districts and their respective unit
totals as computed under § 180-3 and as updated annually.
§ 180-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 180-3
1:171
§ 180-3. Sewer unit calculation.
A. Unit calculation based on property use. Calculation of sewer units for
properties connected to the sewer system shall be made in accordance
with the following criteria based on specific property uses.
Property Use/Description
Basis of Sewer Unit
Calculation
Residential
Single-family home, townhome,
condominium
1.0 unit/Tax I.D.
Attached townhome structures 1.0 unit/Tax I.D.
Apartments 1.0 unit/2- or 3-bedroom
apartment
0.75 unit/1-bedroom apartment
Manufactured homes 0.75 unit/home site
Combination single-family home
with professional office or
customary home occupation
2.0 units
or in-law apartment 1.5 units
Group homes 1.0 unit or annual water
consumption divided by 60,000
gallons, whichever is greater
Commercial
Grocery store, pharmacy, retail
outlets, shopping plaza, office
building, laundromat, service
stations and car dealers, hotel/
motel, movie theaters,
recreation/entertainment, etc.
1.0 unit for each business use or
annual water consumption
divided by 60,000 gallons,
whichever is greater
Day-care facilities 1.0 unit or annual water
consumption divided by 60,000
gallons, whichever is greater
Industrial/Manufacturing
facilities
1.0 unit or annual water
consumption divided by 60,000
gallons, whichever is greater
Restaurants, fast-food
establishments
1.0 unit or annual water
consumption divided by 60,000
gallons, whichever is greater
Food service, bakery, etc. 1.0 unit or annual water
consumption divided by 60,000
gallons, whichever is greater
Community Service
§ 180-3 PENFIELD CODE § 180-3
1:172
Property Use/Description
Basis of Sewer Unit
Calculation
Public, private or parochial
schools
1.0 unit or annual water
consumption divided by 60,000
gallons, whichever is greater
Colleges 1.0 unit or annual water
consumption divided by 60,000
gallons, whichever is greater
Church, convent, parsonage 1.0 unit or annual water
consumption divided by 60,000
gallons, whichever is greater
Hospitals, nursing facilities,
assisted-living facilities
1 unit/every 2 beds or annual
water consumption divided by
60,000 gallons
Fire hall, ambulance hall, post
office, government-owned
facilities
1.0 unit or annual water
consumption divided by 60,000
gallons, whichever is greater
B. Notes.
(1) All sewer unit computations will be rounded to the nearest
hundredth of a unit.
(2) Annual water consumption figures shall be obtained from the
Monroe County Water Authority, documenting the previous year's
water use.
(3) Where more than one water meter exists for a particular property
the usage shall be combined.
(4) In the case of Sewer District #12 (Bay Front Area of Empire
Boulevard), sewer unit calculations are based on criteria set forth
as part of the establishment of Sewer District #12.
(5) Those property uses not specifically mentioned above will be
assigned a use in accordance with the property class code as
designated by the Town Assessor's office.
C. Unit calculation for bond indebtedness.
(1) Sewer unit calculations for bond indebtedness (debt service) shall
be made in the same manner as listed in Subsection A.
(2) Vacant land. Each parcel of developable vacant land which is within
an existing sewer district or extension thereof and which has
access to the sewer system shall be charged bond indebtedness on
the following schedule:
(a) One-half acre to one acre equals 1.0 unit.
(b) One acre to five acres equals 2.0 units.
§ 180-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 180-3
1:173
§ 180-4. Town Board authority.
In accordance with this article and General Municipal Law Article 14-F, the
Town Board, through the annual budget process, shall cause the calculation
of, public input on, and establishment of sanitary sewer rents for those
properties within sanitary sewer districts and/or extensions thereof, as is
appropriate.
§ 180-5. Calculation and collection of sewer rents.
Once the annual tax rate for various sewer rent components has been
determined, this rate will be multiplied by the total number of units derived,
(c) Five acres and larger equals 2.0 units for every five acres or
portion thereof.
D. Unit calculation for new connections. In the case of first-time sewer use
through either new connection or a certificate of occupancy, calculation
of sewer units shall be made as follows:
(1) June 30 of each year shall be the cut-off date for additions,
deletions and updates to the upcoming year's special district tax
roll.
(2) A new sewer account which either is connected to the sewer
system or, in the case of a new home, receives a certificate of
occupancy on or before June 30 will be added to the upcoming
year's sewer special district roll. Properties connected or receiving
certificates of occupancy after June 30 will be held over until the
following year's sewer special district roll.
(3) Portions, for example:
(a) A property connected on June 20 will be added to the upcoming
year's sewer special district tax roll and assessed 0.5 unit from
July 1 through December 31 of the current year, plus 1.0 unit
from January 1 through December 31 of the upcoming tax year.
Therefore, this property would be assessed a total of 1.5 sewer
units for the first year.
(b) A property connected on or after July 1 misses the annual cutoff
date and will therefore be held over until the following
year's special district tax roll. In this case, the property will be
assessed 0.42 unit from August 1 through December 31 of the
connection year, plus 1.0 unit from January 1 through
December 31 of the year for which the property was held over,
plus 1.0 unit from January 1 through December 31 for the
upcoming tax year, yielding a total of 2.42 units for the first
year.
(4) After the first year and in subsequent years, the sewer unit count
will be based on criteria outlined in this § 180-3.
§ 180-3 PENFIELD CODE § 180-5
1:174
as outlined in § 180-3A, B and C, to arrive at the sewer rent charge for each
component. These annual sewer rent charges are included as separate line
items on the annual property tax bill and shall be collected and enforced in
the same manner and at the same time as provided by law for the collection
and enforcement of Town taxes.
§ 180-6. Out-of-district users.
§ 180-7. Disposition of revenues.
Revenues derived from sewer rents shall be deposited into specific funds
to be known as "sewer rent funds," for each specific sewer rent purpose.
Moneys in such fund(s) shall be used only in the manner and for the
purposes specified and in the order required by the Sewer Rent Law of the
State of New York.
A. Any property not currently within an existing sewer district or
extension thereof may petition the Town Board for approval to connect
the property to the public sewer system through an out-of-district user
agreement.
B. A petition letter shall be submitted to the Town Board requesting
approval of the out-of-district user status. The letter shall be
accompanied by a map of sufficient detail to describe the property and
building(s) to be connected, the connection point along the public
sewer and demonstrating a legal right of access to the sewer system.
Upon review and consideration, the Town Board may grant the property
out-of-district user status and authorize the Supervisor to execute an
out-of-district user agreement which stipulates:
(1) That the property will, by virtue of access to, and use of, the
facilities of the sewer district(s), be specially benefitted.
(2) All costs associated with improvements thereto shall be borne by
the property owner.
(3) The property shall be responsible to pay annual assessments
associated with operation and maintenance charges, transmission
and treatment charges and bond indebtedness, which are normal
and usual to properties within said district, on a per-unit basis as
defined in § 180-3 of this article.
§ 180-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 180-7
1:175

ARTICLE II
Sewer Use
§ 180-8. Title.
This article shall be known as the "Sewer Use Ordinance."
§ 180-9. Purpose.
It is the purpose of this article to promote and protect the health, safety and
general welfare of the residents of the Town of Penfield and/or customers
of the Penfield sewer district(s). This shall be achieved through effective
management and proper maintenance of the public sewer collection system,
to yield the highest possible level of system reliability.
§ 180-10. Authority.
§ 180-11. Definitions.
Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meaning of terms
used in this article shall be as follows:
ACCEPTABLE KITCHEN WASTE — The waste generated from the
preparation or dispensing of food or meals that has been shredded to such a
degree that all particles will be carried freely under average flow conditions
which normally exist within that section of the public sewer system, with no
particle greater than 1/4 inch in any dimension.
AUTHORIZED DISTRICT REPRESENTATIVE (ADR) — That person so
designated by the Town Board or Superintendent to check and/or verify
compliance with this article and conduct inspections of grease traps and
associated maintenance records.
BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS — The Town Board, being charged with
governing the affairs of all sewer districts or extensions thereto within the
Town of Penfield.
BUILDING DRAIN — That portion of the lowest horizontal sanitary drainage
piping within a building which conducts wastewater to the building sewer.
BUILDING SEWER or SANITARY LATERAL — The extension of the sanitary
drainage piping from the public sewer system or individual sewage disposal
A. The public sewer collection system within the sewer district(s) of the
Town of Penfield shall be under the control of the Penfield Town Board
acting as the Board of Commissioners for said districts. The Town Board
shall designate a Superintendent to manage and supervise the day-today
operations of the sewer districts.
B. Only those properties that are within the sewer district(s) or extensions
thereto, or are granted out-of-district user status, shall have legal
authority to utilize the public sewer system either directly or indirectly.
§ 180-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 180-11
1:177
system to the outside of the wall of a building, to where it is connected to
the building drain.
C OF C — Certificate of compliance, with either sections of the Town Code,
this article or Town Specifications.
COMPLIANT DISCHARGE — Commercial or industrial sewage discharges
to the public sewer system, which, when analyzed, show pollutant
concentrations which do not exceed limits established by this article, Article
III of this chapter, or the Monroe County Sewer Use Law, rules and
regulations of the Pure Waters Administrative Boards or the Town of
Webster Sewer Use Law.
FOG — Fats, oils and/or grease generated through the preparation, cooking,
dispensing or cleaning of utensils or equipment, which is measured in mg/l.
FOG COMPLIANT DISCHARGE — Discharge from a grease trap or any
kitchen or building drain which does not exceed 140 mg/l of FOG at peak
operation time.
FLOATABLES — Any fibrous, woven, spun or stringy material which is
introduced in the public sewer system and does not readily break as a result
of wetting or under common turbulence normally found in the public sewer
system.
GARBAGE — The kitchen waste generated from the preparation, cooking
and dispensing of food and from handling, storage, or sale of fruit, produce
or meat.
INDIVIDUAL SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM — A septic system or seepage
pit which is under the jurisdiction of the Monroe County Health
Department.
NUISANCE — Use or lack of use of the public sewer system in such a
manner so as to disrupt or endanger the health, safety and general welfare
of the residents of the Town of Penfield or customers of the Penfield sewer
district(s) and/or the effective management and reliable operation of the
public sewer system.
OWNER — The owner of record or any person holding title to, or having
any ownership interest in, real property within any of the sewer districts or
extensions thereto, as described above.
PERSON — Any individual, firm, company, association, society, corporation,
not-for-profit organization or group who or which has business with the
sewer district(s).
PRIVATE SYSTEM — Those portions of the sanitary sewer collection system
serving individual properties and which are located outside of public rightsof-
way or easements to the Town of Penfield.
PUBLIC SEWER SYSTEM — That portion of the sanitary sewer collection
system owned, operated and/or controlled by the sewer district(s) of the
Town of Penfield, including gravity pipes or conduits, lateral pipes,
manholes, pumping systems, force mains and appurtenances used to collect
§ 180-11 PENFIELD CODE § 180-11
1:178
and transmit wastewater to the receiving works of either Monroe County
Pure Waters or adjacent municipalities under contract for such conveyance.
SANITARY SEWER COLLECTION SYSTEM — A network of gravity pipes
or conduits, lateral pipes, manholes, pumping systems, force mains and
appurtenances which collect and transmit sewage generated from
residential, commercial or industrial uses to receiving works of either an
adjoining municipality or Monroe County Pure Waters; and to which
discharge of surface water or groundwater is expressly prohibited.
SEWAGE — Water-carried waste which is discharged from the sanitary
fixtures or conveniences of dwellings, commercial business uses and/or
industrial uses, including apartments, hotels, schools and institutions.
SEWER DEPARTMENT — The department within the Town of Penfield
organization charged with operation, maintenance and/or repair of the
public sewer system and administration of the affairs of the sewer
district(s).
SEWER DISTRICT — A geographic boundary, including one or more parcels
of land, established by the Town Board, expressly for the purpose of
providing sanitary sewer service, maintenance, inspection, renovations and/
or improvements as required; and given the authority to levy charges
associated with these operations or indebtedness associated therewith.
SUPERINTENDENT — That person designated by the Town Board to
oversee and manage the daily operations of the Sewer Department and
sewer district affairs.
TOWN SPECIFICATIONS — The Town development regulations and
specifications, and all applicable sections of this Town Code.
WASTEWATER — Sewage.
§ 180-12. Interference prohibited; plumbing permit required; sewer
entrance fees.
A. No person or entity shall open, enter into or otherwise interfere with
operation of the public sewer system.
B. No person or entity shall undertake plumbing work, except that work
which is classified as general or regular maintenance, without first
obtaining a plumbing permit for said work. Application for plumbing
permits shall be made through either the Sewer Department for
underground work or the Building Department for interior plumbing
work. All work shall be in accordance with applicable provisions of this
Code, Town specifications, and/or the New York State Uniform Building
Code. All work shall be inspected by either the Sewer or Building
Department, as applicable.
C. The Town Board will annually fix plumbing permit fees, which will be
chargeable to property owners, persons or entities who or which desire
to make repairs or modifications to their private systems. Such fees
§ 180-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 180-12
1:179
§ 180-13. Plumbing permits.
§ 180-14. Prohibited discharges.
shall be sufficient in amount to cover all administrative costs associated
with permit and C of C issuance and inspection.
D. Each property owner will be responsible for paying a one-time sewer
entrance fee prior to connecting his/her property to the public sewer
system. For multiple-dwelling properties, no more than one sewer
entrance fee will be charged to any one taxable parcel of land. The
sewer entrance fee is comprised of a Town of Penfield and Monroe
County Pure Waters component that is set annually, except in areas of
northern Penfield where the entrance fee amount is established
through the Monroe County/Town of Webster sewer use contract.
A. Any property owner desiring to undertake plumbing work on his/her
own premises may do so after first obtaining a plumbing permit. In this
case, the plumbing work shall only be done on the property owner's
private system, and must be done in accordance with Town
specifications and/or the New York State Uniform Building Code. By
signing and accepting the plumbing permit, the property owner agrees
to indemnify the Town of Penfield, its sewer district(s) and agents from
any and all loss or damage that may result directly or indirectly from
work covered under said plumbing permit.
B. Plumbing contractors or entities engaged in the performance of any
type of plumbing work, other than regular or general maintenance,
shall first apply for and obtain a plumbing permit as outlined in
§ 180-13 above. Prior to issuance of the permit, the plumbing
contractor or entity shall demonstrate the possession of:
(1) A general liability insurance policy naming the Town of Penfield as
an additional insured, in an amount not less than $300,000 each
occurrence, and $500,000 aggregate,
(2) Either a valid New York State workers' compensation and disability
policy covering all employees or a certificate of exemption from
New York State workers' compensation.
C. Any property owner or plumbing contractor or entity engaged in any
type of plumbing work, other than that work listed as regular or general
maintenance, without first obtaining a plumbing permit shall be in
violation of this article.
A. No person or sewer user shall discharge, or cause to be discharged, any
of the following to the public sewer system, either directly or indirectly:
(1) Surface water, groundwater or foundation water.
(2) Any wastewater discharge containing more than 140 milligrams
per liter, by weight, of fats, oils or grease (FOG).
§ 180-12 PENFIELD CODE § 180-14
1:180
§ 180-15. FOG, oil and/or grit abatement.
(3) Any liquid or vapor having a temperature lower than 32° F. or
higher than 150° F.
(4) Any gasoline, benzene, naptha, fuel oil or other flammable or
explosive liquid, solid or gas.
(5) Any garbage that has not been properly shredded.
(6) Any ashes, cinders, sand, mud, grit, straw, animal wastes, shavings,
metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood, manure or any
other solid or viscous substance capable of causing obstruction to
the flow in sewers or other interference with the proper operation
of the collection system in the opinion of the Town Board.
(7) Any woven, fibrous or stringy material which does not readily break
apart under common turbulence normally found in the public sewer
system.
(8) Any water or wastes having a pH lower than six or higher than
nine, or having any other corrosive property capable of causing
damage or hazard to structures, equipment and/or personnel.
(9) Any water or wastes containing a toxic or poisonous substance in
sufficient quantity to interfere with any sewage treatment process,
constitute a hazard to humans or animals, or create any hazard in
the receiving waters of the sewage treatment plant in the opinion
of the Town Board.
(10) Any noxious or malodorous gas or substance.
(11) Any nondomestic waste from holding tanks, sludge or skimmings
from the cleaning or pumping of grease traps or oil/water/sand
separators to any of the district(s)-owned collection points.
(12) Any water or wastes containing suspended solids of such character
or quantity that, in the opinion of the Superintendent, require
extraordinary effort or expense to transmit such materials through
the public sewer system or otherwise maintain system reliability.
(13) Any wastewater which exceeds any of the thresholds established in
either the Monroe County Sewer Use Ordinance and/or Pure
Waters District rules and regulations; or Town of Webster Code
Chapter 175, Sewers (discharge restrictions).
B. If, in the judgment of the Superintendent, special analyses must be
performed to determine the magnitude or composition of any of the
above, the costs of such laboratory analysis fees shall be borne by the
property owner.
A. Any commercial or industrial sewer users that generate wastewater
containing organic, inorganic, greasy or fatty liquid(s), semi-liquid and/
§ 180-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 180-15
1:181
§ 180-16. Observation manholes.
Any commercial/industrial property requesting to make connection to the
public sewer system shall make such connection directly into an existing
sanitary manhole, or if an existing manhole is not conveniently located shall
construct a new manhole, per Town specifications, over the public sewer
to facilitate observation, sampling and measurement of the wastewater
discharge. The observation manhole is to be constructed solely at the
expense of the property owner and in accordance with plans and
specifications approved by the Superintendent.
§ 180-17. Lateral maintenance responsibility.
§ 180-18. Material and installation specifications.
All pipe materials and installation methods or any repair or maintenance
work shall be in accordance with the Town specifications and/or applicable
sections of the New York State Uniform Building Code.
or solid wastes shall utilize an appropriately sized grease trap (GT) to
collect and restrict the passage of these substances to either the public
sewer system or a private system which connects to the public system.
B. Oil/Water and grit interceptors (OWS) of appropriate size and flow rate
shall be provided when, in the opinion of the Superintendent, they are
necessary for the proper separation of oils, grease, grit or other
contaminants normally found emanating from floor drains or pits.
C. All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the
Superintendent or authorized district representative (ADR) and in
accordance with Article III, Fats, Oils and Grease Abatement, of this
chapter.
A. It shall be the responsibility of the property owner to provide general
and/or regular maintenance of the sanitary lateral or building sewer
which serves his/her property. This shall include, but is not limited to,
as much cabling, cutting, flushing, or root removal as is necessary to
keep the building sewer in good working order.
B. If through video inspection it is determined that the portion of the
building sewer within the public right-of-way or Town easement is
either structurally or hydraulically deficient, the Sewer Department will
relieve the property owner of his/her responsibility for general or
regular maintenance of that portion of the building sewer. The Sewer
Department may choose to install a lot line clean-out and provide
whatever regular maintenance necessary to keep that section of the
building sewer in good working order, or have the deficiency removed.
§ 180-15 PENFIELD CODE § 180-19
1:182
§ 180-19. Check valves or backflow devices.
Any plumbing fixtures located in a basement or which have a flood rim
which is below the rim of the nearest adjacent upstream manhole shall
utilize an approved check valve or backflow device. Said installation shall
be in accordance with applicable provisions of the New York State Uniform
Building Code.
§ 180-20. Power and authority of inspectors.
§ 180-21. Enforcement; penalties for offenses.
A. The Superintendent or ADR shall be permitted to enter upon any
properties for the purpose of inspection, observation, measurement,
sampling and testing, or activities that are in accordance with this
article or any regulations promulgated thereunder.
B. Those records or data possessed by the owner or manager of a facility
that, in the judgment of the SPR or ADR, have bearing on or affect the
operation of the public sewer system shall be made available for
inspection. Denial of this request shall be considered a violation of the
Town Code and this article.
A. Any permit issued pursuant to this article may be subject to
cancellation after a hearing in the event of a finding by the Town Board
at such hearing that the user or permittee of the sewerage system has
violated any of the provisions of this article. Such hearing shall take
place on 10 days' written notice to the permittee or user. Upon any
cancellation provided for in this subsection or otherwise in this section,
the Town Board may terminate the use of the sewer by severing the
connection to the sewerage system.
B. Any person violating any provision of this article shall be responsible in
monetary damages for any injury to the sewer system or expense
caused the Town Board by such violation. This money may be collected
by civil action in the Supreme Court of the State of New York.
Obedience to this article may also be enforced by injunction.
C. Any person, firm or corporation violating any provisions of this article
and interfering with, entering or using said sewer systems without
obtaining permission hereunder shall be guilty of an offense and subject
to a fine of not more than $250 or to imprisonment for not more than 15
days, or both such fine and imprisonment; and, in addition, when a
violation of this article or any of the provisions thereof is continuous,
each 24 hours thereof shall constitute a separate, distinct and
additional violation.
D. The Town Board of the Town of Penfield shall be responsible for the
enforcement of this article.
E. Any condition that in the judgment of the Superintendent poses a direct
or imminent risk to the function or reliability of the public sewer system
§ 180-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 180-21
1:183
§ 180-22. Interpretation.
Where the conditions imposed by any provision of this article are less
restrictive than rules or regulations of any other agency having jurisdiction
or their employees or agents, the provisions which are more restrictive shall
govern.
may be cause for the Superintendent to have the risk removed or
corrected, and the costs thereof shall be chargeable to the owner of the
property.
§ 180-21 PENFIELD CODE § 180-22
1:184
ARTICLE III
Fats, Oils and Grease (FOG) Abatement
§ 180-23. Title.
The title of this article is "Fats, Oil and Grease (FOG) Abatement.'
§ 180-24. Purpose.
§ 180-25. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AUTHORIZED DISTRICT REPRESENTATIVE (ADR) — That individual
designated by the Sewer District Commissioners or the Superintendent to
check and verify compliance with this article or conduct inspections of
facilities or GT.
BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (BOD) — The measure of the amount of
oxygen required to oxidize and stabilize organic material in wastewater.
FIXTURE — Includes each plumbing fixture, appliance, apparatus, or other
equipment required to be connected to or discharging into a grease trap
(GT) or interceptor.
FOG — The measurement of fats, oils and grease present, measured in mg/
l.
FOG TESTING — A one-liter sample drawn from the effluent. The amount of
FOG present, in mg/l, shall be determined by using the hexane method.
GREASE TRAP (GT) — An appropriately sized receptacle utilized by
commercial or industrial sewer users to intercept, separate and collect
fats, oils, grease or other organic waste commonly found in the handling,
preparation or serving food, approved by the ADR.
GT WASTE — Accumulated fats, oils, grease or other organic waste in a GT,
which on some regular basis, determined by separation effectiveness and
material accumulation, is removed for proper disposal.
A. The discharge of fats, oil, grease, sand, grit or other harmful materials
into the public sewer system poses a threat to the health, welfare and
safety of the residents of the Town of Penfield by reducing system
reliability; and requires additional maintenance efforts which increase
cost. The Town Board, as Commissioners of the Town of Penfield
sanitary sewer district(s), desires to reduce discharge of these
substances to the maximum extent practical and control their
introduction to the district's facilities.
B. This article provides rules and regulations which set acceptable
discharge limits of FOG to the public sewer system and specifies
minimum controls for the separation and removal of these materials
from the wastewater stream.
§ 180-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 180-25
1:185
ILLICIT DISCHARGE — Any direct or indirect non-stormwater discharge to
a storm drainage system, and any stormwater discharges to the sanitary
sewer system, as defined in Chapter 194, Storm Sewers, Article I, of the
Town Code.
LIQUID WASTE — All waterborne solids and liquids containing dissolved or
suspended waste materials, including but not limited to septic and wastes
from grease traps and grit traps.
MANAGER — A person responsible for conducting, supervising, managing
or representing the business activities of a sewer user or transporter.
NEW USER — Any person or entity requesting connection to the district(s)
sanitary sewer collection system that would be required to install
pretreatment provisions described in this article. This shall include new
establishments along with existing establishments when ownership is
transferred.
OBSERVATION MANHOLE — An existing or new manhole where
commercial or industrial users are to make their connection to the public
sewer system to facilitate observation, sampling and measurement of the
wastewater discharge.
OIL/WATER SEPARATOR (OWS) — A receptacle used to separate
petroleum-based oils or grease from discharge emanating from floors, floor
drains or pits commonly found in facilitates involved in repair, maintenance
or washing of automobiles, machinery or equipment maintenance.
OWS WASTE — Oil or grease residue that has been separated from
drainage-emanating floors, floor drains or pits which shall be removed from
OWS on some regular basis and properly disposed.
PERSON — An individual, corporation (including a government
corporation), organization, state or federal governmental subdivision or
agency, political subdivision, interstate agency or body, business, trust,
partnership, association, firm, company, joint-stock company, commission,
or any other legal entity.
PUBLIC SEWER SYSTEM — That portion of the sanitary sewer collection
system owned, operated and/or controlled by the sewer district(s) of the
Town of Penfield, including sewer pipes, manholes, pump stations, valves
and other appurtenances used to collect and transmit wastewater to the
receiving works of either Monroe County Pure Waters or adjacent
municipalities under contract for such conveyance.
SAND/GRIT TRAP (SGT) — A receptacle used to separate sand, grit or other
particulate matter discharges emanating from floors, floor drains or pits
commonly found in facilitates involved in repair, maintenance or washing of
automobiles, machinery. These receptacles can either be separate and with
the SGT upstream of the OWS or combined with the OWS.
SANITARY SEWER — A network of pipes, conduit, and facilities which are
designed to carry and transmit sanitary sewage to either the receiving
works of an adjoining municipality or Monroe County Pure Waters; and to
which discharge of surface water or groundwater is expressly prohibited.
§ 180-25 PENFIELD CODE § 180-25
1:186
SEWER DISTRICT(S) — A geographic boundary, including one or more
parcels of land, established by the Town Board expressly for the purpose
of providing sanitary sewer service, maintenance, inspection, renovations
and/or improvements as required; and given the authority to levy charges
associated with these operations or indebtedness associated therewith.
STICK TESTING — A clear hollow tube that is inserted into trap to capture
a portion of its contents to determine the contents and amounts present.
TEST PORT — A location where test sampling of GT discharges can be made
prior to the combination with other sanitary discharges from the use. This
location shall be located as close to the GT discharge end as practical and
prior to the location where the contents enter the sewer district(s) sanitary
sewer system.
25% RULE — A system which traps grease and sediment should only occupy
a maximum of 25% of the total GT depth.
USER — The entity with a connection to the sewer district(s) sanitary sewer
collection system that is required to install appropriately sized equipment
which provides the specified level of separation and removal of substances
described in § 180-25.
§ 180-26. Grease traps and oil/water separators.
A. Commercial and/or industrial users involved in the handling,
preparation and serving of food shall provide appropriately sized
grease traps (GT) as approved by the ADR, which shall provide effective
removal of fats, oils and grease from the sanitary discharge.
B. Sewer users involved in repair, maintenance or washing of automobiles,
machinery or equipment shall provide appropriately sized OWS and
SGT as approved by the ADR, which shall provide proper and effective
separation and collection of oils or grease and/or grit or sand or other
sediment from the sanitary discharge. These receptacles can either be
separate, with the SGT upstream of the OWS, or combined with the
OWS, if appropriately sized and configured.
C. All interceptors or traps shall be of a type and capacity as approved by
the ADR and shall be located so as to be readily and easily accessible for
routine cleaning and inspection. Such traps shall be constructed of
impervious materials capable of withstanding H-20 vehicle wheel
loading, gas and water tight and equipped with easily removable
covers. All GT, OWS and SGT shall be constructed and maintained by
the user at its own expense and in continuously efficient operation at all
times.
D. It shall be the obligation of the user and/or his/her representative to
properly size an appropriate GT, OWS and SGT for the application.
Approval of said equipment by the ADR does not in any way constitute a
guarantee that the equipment will function in the manner described by
the manufacturer; nor shall it relieve the user from its obligations under
this article to provide appropriate separation and/or removal of
§ 180-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 180-26
1:187
§ 180-27. Required connections.
§ 180-28. Sizing and arrangement of outside grease traps.
substances described in § 180-25, or enlarging or otherwise modifying
such facilities to accomplish the intended purpose.
A. Commercial and/or industrial users involved in the handling,
preparation, cooking, and serving of food shall have a separate system
of kitchen waste piping which discharges directly to an appropriately
sized GT.
B. The following fixtures shall discharge to a GT:
(1) All wash sinks.
(2) Vegetable prep sinks. If a disposer or chopper is utilized, a separate
particle separator shall be utilized upstream of the drainage point
to the kitchen drainage system.
(3) Floor (mop) sinks.
(4) Floor drains.
(5) Dishwashers.
(6) Outside grease receptacles, slab drains (covered).
C. A test port or cleanout shall be present on the discharge side of all GT
and upstream of the connection point to the main sanitary lateral.
A. A minimum one-thousand-gallon capacity exterior GT shall be installed
for all new commercial kitchen installations.
B. The exterior GT and piping shall be configured so that:
(1) The inlet and outlet compartment of the GT shall have properly
functioning flow distribution baffles, as shown on the GT detail
within the Town specifications.
(2) The inlet baffle shall be set at 12 inches off the bottom of the GT;
the outlet baffle shall be set 18 inches off the bottom of the GT
compartment.
(3) The GT has a twenty-four-inch maintenance opening positioned
over the inlet baffle and outlet baffle, which are to remain easily
accessible for inspection by the ADR.
(4) The discharge piping includes a test port immediately downstream
of the GT discharge pipe for sampling purposes.
(5) Separate drain lines serve all of the kitchen fixtures. Toilets,
urinals, and other sanitary fixtures shall not drain through the GT.
§ 180-26 PENFIELD CODE § 180-28
1:188
§ 180-29. Renovations or upgrades.
§ 180-30. Grease trap maintenance criteria.
(6) Garbage disposals or choppers shall not drain through the GT, but
shall have a separate particle or sediment removal trap.
(7) All waste shall enter the GT through the inlet pipe only.
(8) In vehicular traffic areas, the GT shall be designed to have a
minimum H-20 top slab and cover rating.
(9) Each GT shall be installed and remain easily accessible for
inspection, cleaning and removal of grease accumulation. The
location of the GT shall be approved by the ADR.
(10) Each GT shall serve only one facility.
A. Any user making application for a building permit to renovate, modify
or upgrade its restaurant or food service facility shall be required to
upgrade its FOG compliance equipment.
(1) Any new commercial kitchen or modification to an existing
commercial kitchen without appropriate GT provisions shall be
required to provide an appropriately sized GT, in compliance with
the sizing rules and regulations contained herein.
(2) Any modifications to an existing kitchen having an existing GT, or
modifications to an existing restaurant having an existing kitchen
with a GT installation, shall demonstrate that the existing GT is
appropriately sized, in good working order and functioning
properly.
B. In either of these cases, the user or permittee shall be required to
install a test port on the discharge side of the GT for measurement of
FOG concentrations.
A. Any GT with a surface FOG cake of six inches in thickness or greater or
a bottom sediment layer of greater than 12 inches is considered to be
out of compliance and shall be immediately cleaned. This requirement
shall be checked by stick test.
B. All users shall service their GT by pumping, cleaning and backwash as
often as necessary so as to keep the GT in compliance. Such service
shall include complete removal of GT contents, in lieu of skimming the
top of the grease layer only. Thorough cleaning of the GT shall include
the removal of grease and scum from the inner walls and baffles and
complete removal of sediment from the bottom of the GT.
C. The user/manager of a restaurant facility shall designate an individual/
employee who shall be responsible for checking the function of the GT.
This person will initially establish the regularity of GT maintenance.
§ 180-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 180-30
1:189
§ 180-31. Authority to enter facilities, inspect records and sample
discharges.
Pursuant to this article, the ADR is granted the right to enter any business,
without announcement or appointment, for the express purpose of
reviewing records pertaining to the user's GT maintenance, to inspect
equipment or sample any discharges emanating from the establishment.
§ 180-32. Discharge limitations.
§ 180-33. Best management practices.
To ensure that the GT remains in good working order, there are several
best management practices (BMP) that should be followed to reduce
maintenance costs and avoid enforcement.
The user/manager is responsible for keeping all GT maintenance
records which demonstrate regular pumping and cleaning of the GT.
D. These records shall indicate dates pumped, amounts pumped, the
hauler, and destination of pumped materials. These records shall be
available for review by the ADR upon inspection. Missing, incomplete or
no records constitute a violation of this article.
A. Users with FOG discharge concentrations greater than 140 mg/l shall
be considered in violation of this article.
B. GT shall be inspected by the ADR on a periodic basis, but no less than
every six months. GT found in violation shall be inspected by the ADR
more frequently.
C. Users whose GT is found out of compliance with this article shall be
given written notice by the ADR to correct the violation within two
weeks. If the violation is not corrected by the user within two weeks of
written notice or if this is a repeat violation, the user may be referred
for enforcement action.
D. No person shall discharge to the public sewer system any nondomestic
waste from holding tanks, sludge or skimmings from the cleaning or
pumping of GT or oil water separator and grease traps to any of the
district(s)-owned collection points.
A. Prevent the utilization of disposal for food waste that is high in fat
content. These products can be disposed of in approved garbage bins.
B. Recycle used cooking oils when possible or place them safely in the
trash.
C. The total contents of the GT shall be removed on a regular basis or as
needed to prevent problems in the system.
D. Repairs shall be made promptly.
§ 180-30 PENFIELD CODE § 180-33
1:190
§ 180-34. Enforcement; penalties for offenses.
Repeat violations may be cause for revocation of special use permits for
operation, monetary penalties or both.
E. Keep GT accessible to allow for periodic inspection and maintenance.
F. It is recommended that a dish-washing machine not be the last fixture
on the line which is connected to the GT.
G. Waste grease from fryers is considered recyclable oil and grease. All
users shall have waste grease containers to store recyclable oil and
grease. Users are encouraged to contract with licensed renderers to
remove the collected waste oil and grease and haul it to the renderer's
processing plant.
H. Users are encouraged to become familiar with their GT function, and
promote the above practices within their organization.
§ 180-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 180-34
1:191
Chapter 187
SOLID WASTE
§ 180-34 PENFIELD CODE § 180-34
1:192
ARTICLE I
Garbage and Refuse Control
[Adopted 6-7-1954; amended in its entirety 12-16-2015 by L.L. No.
3-2015]
§ 187-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to promote the health, safety and general
welfare of the Town of Penfield by regulating the disposal of garbage, ashes,
rubbish, or other waste materials.
§ 187-2. Hauling garbage or refuse.
§ 187-3. Garbage and refuse equipment.
§ 187-4. Garbage accumulations prohibited.
No person shall allow accumulations of garbage, offal, or noisome
substances upon premises owned or occupied by him.
A. No person shall bring into the Town of Penfield garbage, offal, refuse or
other organic or inorganic waste products, except manure or fertilizer
to be used for agricultural purposes.
B. No person shall engage in the business of collecting garbage, offal,
ashes, refuse, rubbish or noisome substances without proof of being a
licensed hauler by the New York State Department of Environmental
Conservation in accordance with applicable NYS environmental
conservation laws.
C. In addition to those conditions set forth by the NYS Department of
Environmental Conservation, licensed waste haulers shall be required
to utilize necessary vehicle covers and be equipped so that no part of
the load shall blow, leak or spill into the environment, including waste
materials that are carried in conveyance receptacles.
A. Every owner, lessee or occupant of any building, premises or place of
business within the Town of Penfield shall provide or cause to be
provided, and at all times keep, suitable and sufficient receptacles for
receiving and holding offal, garbage, ashes, refuse, rubbish or noisome
substances that may accumulate or be used upon said premises.
B. No such receptacles shall be kept near any public place longer than
may be necessary for the removal of the contents thereof. All
receptacles used for the reception of garbage and noisome substances
shall be provided with proper covers and such receptacles shall at all
times be securely closed.
§ 187-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 187-5
1:193
§ 187-5. Dumping of offal, garbage, ashes, or other noisome
substances regulated.
No person or business shall dump or deposit, or no property shall be used
for the dumping, or deposition of offal, garbage, ashes, papers, refuse,
rubbish or noisome substances within the Town of Penfield.
§ 187-6. Personnel.
This article shall be administered by the Code Enforcement Officer or
authorized official.
§ 187-7. Penalties for offenses.
A violation of any of the provisions of this article or the refusal or failure to
comply with any of the provisions thereof or with any order issued pursuant
to the provisions of this article shall be a violation and shall subject the
violator to a fine not to exceed $500 or imprisonment for a period not to
exceed 15 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment, or to a penalty
of $500 to be recovered by the Town of Penfield in a civil action. Every
day that such violation, disobedience, omission, neglect or refusal shall
continue shall be deemed a separate offense. In addition to the remedies
hereinabove set forth, the Town Board may institute any appropriate action
or proceeding to prevent the continued violation of the provisions of this
article or of any order issued pursuant thereto.
§ 187-8. Repeal of existing ordinances.
Each and every provision of the Sanitation and Drainage Ordinance of
the Town of Penfield adopted July 1947, and the amendments thereto,
together with § 117.4 of the Building Code of the Town of Penfield, are
hereby repealed, except that this article does not repeal, abrogate or impair
conditions now existing or permits previously issued relating to the matters
covered by said repealed ordinances.
§ 187-5 PENFIELD CODE § 187-8
1:194
ARTICLE II
Recycling
[Adopted 12-4-1991 by L.L. No. 3-1991; amended in its entirety
12-16-2015 by L.L. No. 3-2015]
§ 187-9. Findings.
The Town of Penfield finds that:
§ 187-10. Authority and purpose.
This article is adopted pursuant to Chapter 541 of the Laws of 1976, as
amended, and Chapter 552 of the Laws of 1980 of the State of New York,3
as amended, for the following purposes:
§ 187-11. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ADMINISTRATOR — The Solid Waste Administrator of Monroe County.
AUTHORIZED HAULER — Specifically, those persons authorized by Monroe
County and/or the Monroe County Department of Environmental Services
to collect and transport recyclable materials generated or originated within
the county.
AUTHORIZED RECYCLING FACILITY OR FACILITIES — A permitted or
specifically exempt facility or facilities for processing, reprocessing and/
or recycling recyclable materials specified in the regulations promulgated
pursuant to § 347-31A of the Monroe County Solid Waste Reuse and
A. Removal of certain materials from the solid waste stream will decrease
the flow of solid waste to landfills, aid in the conservation of valuable
resources, and reduce the required capacity of existing and proposed
resource facilities.
B. The New York Solid Waste Management Act of 1988 requires that
municipalities adopt a local law or ordinance by September 1, 1992, to
require that solid waste which has been left for collection or which is
delivered by the generator of such waste to a solid waste management
facility shall be separated into recyclable, reusable or other
components for which economic markets for alternate uses exist.
A. To institute a plan for the management of recyclable materials
generated or originated in the Town of Penfield, to promote the safety,
health and well-being of persons and property within the Town of
Penfield; and
B. To implement the express policy of the State of New York encouraging
solid waste reduction through recycling.
3. Editor's Note: See General Municipal Law § 120-aa.
§ 187-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 187-11
1:195
Recycling Local Law. This term shall exclude incineration facilities, wasteto-
energy facilities and landfills.
CONTAINER — A county-provided blue box container with a county logo for
recyclable materials or any other durable container for recyclable materials
readily identifiable by the authorized hauler as a container for recycling
materials.
COUNTY — Monroe County.
EXECUTIVE — The County Executive of Monroe County.
FACILITY — Any solid waste management-resource recovery facility
employed beyond the initial solid waste collection process which is to
be used, occupied or employed for or is incidental to the receiving,
transporting, storage, processing or disposal of solid waste or the recovery
by any means of any material or energy product or resource therefrom,
including recycling centers, transfer stations, processing systems; resource
recovery facilities, sanitary landfills, plants and facilities for composting or
landspreading of solid wastes, secure land burial facilities, reprocessing
and recycling facilities, surface impoundments and waste oil storage,
incinerators, and other solid waste disposal reduction or conversion
facilities.
HAZARDOUS WASTE —
OTHER RECOVERABLE MATERIALS — Any material, substance, byproduct,
compound, or any other item generated or originated within the
county and separated from solid waste at the point of generation for
separate collection, sale, external reuse or reprocessing and/or disposition
other than by disposal in landfills, sewage treatment plants or incinerators.
Other recoverable materials do not include recyclable materials as defined
herein.
PERSON — Any natural person, partnership, association, joint venture,
corporation, estate, trust, association, county, city, town, village, school
district, improvement district, governmental entity or other legal entity.
RECYCLABLE MATERIALS — Include, but are not limited to, the following:
Any "hazardous waste" as defined under the Resource Conservation
and Recovery Act, 42 U.S.C. § 6901 et seq., or "hazardous substance"
as defined under the Comprehensive Environmental Response,
Compensation and Liability Act, 42 U.S.C. § 9601 et seq., or "hazardous
waste" as defined under New York Environmental Conservation Law
§ 27-0901 et seq., as each such law may be amended from time to
time, and the regulations promulgated thereunder, and any analogous
or succeeding federal, state or local law, rule or regulation and any
regulations promulgated thereunder; and
A.
Any other material which any governmental agency or unit having
appropriate jurisdiction shall determine from time to time cannot be
processed at the facility because it is harmful, toxic or dangerous.
B.
A. Containers.
§ 187-11 PENFIELD CODE § 187-11
1:196
Aluminum: aluminum products and containers fabricated primarily
of aluminum and commonly used for soda, beer, beverages or other
food or drink products and other aluminum products.
(1)
Glass food and beverage containers: new and used glass food and
beverage containers which have been rinsed and are free of food
contamination, including clear (flint), green and brown (amber)
colored glass bottles. Glass shall not include ceramics, plate glass,
auto glass, Pyrex, leaded glass, mirrored glass or flat glass.
(2)
Metal cans: containers fabricated primarily of steel or tin, or
bimetal cans of steel, tin and/or aluminum, but not including
aluminum cans.
(3)
Plastics: including high-density polyethylene (HDPE), low-density
polyethylene (LDPE), polystyrene, and polyethylene terephthalate
(PET); commonly used for soda, milk and other containers.
(4)
Paper.
Boxboard: wood-pulp-based material which is usually smooth on
both sides but with no corrugated center; excludes material with
wax coating.
(1)
Corrugated: wood-pulp-based material which is usually smooth on
both sides with a corrugated center; commonly used for boxes;
excludes material with wax coating.
(2)
High-grade paper: white and colored office bond, duplicating
paper, computer paper, and other high-quality paper.
(3)
(4) Magazines: magazines, glossy catalogs, and other glossy paper.
Newsprint: common, inexpensive machine-finished paper made
chiefly from wood pulp and used for newspapers. This term
excludes magazines.
(5)
B.
Other.
Construction and demolition debris: material resulting from the
construction, renovation, equipping, remodeling, repair and
demolition of structures and roads; and material consisting of
vegetation resulting from land clearing and grubbing, utility line
maintenance and seasonal and storm-related cleanup. Such
material includes, but is not limited to, bricks, concrete and other
masonry materials, soil, rock, wood, wall coverings, plaster,
drywall, plumbing fixtures, nonasbestos insulation, roofing
shingles, asphaltic pavement, glass, plastics, electrical wiring and
components, carpeting, foam padding, linoleum, and metals that
are incidental to any of the above.
(1)
Large appliances: stoves, refrigerators, dishwashers, dryers,
washing machines, water heaters and other large appliances and
(2)
C.
§ 187-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 187-11
1:197
RECYCLING or RECYCLED — Any method, technique or process utilized to
separate, process, modify, convert, treat or otherwise prepare solid waste
so that its component materials or substances may be beneficially used or
reused as raw materials.
SOLID WASTE — All putrescible and nonputrescible solid wastes generated
or originated within the county, including, but not limited to, materials
or substances discarded or rejected, whether as being spent, useless,
worthless or in excess to the owners at the time of such discard or rejection
or for any other reason, or are being accumulated, stored, or physically,
chemically or biologically treated prior to being discarded, have served
their intended use, or are a manufacturing by-product, including, but not
limited to, garbage, refuse, and other discarded solid materials, including
solid waste materials, resulting from industrial, commercial and
agricultural operations and from community activities, sludge from air or
water pollution control facilities or water supply treatment facilities,
rubbish, ashes, contained gaseous material, incinerator residue, demolition
and construction debris and offal, but not including sewage and other highly
diluted water-carried materials or substances and those in gaseous form, or
hazardous waste as defined in this article.
SOURCE SEPARATION — The segregation of recyclable materials and other
recoverable materials from solid waste at the point of generation for
separate collection, sale or other disposition.
WASTE STREAM REDUCTION PROGRAM — Includes source separation,
recycling programs, changes to the packaging portion of the waste stream
to reduce solid waste generated, the activities and enterprises of scrap
dealers, processors and consumers and other programs designed to reduce
the volume of solid waste or enhance reclamation and recovery of solid
waste or recyclable materials otherwise destined for the municipal waste
stream. For purposes of this definition, such reduction programs shall not
include the processing of waste for incineration or disposal by other means.
§ 187-12. Source separation required.
scrap metal, and excluding air conditioners, microwaves and
televisions.
(3) Wood waste: including logs, pallets and other wood materials.
Yard waste: grass clippings, leaves, branches up to four inches in
diameter, and other like vegetative garden materials.
(4)
A. Solid waste generated or originated within the Town of Penfield which
has been left for collection or which is delivered by the generator to a
facility shall be disposed of as follows:
(1) Prior to initial collection or transport, such solid waste shall be
source separated into recyclable, reusable or other components for
which economic markets exist as provided in the Monroe County
Solid Waste Reuse and Recycling Regulations.
§ 187-11 PENFIELD CODE § 187-12
1:198
§ 187-13. Collection of recyclables placed at curbside.
§ 187-14. Authorized haulers.
(2) Recyclable materials shall not be commingled with other solid
waste during collection, transportation or storage following
collection. The County Administrator may grant such exemptions
as he/she determines are in the public interest when such
individuals demonstrate an inability to comply pursuant to
application made pursuant to applicable laws, rules and
regulations.
(3) All recyclable materials generated or originated within the Town of
Penfield must be delivered to an authorized recycling facility or
handled through a waste stream reduction program.
(4) No authorized recycling facility or waste stream reduction program
shall receive recyclable materials generated or originated within
the Town of Penfield except those materials permitted by law.
B. Disposal of solid waste which is barred from all authorized recycling
facilities by rules, regulations or orders promulgated pursuant to this
article, the Monroe County Solid Waste Reuse and Recycling Law, or by
any other law, regulation or ordinance shall not otherwise be regulated
by this article.
C. No hazardous waste may be delivered to an authorized recycling
facility.
A. Only persons who are acting under authority of the county or an
authorized hauler shall collect, pick up, remove or cause to be
collected, picked up or removed any solid waste recyclable materials so
placed for collection; each such unauthorized collection, pickup or
removal shall constitute a separate violation of this article; provided,
however, where the county or an authorized hauler has refused to
collect certain recyclable materials because they have not been
separated, placed or treated in accordance with the provisions of this
article or the Monroe County Solid Waste Reuse and Recycling Law, the
person responsible for initially placing those materials for collection
may and shall remove those materials from any curb, sidewalk or street
side.
B. Nothing herein shall prevent any person from making arrangements for
the private collection, sale or donation of recyclable materials; provided
that recyclable materials to be privately collected, sold or donated shall
not be placed curbside on or immediately preceding the day for
collection of such recyclable materials. Any and all recyclable materials
placed in a county-supplied container at curbside or any designated
collection place shall immediately become the property of the county.
§ 187-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 187-14
1:199
§ 187-15. Enforcement; penalties for offenses.
A. All authorized haulers must enter into an authorized hauler contract
with the county.
B. An authorized hauler sticker shall be prominently displayed on each
vehicle operated by or on behalf of the authorized hauler and/or
documentary evidence of such authorized hauler status must be
available for inspection within each such vehicle.
C. All authorized haulers shall indemnify and hold harmless the Town of
Penfield for any pending, threatened or actual claims, liability or
expenses arising from waste disposal by the authorized hauler in
violation of this article.
D. Authorized haulers shall offer collection services for all recyclable
materials to all residential customers for whom they provide solid waste
collection services at the same times and on the same days as services
are provided to their customers for solid waste collection.
E. Each hauler shall develop and submit for county approval a generic
collection plan for collection recyclable materials from its commercial,
industrial and institutional customers as described in the Monroe
County Solid Waste Reuse and Recycling Law, Chapter 347, Part 2,
§ 347-36 of the County Code.
F. Authorized haulers shall not accept for collection solid waste which has
not been source-separated in conformity with the regulations
promulgated under Monroe County's Solid Waste Reuse and Recycling
Law.
A. Inspections and notices.
(1) All portions of vehicles and containers used to haul, transport, or
dispose of recyclable materials, including such containers placed
outside, shall be subject to inspection to ascertain compliance with
this article, the County Solid Waste Reuse and Recycling Law and
the rules, regulations or orders promulgated pursuant to the
county law, by any police officer, peace officer, code compliance
official, and any other public official designated by the county or
Town.
(2) Police officers, peace officers, code compliance officials and the
specified public servants are hereby authorized and directed to
issue warnings and notices for violations of this article.
B. Penalties.
(1) Any person violating this article shall be subject to a warning by the
police officer, peace officer, code compliance official, or any other
authorized official of the Town of Penfield for the first violation.
§ 187-14 PENFIELD CODE § 187-15
1:200
§ 187-16. When effective.
The provisions of this article shall be effective on the date the County Solid
Waste Reuse and Recycling Local Law becomes effective and upon the date
of filing with the New York State Secretary of State, whichever date is later.
(2) Any person violating this article shall be subject to a fine not to
exceed $50 for the second violation.
(3) Any person violating this article shall be subject to a fine not to
exceed $1,000 for the third or any additional violations.
(4) The Town of Penfield may commence a civil action and/or proceed
to enjoin, determine and collect a fine or otherwise remedy a
violation of this article.
(5) Any penalties or damages recovered or imposed under this article
are in addition to any other remedies available at law or equity.
(6) No penalties, fines, civil sanctions or other enforcement actions,
except warnings, will be commenced prior to June 1, 1992, in order
to permit persons regulated hereunder to come into compliance
with this article.
§ 187-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 187-16
1:201
Chapter 194
STORM SEWERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Sewers — See Ch. 180.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 198.
Zoning and land use — See Ch. 250.
§ 187-16 PENFIELD CODE § 187-16
1:202
ARTICLE I
Illicit Discharges and Connections
[Adopted 12-19-2007 by L.L. No. 5-2007]
§ 194-1. Purpose and intent.
The purpose and intent of this article is to ensure the health, safety and
general welfare of citizens, and protect and enhance the water quality of
watercourses and water bodies in a manner pursuant to and consistent with
the Federal Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.) by:
§ 194-2. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMPs) — Schedules of activities,
prohibitions of practices, general good housekeeping practices, pollution
prevention and educational practices, maintenance procedures and other
management practices to prevent or reduce the discharge of pollutants
directly or indirectly to stormwater, receiving waters or stormwater
conveyance systems. BMPs also include treatment practices, operating
procedures and practices to control site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or
water disposal or drainage from raw materials storage.
CLEAN WATER ACT — The federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C.
§ 1251 et seq.) and any subsequent amendments thereto.
CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY — Activities subject to SPDES construction
permits. Currently these include construction projects resulting in land
disturbance of one acre or more. Such activities include, but are not limited
to, clearing and grubbing, grading, excavating and demolition.
DISCHARGER — Any individual, association, organization, partnership,
firm, corporation or other entity discharging stormwater to the municipal
storm sewer.
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS — Any material, including any substance, waste
or combination thereof, which because of its quantity, concentration or
physical, chemical or infectious characteristics may cause or significantly
contribute to a substantial present or potential hazard to human health,
safety, property or the environment when improperly treated, stored,
transported, disposed of or otherwise managed.
ILLEGAL DISCHARGE — Any direct or indirect non-stormwater discharge
to the storm drain system, except as exempted in § 194-7 of this article and
A. Reducing pollutants in stormwater discharges to the maximum extent
practicable;
B. Prohibiting non-stormwater discharges to the storm drain system; and
C. Prohibiting stormwater discharges to sanitary sewers.
§ 194-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 194-2
1:203
any stormwater discharges to the sanitary sewer except as permitted by the
Town of Penfield.
ILLICIT CONNECTIONS — Either of the following:
INDUSTRIAL ACTIVITY — Activities subject to SPDES industrial permits as
defined in 40 CFR 122.26(b)(14).
INDUSTRIAL WASTES — Any liquid, gaseous or solid substance or a
combination thereof which is an undesired by-product waste resulting from
any process of industry, manufacturing, trade or business or from the
development or recovery of any natural resources, except garbage.
NON-STORMWATER DISCHARGE — Any discharge to the storm drain
system that is not composed entirely of stormwater.
PERSON — Any individual, association, organization, partnership, firm,
corporation or other entity recognized by law and acting as either the owner
or as the owner's agent.
POLLUTANT — Anything which causes or contributes to pollution.
Pollutants may include, but are not limited to: paints, varnishes and
solvents; oil and other automotive fluids; nonhazardous liquid and solid
wastes and yard wastes; refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter or other discarded
or abandoned objects, articles and accumulations, so that same may cause
or contribute to pollution; floatables; pesticides, herbicides and fertilizers;
hazardous substances and wastes; sewage, fecal coliform and pathogens;
dissolved and particulate metals; animal wastes; wastes and residues that
result from constructing a building or structure; and noxious or offensive
matter of any kind.
PREMISES — Any building, lot, parcel of land or portion of land, whether
improved or unimproved, including adjacent sidewalks and parking strips.
PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM — A facility serving one or more
parcels of land or residential households, or a private, commercial or
institutional facility, that treats sewage or other liquid wastes for discharge
into the groundwater of New York State, except where a permit for such
Any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface, which
allows an illegal discharge to enter the storm drain system, including,
but not limited to, any conveyances which allow any non-stormwater
discharge including sewage, process wastewater and wash water to
enter the storm drain system and any connection to the storm drain
system from indoor drains and sinks, regardless of whether said drain
or connection had been previously allowed, permitted or approved by a
government agency.
A.
Any drain or conveyance connected from a commercial or industrial
land use to the storm drain system which has not been documented
in plans, maps or equivalent records and approved by the Town of
Penfield.
B.
Any stormwater discharge to a sanitary sewer unless approved by the
Town of Penfield.
C.
§ 194-2 PENFIELD CODE § 194-2
1:204
a facility is required under the applicable provisions of Article 17 of the
Environmental Conservation Law.
SANITARY SEWER — A sewer which transports sewage and to which
stormwater, surface water and groundwaters are not intentionally admitted.
SEWAGE — A combination of the water-carried wastes from residences,
business buildings, institutions, and industrial establishments, together
with such groundwater, surface water and stormwater as may be
inadvertently present. The admixture of sewage with industrial wastes as
defined above or other wastes also shall be considered "sewage" within the
meaning of this definition.
SPECIAL CONDITIONS —
STATE POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (SPDES)
STORMWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT — A permit issued by NYSDEC [under
authority delegated pursuant to 33 U.S.C. § 1342(b)] that authorizes the
Discharge compliance with water quality standards: The condition that
applies where a municipality has been notified that the discharge of
stormwater authorized under its municipal separate storm sewer (MS4)
permit may have caused or has the reasonable potential to cause or
contribute to the violation of an applicable water quality standard.
Under this condition, the Town of Penfield must take all necessary
actions to ensure future discharges do not cause or contribute to a
violation of water quality standards.
A.
303(d) listed waters: The condition in the Town of Penfield's MS4
permit that applies where the Town of Penfield discharges to a 303(d)
listed water. Under this condition, the stormwater management
program must ensure no increase of the listed pollutant of concern to
the 303(d) listed water.
B.
Total maximum daily load (TMDL) strategy: The condition in the Town
of Penfield's MS4 permit where a TMDL including requirements for
control of stormwater discharges has been approved by EPA for a water
body or watershed into which the Town of Penfield discharges. If the
discharge from the Town of Penfield did not meet the TMDL stormwater
allocation prior to September 10, 2003, the Town of Penfield was
required to modify its stormwater management program to ensure that
reduction of the pollutant of concern specified in the TMDL is achieved.
C.
The condition in the Town of Penfield's MS4 permit that applies if a
TMDL is approved in the future by EPA for any water body or watershed
into which the Town of Penfield discharges. Under this condition, the
Town of Penfield must review the applicable TMDL to see if it includes
requirements for control of stormwater discharges. If the Town of
Penfield is not meeting the TMDL stormwater allocations, the Town
of Penfield must, within six months of the TMDL's approval, modify
its stormwater management program to ensure that reduction of the
pollutant of concern specified in the TMDL is achieved.
D.
§ 194-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 194-2
1:205
discharge of pollutants to waters of the United States, whether the permit
is applicable on an individual or general area-wide basis.
STORM DRAINAGE SYSTEM — Publicly owned facilities by which
stormwater is collected and/or conveyed, including, but not limited to, any
roads with drainage systems, municipal streets, gutters, curbs, inlets, piped
storm drains, pumping facilities, retention and detention basins, natural and
human-made or -altered drainage channels (i.e., ditches), reservoirs and
other drainage structures.
STORMWATER — Any surface flow, runoff or drainage consisting entirely
of water from any form of natural precipitation and resulting from such
precipitation.
STORMWATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PLAN — A document which
describes the best management practices and activities to be implemented
by a person to identify sources of pollution or contamination at a site
and the actions to eliminate or reduce pollutant discharges to stormwater,
stormwater conveyance systems and/or receiving waters to the maximum
extent practicable.
303(d) LIST — A list of all surface waters in the state for which beneficial
uses of the water (drinking, recreation, aquatic habitat and industrial use)
are impaired by pollutants, prepared periodically by the Department of
Environmental Conservation as required by Section 303(d) of the Clean
Water Act. 303(d) listed water are estuaries, lakes and streams that fall
short of state surface water quality standards and are not expected to
improve within the next two years.
TOTAL MAXIMUM DAILY LOAD (TMDL) — The maximum amount of a
pollutant to be allowed to be released into a water body so as not to impair
uses of the water, allocated among the sources of that pollutant.
WASTEWATER — Any water or other liquid, other than uncontaminated
stormwater, discharged from a facility.
WATERCOURSE — Waters of the United States as defined at 40 CFR 122.2.
WATERS OF THE UNITED STATES — Surface watercourses and water
bodies as defined at 40 CFR 122.2, including all natural waterways and
definite channels and depressions in the earth that may carry water, even
though such waterways may only carry water during rains and storms and
may not carry stormwater at and during all times and seasons.
§ 194-3. Applicability.
This article shall apply to all water entering the storm drain system
generated on any developed and undeveloped lands unless explicitly
exempted by the Town of Penfield. This article also applies to stormwater
entering the sanitary sewers.
§ 194-2 PENFIELD CODE § 194-4
1:206
§ 194-4. Administration.
The Town of Penfield shall administer, implement and enforce the provisions
of this article. Any powers granted or duties imposed upon the Town of
Penfield may be delegated in writing by the Supervisor of the Town of
Penfield to persons or entities acting in the beneficial interest of or in the
employ of the Town.
§ 194-5. Disclaimer.
The standards set forth herein and promulgated pursuant to this article are
minimum standards; therefore, this article does not intend nor imply that
compliance by any person will ensure that there will not be contamination,
pollution nor unauthorized discharge of pollutants.
§ 194-6. Powers and authority of inspectors.
A. Town of Penfield authorized officials bearing proper credentials and
identification shall be permitted to enter all properties for the purposes
of inspection, records examination and copying, observation,
measurements, sampling, and testing pertinent to discharge or
potential to discharge and for repair and maintenance to the municipal
separate storm sewer system. [Amended 12-16-2015 by L.L. No.
3-2015]
B. Information and data on a nondomestic source obtained from reports,
questionnaires, permit applications, permits and monitoring programs
and from inspections shall be available to the public or other
governmental agency without restriction, unless the nondomestic
source specifically requests and is able to demonstrate to the
satisfaction of the Town of Penfield that the release of such information
would divulge information, processes or methods of production entitled
to protection as confidential information according to the criteria set
forth in 40 CFR 2.208 and 2.302, as may be amended from time to time.
When requested by the person furnishing a report, the portions of a
report which might disclose confidential information shall not be made
available for inspection by the public. Stormwater constituents and
characteristics will not be recognized as confidential information.
Information accepted by the Town of Penfield as confidential shall be
made available upon request to any agency meeting the requirements
of Section 308 of the Clean Water Act, including officers, employees or
authorized representatives of the United States concerned with
carrying out the Clean Water Act, bound by the confidentiality rules in
40 CFR Part 2, as may be amended from time to time.
C. While performing the necessary work on private properties referred to
in Subsection A, the Town of Penfield shall observe all safety rules
applicable to the premises established by the person, and the person
shall be held harmless for injury or death to the authorized
representative(s), and the Town of Penfield shall indemnify the person
against loss or damage to its property by Town of Penfield employees
§ 194-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 194-6
1:207
§ 194-7. Discharge prohibitions.
and against liability claims and demands for personal injury or property
damage asserted against the person by Town of Penfield employees and
growing out of the inspection and sampling operation, except as such
may be caused by negligence or failure of the person to maintain safe
conditions.
D. Unreasonable delays in allowing the Town of Penfield access to the
premises or other interference with the activities of the Town of
Penfield shall be a violation of this article. Access to property and/or
records of a nondomestic source may not be refused on the basis that
the Town of Penfield refuses to sign any waiver, access agreement, or
similar document.
E. If the Town of Penfield has been refused access to a building, structure
or property or any part thereof, and if the Town of Penfield has
demonstrated probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of
this article or that there is a need to inspect as part of a routine
inspection program of the Town of Penfield to verify compliance with
this article or any permit or order issued hereunder, or to protect the
overall public health, safety and welfare of the community, then the
Town of Penfield will make an application to a court of competent
jurisdiction for a search and/or seizure warrant, describing therein the
specific location subject to the warrant. The warrant application shall
specify what, if anything, may be searched and/or seized on the
property described. If granted by the court, such warrant shall be
served at reasonable hours by the Town of Penfield in the company of a
uniformed officer of the law enforcement agency with jurisdiction over
the property. In the event of an emergency affecting public health and
safety, inspections may be made without the issuance of a warrant.
A. Prohibition of illegal discharges.
(1) No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged into the
municipal storm drain system or watercourses any materials,
including, but not limited to, pollutants or waters containing any
pollutants that cause or contribute to a violation of applicable
water quality standards, other than stormwater. Such activities
include failing private sewage disposal systems as defined in
§ 194-2, improper management of animal waste or any other
activity that causes or contributes to violations of the municipality's
municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) SPDES permit
authorization.
(2) Upon notification to a person that it is engaged in activities that
cause or contribute to violations of the municipality's MS4 SPDES
permit authorization, that person shall take all reasonable actions
to correct such activities such that they no longer cause or
contribute to violations of the municipality's MS4 SPDES permit
authorization.
§ 194-6 PENFIELD CODE § 194-7
1:208
B. Prohibition exceptions. The commencement, conduct or continuance of
any illegal discharge to the storm drain system is prohibited, except as
described as follows:
(1) The following discharges are exempt from discharge prohibitions
established by this article: water line flushing or other potable
water sources, landscape irrigation or lawn watering, diverted
stream flows, rising groundwater, groundwater infiltration to storm
drains, uncontaminated and non-sediment-laden pumped
groundwater, foundation or footing drains (not including active
groundwater dewatering systems), crawl space pumps, airconditioning
condensation, springs, noncommercial washing of
vehicles, natural riparian habitat or wetland flows, swimming pools
(if dechlorinated, typically less than one PPM chlorine), firefighting
activities and any other water source not containing
pollutants. Regardless of exemption, best management practices
should be implemented to reduce impacts from the above activities.
(2) Discharges specified in writing by the Town of Penfield as being
necessary to protect public health and safety.
(3) Dye testing is an allowable discharge, but requires a verbal
notification to the Town of Penfield prior to the time of the test.
(4) The prohibition shall not apply to any non-stormwater discharge
permitted under SPDES permit, waiver or waste discharge order
issued to the discharger and administered under the authority of
the New York State Department of Environmental Conservation,
provided that the discharger is in full compliance with all
requirements of the permit, waiver or order and other applicable
laws and regulations, and provided that written approval has been
granted for any discharge to the storm drain system by the Town of
Penfield.
C. Prohibition of illicit connections.
(1) The construction, use, maintenance or continued existence of illicit
connections to the storm drain system is prohibited.
(2) This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illicit
connections made in the past, regardless of whether the connection
was permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at
the time of connection.
(3) A person is considered to be in violation of this article if the person
connects a pipe or line conveying sewage to the municipal separate
storm sewer system (MS4) or allows such a connection to continue.
D. Waste disposal prohibitions. No person shall throw, deposit, leave,
maintain, keep, or permit to be thrown, deposited, left, or maintained,
in or upon any public or private property, driveway, parking area, street,
alley, sidewalk, component of the storm drainage system, or water of
§ 194-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 194-7
1:209
§ 194-8. Suspension of MS4 access.
the United States, any refuse, rubbish, yard/lawn waste, garbage, litter,
or other discarded or abandoned objects, articles, and accumulations,
so that the same may cause or contribute to pollution. Wastes deposited
in streets in proper waste receptacles for the purposes of collection are
exempted from this prohibition.
E. Prohibition against failing private sewage disposal systems. No person
shall construct or maintain any cesspool, sewage disposal system, pipe
or drain so as to expose or discharge the sewage contents or other
deleterious liquids or matter therefrom to the atmosphere or on the
ground surface or into any storm sewer or drain so as to endanger any
watercourse or body of water unless a permit for such discharge shall
have been issued by the Monroe County Department of Public Health or
by the State Department of Health or the State Department of
Environmental Conservation and such discharge shall be made in
accordance with the requirements thereof. Owners or operators of
private sewage disposal systems shall operate, maintain and inspect
such systems in accordance with the Monroe County Sanitary Code.
[Amended 12-16-2015 by L.L. No. 3-2015]
F. Prohibition of stormwater discharge to sanitary sewer. Stormwater
shall not be discharged into the sanitary sewer without written
permission to do so from the Town of Penfield.
A. Suspension due to illicit discharges in emergency situations. The Town
of Penfield may, without prior notice, suspend discharge access into the
MS4 to a person when such a suspension is necessary to stop an actual
or threatened discharge which presents or may present imminent and
substantial danger to the environment; to the health or welfare of
persons; to the storm drainage system, including but not limited to
pipes, manholes, outfall structures and storm laterals; or the waters of
the United States. If the violator fails to comply with a suspension order,
the Town of Penfield may take such steps as deemed necessary to
prevent or minimize damage to the MS4 or waters of the United States
or to minimize danger to persons.
B. Suspension due to the detection of illicit discharge.
(1) Any person discharging to the MS4 in violation of this article may
have his/her MS4 access suspended or terminated if such action
would abate or reduce an illicit discharge. The Town of Penfield will
notify a violator of the proposed suspension or termination of its
MS4 access. The violator may petition the Town of Penfield
Engineer to reconsider the suspension or termination of MS4
access by requesting a hearing.
(2) It shall be unlawful for any person to reinstate MS4 access to
premises suspended or terminated pursuant to this section,
without the prior approval of the Town of Penfield.
§ 194-7 PENFIELD CODE § 194-9
1:210
§ 194-9. Industrial or construction activity discharges.
Any person subject to an industrial or construction activity SPDES
stormwater discharge permit shall comply with all provisions of such
permit. Proof of compliance with said permit may be required in a form
acceptable to the Town of Penfield prior to discharge or as a condition of a
subdivision map, site plan, building permit, or development or improvement
plan; upon inspection of the facility; during any enforcement proceeding or
action; or for any other reasonable cause.
§ 194-10. Monitoring of discharges.
A. Applicability. This section applies to all facilities that the Town of
Penfield must inspect to enforce any provision of this article, or
whenever the Town of Penfield has cause to believe that there exists, or
potentially exists, in or upon any premises any condition which
constitutes a violation of this article.
B. Access to facilities.
(1) The Town of Penfield shall be permitted to enter and inspect, at any
time, facilities subject to regulation under this article as often as
may be necessary to determine compliance with this article. If a
discharger has security measures in force which require proper
identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the
discharger shall make the necessary arrangements to allow access
to representatives of the Town of Penfield.
(2) Facility operators shall allow the Town of Penfield ready access to
all parts of the premises for the purpose of inspection, sampling
and examination of the private storm drainage system. Persons or
facility operators must supply copies, if requested by the Town of
Penfield, of all records kept under the conditions of the SPDES
stormwater discharge permit. Persons or facility operators must
also identify the performance of any additional duties as defined by
state and federal law.
(3) The Town of Penfield shall have the right to place or position on any
permitted facility such devices as are necessary in the opinion of
the Town of Penfield to conduct monitoring and/or sampling of the
facility's discharge to the storm sewer system.
(4) The Town of Penfield has the right to require the discharger to
install monitoring equipment as necessary. The facility's sampling
and monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe
and proper operating condition by the discharger at its own
expense. All devices used to measure stormwater flow and quality
shall be calibrated as necessary and recommended by the
manufacturer to ensure their accuracy.
(5) Any temporary or permanent obstruction to the facility which
allows for unsafe access or difficulty in monitoring, inspecting or
§ 194-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 194-10
1:211
§ 194-11. Use of best management practices to prevent, control and
reduce stormwater pollutants.
sampling of the storm drainage system shall be promptly removed
by the discharger at the written or verbal request of the Town
of Penfield and shall not be replaced. All costs associated with
clearing such access restrictions shall be borne by the discharger
in full.
(6) Unreasonable delays, as determined by the Town of Penfield, in
allowing the Town of Penfield access to a facility, which is permitted
under the New York State Department of Environmental
Conservation SPDES program, for the purposes of conducting any
activity authorized or required by the permit is considered a
violation of said program and of this article.
(7) If the Town of Penfield has been refused access to any part of the
premises from which a discharge or conveyance to the storm sewer
system exists, and the Town of Penfield is able to demonstrate
probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this
article, or that there is a need to further inspect and/or sample the
private stormwater system to verify compliance with this article or
any order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public health,
safety and welfare of the community, then the Town of Penfield may
seek issuance of a search warrant from any court of competent
jurisdiction.
A. Best management practices. The Town of Penfield will adopt
requirements identifying best management practices (BMPs) for any
activity, operation or facility which may cause or contribute to pollution
or contamination of stormwater, the storm drain system or waters of the
United States. The owner or operator of a commercial or industrial
establishment shall provide, at his/her own expense, reasonable
protection from accidental discharge of prohibited materials or other
wastes into the municipal storm drain system or watercourses through
the use of structural and nonstructural BMPs. Further, any person
responsible for a property or premises, which is, or may be, the source
of an illicit discharge, may be required to implement, at said person's
expense, additional structural and nonstructural BMPs to prevent the
further discharge of pollutants to the municipal storm drainage system.
Compliance with all terms and conditions of a valid SPDES permit
authorizing the discharge of stormwater associated with industrial
activity, to the maximum extent practicable, shall be deemed
compliance with the provisions of this section. Appropriately designed
structural/nonstructural BMPs shall be included as part of a stormwater
pollution prevention plan (SWPPP) as necessary for compliance with
requirements of the SPDES permit.
B. Private sewage disposal systems. Where private sewage disposal
systems are contributing to the Town of Penfield being subject to the
special conditions as defined in § 194-2 of this article, the owner or
§ 194-10 PENFIELD CODE § 194-11
1:212
§ 194-12. Watercourse protection.
§ 194-13. Notification of spills.
Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as soon as any person
responsible for a facility or operation or responsible for emergency
response for a facility or operation has information of any known or
suspected release of materials which are resulting or may result in the
illegal discharge of pollutants into stormwater, the public or private storm
drain system or waters of the United States, said person shall take all
necessary steps to ensure the discovery, containment and cleanup of any
such release. In the event a release of hazardous materials occurs, said
person shall immediately notify the NYSDEC Region 8 Spill Response Team
and/or call the NYS Spill Hotline within the time frame established by law
as well as notify the Town of Penfield of the occurrence. In the event of
a release of nonhazardous materials, said person shall notify the Town of
operator of such private sewage disposal system shall be required to
maintain and operate the system as follows:
(1) Private sewage disposal systems should be operated, maintained
and inspected in accordance with the Monroe County Sanitary
Code.
(2) Septic tank additives shall not be used.
(3) Private sewage disposal systems shall be repaired or replaced as
follows:
(a) In accordance with Monroe County sewerage design
standards.
(b) No person shall alter, repair or extend a private sewage
disposal system unless a permit is obtained from the Town of
Penfield or Monroe County Public Health Director or an
authorized representative. [Amended 12-16-2015 by L.L.
No. 3-2015]
A. No person shall alter a stormwater practice on private or publicly
owned land such that it alters the stormwater practice from its intended
use.
B. Every person owning property through which a watercourse passes, or
such person's lessee, shall keep and maintain that part of the
watercourse within the property in a manner which prevents illicit
discharges and keeps the watercourse free of trash, debris, yard/lawn
waste, excessive vegetation and other obstacles that would pollute,
contaminate or significantly retard the flow of water through the
watercourse. In addition, the owner or lessee shall maintain existing
privately owned structures within or adjacent to a watercourse so that
such structures will not become a hazard to the use, function or
physical integrity of the watercourse.
§ 194-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 194-13
1:213
Penfield in person or by phone or facsimile no later than the next business
day. Notifications in person or by phone shall be confirmed by written
notice addressed and mailed to the Town of Penfield, 3100 Atlantic Avenue,
Penfield, NY 14526, postmarked within three business days of the date
of the in-person or phone notice. If the discharge of prohibited materials
emanates from a commercial or industrial establishment, the owner or
operator of such establishment shall also retain an on-site written record of
the discharge and the actions taken to prevent its recurrence. Such records
shall be retained for at least five years.
§ 194-14. Enforcement.
§ 194-15. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 12-16-2015 by L.L. No.
3-2015]
In addition to or as an alternative to any penalty provided herein or by law,
any violation of this article is punishable by a fine not to exceed $350 or
imprisonment for a period not to exceed 15 days, or both, for conviction
of a first offense; a second violation of this article committed within a
period of five years is punishable by a fine of not less than $350 nor more
than $700 or imprisonment for a period not to exceed 15 days, or both;
and a third or subsequent violation of this article within a period of five
years is punishable by a fine of not less than $700 nor more than $1,000
or imprisonment for a period not to exceed 15 days, or both. Each day's
continued violation shall constitute a separate additional violation.
A. Whenever the Town of Penfield finds that a person has violated a
prohibition or failed to meet a requirement of this article, the Town of
Penfield may order compliance by written notice of violation to the
responsible person. Such notice may require, without limitation:
(1) The performance of monitoring, analyses and reporting.
(2) The elimination of illicit connections or discharges.
(3) That violating discharges, practices or operations shall cease and
desist.
(4) The abatement or remediation of stormwater pollution or
contamination hazards and the restoration of any affected property.
(5) Payment of a fine to cover administrative and remediation costs.
(6) The implementation of source control or treatment BMPs.
B. If abatement of a violation and/or restoration of affected property are
required, the notice shall set forth a deadline within which such
remediation or restoration must be completed. Said notice shall further
advise that, should the violator fail to remediate or restore within the
established deadline, the work will be done by a designated
governmental agency or a contractor and the expense thereof shall be
charged to the violator.
§ 194-13 PENFIELD CODE § 194-16
1:214
§ 194-16. Appeal of notice of violation.
Any person receiving a notice of violation may appeal the determination
of the Town of Penfield. The notice of appeal must be received within 10
days from the date of the notice of violation. Hearing on the appeal before
the appropriate authority or his/her designee shall take place within 15
days from the date of receipt of the notice of appeal. The decision of the
municipal authority or his/her designee shall be made within 15 days and
be final.
§ 194-17. Enforcement measures after appeal.
If the violation has not been corrected pursuant to the requirements set
forth in the notice of violation, or, in the event of an appeal, within five
days of the decision of the municipal authority upholding the decision of
the Town of Penfield, Town representatives and/or employees may enter
upon the subject private property with the consent of the owner or with a
valid search and/or seizure warrant, and are authorized to take any and all
measures necessary to abate the violation and/or restore the property.
§ 194-18. Cost of abatement of violation.
Within 10 days after abatement of the violation, the owner of the property
will be notified of the cost of abatement, including administrative costs. The
property owner may file a written protection claim objecting to the amount
of the assessment within 10 days. If the amount due is not paid within a
timely manner as determined by the decision of the municipal authority or
by the expiration of the time in which to file an appeal, the charges shall
become a special assessment against the property and shall constitute a lien
on the property for the amount of the assessment. Any person violating any
of the provisions of this article shall become liable to the Town of Penfield
by reason of such violation.
§ 194-19. Injunctive relief.
It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision or fail to comply
with any of the requirements of this article. If a person has violated or
continues to violate the provisions of this article, the Town of Penfield may
petition for a preliminary or permanent injunction restraining the person
from activities which would create further violations or compelling the
person to perform abatement or remediation of the violation.
§ 194-20. Compensatory action.
In lieu of enforcement proceedings, penalties and remedies authorized by
this article, the Town of Penfield may impose upon a violator alternative
compensatory actions, such as storm drain stenciling, attendance at
compliance workshops, creek cleanup, etc.
§ 194-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 194-21
1:215
§ 194-21. Violations deemed public nuisance.
In addition to the enforcement processes and penalties provided, any
condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of
this article is a threat to public health, safety and welfare, and is declared
and deemed a nuisance, and may be summarily abated or restored at the
violator's expense, and/or a civil action to abate, enjoin or otherwise compel
the cessation of such nuisance may be taken.
§ 194-22. Criminal prosecution.
§ 194-23. Remedies not exclusive.
The remedies listed in this article are not exclusive of any other remedies
available under any applicable federal, state or local law, and it is within the
discretion of the Town of Penfield to seek cumulative remedies.
A. For the purposes of conferring jurisdiction upon courts and judicial
officers generally, violations of this article shall be deemed
misdemeanors and for such purpose only all provisions of law relating
to misdemeanors shall apply to such violations. Any person who has
violated or continues to violate this article shall be liable to criminal
prosecution to the fullest extent of the law and, upon conviction, shall
be guilty of a violation and subject to a penalty as set forth in § 194-15
of this article.
B. The Town of Penfield may recover all attorney fees, court costs and
other expenses associated with enforcement of this article, including
sampling and monitoring expenses.
§ 194-21 PENFIELD CODE § 194-23
1:216
Chapter 198
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND EROSION AND
SEDIMENT CONTROL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 120.
Sewers — See Ch. 180.
Storm sewers — See Ch. 194.
Waterways — See Ch. 232.
Zoning and land use — See Ch. 250.
§ 194-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 194-23
1:217

ARTICLE I
Definitions
[Adopted 12-16-2015 by L.L. No. 3-2015]
§ 198-1. Terms defined.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AGRICULTURAL ACTIVITY — The activity of an active farm, including
grazing and watering livestock, irrigating crops, harvesting crops, using
land for growing agricultural products, and cutting timber for sale, but
shall not include the operation of a dude ranch or similar operation, or the
construction of new structures associated with agricultural activities.
AGRICULTURE — The activities associated with producing crops or raising
livestock for economic gain, as further defined in 6 NYCRR 663.2(c).
APPLICANT — A property owner or agent of a property owner who has filed
an application for a land disturbance activity or stormwater management
permit.
CHANNEL — A natural or artificial watercourse with a definite bed and
banks that conducts continuously or periodically flowing water.
CLEARING — Any activity which removes the vegetative surface cover.
COUNTY — The County of Monroe.
DEDICATION — The deliberate appropriation of property by its owner for
general public use.
DESIGNATED AGENT — An individual(s) directed by the Town of Penfield
to conduct site inspections and/or perform other municipal duties.
DETENTION — The holding of natural surface water during and following a
rainfall event, or during snow melt conditions, in an area planned for such
use, in such a way that the addition of the detained water to downstream
drainageways or natural watercourses can be achieved in a controlled
manner.
DRAINAGE — The gravitational movement of water from its place of origin
via surface runoff within or outside developed channels or via subsurface
underflow.
DRAINAGE BASIN — The area drained by a watercourse; used
interchangeably with "watershed."
DRAINAGE SYSTEM — A network consisting of any combination or type of
open channels and enclosed artificial facilities and/or retention or detention
facilities employed to convey or control the runoff of natural surface waters.
EARTHWORK — Construction activities, including clearing, grading,
excavating, soil disturbance or placement of fill that result in land
disturbance.
§ 198-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 198-1
1:219
ENCROACHMENT LIMIT — The boundary of a maintenanceway easement
adjacent to a portion of a drainage system within which no building or
structure shall be erected and within which no trees, bushes or other
vegetation shall be planted or allowed to grow which will interfere with the
maintenance of the drainage channel, unless otherwise allowed, as in an
agricultural exclusion. (See EPOD requirements.)
EROSION CONTROL — Measures that minimize erosion.
EXCAVATION — The removal of sand, gravel, soil, including topsoil or other
natural deposits, by stripping, digging or any other means.
FEE IN LIEU — A payment of money in place of meeting all or part of the
stormwater performance standards required by this chapter.
FILLING — The depositing of natural or artificial material that raises the
existing grade of land or modifies the surfaces of water bodies.
FINAL STABILIZATION — All soil-disturbing activities at the site have been
completed and a uniform perennial vegetative cover with density of 80%
has been established or equivalent measures, such as the use of mulches or
geotextiles, have been employed on all unpaved areas and areas not covered
by permanent structures.
FLOODPLAIN — The area of normally dry terrain that becomes covered
with water during and after local or upstream rainstorms and/or ice melt
conditions. The floodplain for a specific watercourse may be defined in
terms of the severity of the precipitation event which causes the flooding.
Floodplains may be determined from maps prepared by the U.S. Army Corps
of Engineers, by the Federal Flood Insurance Administration (FIA) or as a
result of special engineering studies.
FLOW RATE — The quantity of water which moves past a given point in a
specified increment of time, usually measured in cubic feet per second (cfs).
GRADING —
HOTSPOT — An area where land use or activities generate highly
contaminated runoff, with concentrations of pollutants in excess of those
typically found in stormwater.
IMPERVIOUS COVER — Those surfaces that cannot effectively infiltrate
rainfall (e.g., building rooftops, pavement, sidewalks, driveways, etc.).
INFILTRATION — The process of percolating stormwater into the subsoil.
JURISDICTIONAL WETLAND — An area that is inundated or saturated by
surface water or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to
support a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil
conditions, commonly known as "hydrophytic vegetation."
The alteration of the existing grade of land through excavation or
filling.
A.
B. Excavation or fill of material, including the resulting conditions thereof.
§ 198-1 PENFIELD CODE § 198-1
1:220
LAND DISTURBANCE ACTIVITY — Construction activity, including
clearing, grading, excavating, soil disturbance or placement of fill, that
results in land disturbance of equal to or greater than one acre, or activities
disturbing less than one acre of total land area that is part of a larger
common plan of development or sale, even though multiple separate and
distinct land disturbance activities may take place at different times on
different schedules.
LANDOWNER — The legal or beneficial owner of land, including those
holding the right to purchase or lease the land, or any other person holding
proprietary rights in the land.
LETTER OF CREDIT — A document issued by a financial institution
authorized to conduct business in New York State, which guarantees the
payment of a customer's drafts for a specified period and up to a specified
amount.
LICENSED/CERTIFIED PROFESSIONAL — A person currently licensed to
practice engineering in New York State, a registered landscape architect or
a certified professional in erosion and sediment control (CPESC).
MAINTENANCE AGREEMENT — A legally recorded document that acts as
a property deed restriction, and which provides for long-term maintenance
of stormwater management practices.
NEW YORK STANDARDS AND SPECIFICATIONS FOR EROSION AND
SEDIMENT CONTROL — The most recent version of this publication, which
is commonly known as the "Blue Book."
NEW YORK STATE STORMWATER MANAGEMENT DESIGN MANUAL —
The New York State Stormwater Management Design Manual, most recent
version, including applicable updates, that serves as the official guide for
stormwater management principles, methods and practices.
OFF-SITE FACILITY — A stormwater management measure located outside
the subject property boundary.
PERFORMANCE BOND — A bond underwritten by a surety in the contract
amount to guarantee that the contractor will perform the required work
according to the contract specifications.
PHASING — Clearing a parcel of land in distinct sections, with the
stabilization of each section before the clearing of the next.
QUALIFIED PROFESSIONAL — A person knowledgeable in the principles
and practices of erosion and sediment controls, such as a licensed
professional engineer, registered landscape architect, certified professional
in erosion and sediment control (CPESC), or soil scientist.
RECHARGE — The replenishment of underground water reserves.
REDEVELOPMENT — Reconstruction or modification to any existing,
previously developed land such as residential, commercial, industrial,
institutional or road/highway, which involves soil disturbance.
Redevelopment is distinguished from development or new development
in that new development refers to construction on land where there had
§ 198-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 198-1
1:221
not been previous construction. Redevelopment specifically applies to
construction areas with new impervious surface.
RESPONSIBLE INDIVIDUAL — As related to inspection of construction
site erosion controls, any person with an in-depth understanding of the
principles and practices of erosion and sediment control, stormwater
management and the proper procedures and techniques for the installation
and maintenance of erosion and sediment control features.
SEDIMENTATION; SILTATION — The deposition of soil carried by
floodwaters.
SEDIMENT CONTROL — Measures that prevent eroded sediment from
leaving the site.
SILVICULTURAL ACTIVITY — Activities that control the establishment,
growth, composition, health and quality of forests and woodlands.
SITE — A parcel of land, or a contiguous combination thereof, where
grading work is performed as a single unified operation.
SITE PLAN APPROVAL — The examination and subsequent authorization to
proceed with a project based upon a drawing prepared to specifications and
containing necessary elements, which show the arrangement, layout and
design of the proposed use of a single parcel of land as shown on said plan.
SPDES GENERAL PERMIT FOR CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITIES — A permit
under the New York State Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (SPDES)
issued to developers of construction activities to regulate disturbance of one
or more acres of land.
SPDES GENERAL PERMIT FOR STORMWATER DISCHARGES FROM
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORMWATER SEWER SYSTEMS — A permit
under the New York State Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (SPDES)
issued to municipalities to regulate discharges from municipal separate
storm sewers for compliance with EPA-established water quality standards
and/or to specify stormwater control standards.
STABILIZATION — The use of practices that prevent exposed soil from
eroding.
START OF CONSTRUCTION — The first land disturbance activity
associated with a development, including: land preparation such as
clearing, grading and filling; installation of streets and walkways;
excavation for basements, footings, piers or foundations; erection of
temporary forms; and installation of accessory buildings such as garages.
STATE POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (SPDES) — A
nationally approved program with permits issued in accordance with the
Environmental Conservation Law that authorizes stormwater discharges
from certain construction activities to waters of the United States.
STOP-WORK ORDER — An order issued which requires that all construction
activity on a site be stopped.
§ 198-1 PENFIELD CODE § 198-1
1:222
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT — The use of structural or nonstructural
practices that are designed to reduce stormwater runoff pollutant loads,
discharge volumes, and/or peak flow discharge rates.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT OFFICER — An employee or officer
designated by the municipality to accept and review stormwater pollution
prevention plans, forward the plans to the applicable municipal board and
inspect stormwater management practices.
STORMWATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PLAN (SWPPP) — A plan for
controlling stormwater runoff and pollutants from a site during and after
construction activities.
STORMWATER RUNOFF — The flow on the surface of the ground, resulting
from precipitation.
STORMWATER TREATMENT PRACTICES — Measures, either structural or
nonstructural, that are determined to be the most effective, practical means
of preventing or reducing point source or nonpoint source pollution inputs
to stormwater runoff and water bodies.
STRIPPING — The removal of overburdened, topsoil, soil, vegetation or
other natural material from land.
SURFACE WATER — That portion of natural precipitation which moves
across the land surface, as sheet flow or as channelized flow to permanent
watercourses.
SURFACE WATERS OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK — Lakes, bays, sounds,
ponds, impounding reservoirs, springs, wells, rivers, streams, creeks,
estuaries, marshes, inlets, canals, the Atlantic Ocean within the territorial
seas of the State of New York and all other bodies of surface water, natural
or artificial, inland or coastal, fresh or salt, public or private (except those
private waters that do not combine or effect a junction with natural surface
or underground waters), which are wholly or partially within or bordering
the state or within its jurisdiction. Storm sewers and waste treatment
systems, including treatment ponds or lagoons which also meet the criteria
of this definition are not waters of the state. This exclusion applies only
to man-made bodies of water which neither were originally created in
waters of the state (such as a disposal area in wetlands) nor resulted from
impoundment of waters of the state.
SWALE — A shallow, relatively wide drainage channel or area, with flatter
side slopes than a ditch, usually covered with grass or other natural
vegetation.
TOPSOIL — The natural surface layer of an undisturbed area of terrain,
usually darker than the underlying layer, ranging in organic matter content
from 2% to 50%.
TOWN — The Town of Penfield.
VELOCITY — The speed of water, usually related in feet per second (fps).
VOLUME — A quantity of water, usually related in cubic feet (cf).
§ 198-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 198-1
1:223
WATERCOURSE — An earthen structure to convey stormwater. It may be
natural or man-made and may flow seasonally or year-round.
WATER QUALITY STANDARD VIOLATION — An increase in turbidity that
will result in substantial visible contrast to natural conditions in surface
waters of the State of New York.
WATERSHED — The area drained by a watercourse, usually divided by
a ridge or crest line of natural topography but sometimes by man-made
constructions (same as "drainage basin").
WATERWAY — A channel that directs surface runoff to a watercourse or to
the public storm drain.
WETLANDS —
Lands and submerged lands commonly called "swamps" or "marshes"
which support aquatic or semiaquatic vegetation, plants or brush.
A.
An area that is inundated or saturated by surface water or groundwater
at a frequency and duration sufficient to support a prevalence of
vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions,
commonly known as "hydrophytic vegetation."
B.
§ 198-1 PENFIELD CODE § 198-1
1:224
ARTICLE II
Stormwater Control
[Adopted 3-7-2000 by L.L. No. 4-2000]
§ 198-2. Title.
This article, as adopted by the Town of Penfield, shall be known as the
"Stormwater and Erosion Control Law."
§ 198-3. Findings and purpose.
A. The Town of Penfield finds that uncontrolled drainage and runoff
associated with land development or redevelopment has a significant
impact upon the health, safety, and welfare of the community. The
impacts include, but are not limited to, the following:
(1) Stormwater runoff can carry pollutants into receiving water bodies,
degrading water quality.
(2) The increase in nutrients in stormwater runoff, such as phosphorus
and nitrogen, accelerates eutrophication of receiving waters.
(3) Improper design and construction of drainage facilities can
increase the velocity of runoff, thereby increasing streambank
erosion and sedimentation.
(4) Construction requiring land clearing and the alteration of natural
topography tends to increase erosion.
(5) Sedimentation of water bodies, resulting from increased erosion,
decreases their capacity to hold and transport water, interferes
with navigation, and harms flora and fauna.
(6) Impervious surfaces increase the volume and rate of stormwater
runoff and allows less water to percolate into the soil, thereby
decreasing groundwater recharge and stream base flow.
(7) Improperly managed stormwater runoff can increase the incidence
of flooding and the level of floods which occur, endangering
property and human life.
(8) Substantial economic loss can result from these adverse impacts on
community waters.
(9) The obstruction of flows through construction or reconstruction,
backfilling, excavation and refuse disposal.
(10) The change in the slope, roughness, or distance of travel to the
ground or existing water bodies increases erosion potential or
reduces capacity of land to properly convey stormwater.
B. It is the purpose and intent of this article to protect, maintain and
enhance the short-term and long-term health, safety, and general
§ 198-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 198-3
1:225
§ 198-4. General requirements.
welfare of the citizens of the Town of Penfield. This article has the
following objectives:
(1) Prevent increases in the magnitude and frequency of stormwater
runoff in order to prevent an increase in flood flows and the hazard
and costs associated with flooding.
(2) Prevent decreases in groundwater recharge and stream base flow
so as to maintain aquatic life, assimilative capacity, and potential
water supplies.
(3) Maintain the integrity of stream geometry so as to sustain the
hydrologic function.
(4) Control erosion and sedimentation so as to prevent its deposition in
streams and other receiving water bodies.
(5) Facilitate the removal of pollutants in stormwater runoff so as to
perpetuate the natural biological functions of streams.
(6) Secure multiple community benefits including, but not limited to,
groundwater replenishment, open space protection, and increased
recreational opportunities through integrated land use planning,
(7) Protect property owners from actions by adjoining property owners
that will have a detrimental impact on properties upstream or
downstream.4
A. The design and construction of drainage systems shall be such that
watercourses traversing the development and natural water emanating
from within the development will be carried through and off the
development without adversely affecting overall runoff rate or quantity
or water quality, or injury to improvements, building sites or buildings
existing or to be installed downstream within or adjacent to the
development. Off-site drainage water entering the development shall be
received and discharged at locations and in a manner consistent with
requirements contained herein. The design of drainage facilities within
the development shall be such that they will conform to the ultimate
drainage requirements of the land within the development watershed.
The discharged flow at the downstream area of the development shall
be conducted in drainage facilities so that the flow effect shall be
restored to predevelopment conditions prior to leaving the
development area or reasonably distant therefrom. [Amended
12-16-2015 by L.L. No. 3-2015]
B. Natural drainage patterns shall be employed in preference to
rechanneling streams or watercourses. In no case shall work be
4. Editor's Note: Original Section 4, Definitions, which immediately followed this section,
was included in Article I of this chapter 12-16-2015 by L.L. No. 3-2015.
§ 198-3 PENFIELD CODE § 198-4
1:226
§ 198-5. Prohibited actions.
Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful for any person, firm,
entity or corporation to:
performed which directly or indirectly affects natural drainage patterns
prior to the granting of approval by the Town, county and state agencies
having jurisdiction.
C. No domestic and industrial sewage as defined by the Sewer Ordinance
of the Town of Penfield (Chapter 180 of the Town Code) shall discharge
to any stormwater drainage systems as herein defined.
D. No chemicals, fuels, lubricants or other pollutants shall be disposed of
or deposited into any streams, drainage or water supply systems
without being collected or treated as required by the Town of Penfield
or other authorized review agency.
E. Fill and refuse shall not be disposed of or deposited upon or
immediately adjacent to any wetland, floodplain or drainageway, except
where permitted.
F. Man-made structures and landscaping shall be placed so as not to block
or restrict, in any manner, natural drainage patterns, except where
otherwise permitted.
G. Where land excavations or filling has been permitted, provision shall be
made for the safe conduct of surface water across the face of the slope,
for subsurface drainage as necessary and to prevent materials from
washing across or upon the property of another.
H. Sedimentation basins shall be employed during or after construction as
required by the Town to prevent siltation or turbidity in watercourses or
drainage systems.
I. Surface waters and drainage, where identified as being significant
sources of groundwater replenishment and where such resources are
being utilized as a potable water supply, shall not be revised or altered
except by approval of the Town.
J. Any of the above requirements may be waived by presentation of
sufficient evidence as determined by the Town Engineer.
A. Modify the topography or surface characteristics of any area greater
than 6,000 square feet that affects the rate of flow, water quality, or
erosive potential of the area modified or neighboring properties, unless
the action has been approved by the Town official or board having
jurisdiction. Recognized agricultural procedures in active agricultural
areas as defined by the New York State Division of Agriculture and
Markets are exempt from the regulations herein defined.
B. Place, deposit or permit to be placed or deposited any debris, fill, sand,
stone or other solid materials of any kind or nature or construction of
§ 198-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 198-5
1:227
§ 198-6. Applicability.
§ 198-7. Correction of existing conditions.
All preexisting obstructions or deposits or alterations or diversions of the
natural flow of water or the intensity or quality of flow through any
watercourse or drainage system which cause the inundation of real
property buildings or other premises; or, in the opinion of the Town,
constitute an undue burden upon the drainage system or hamper the proper
present or future course of development of the drainage system; or, in the
opinion of the Town, presently constitute or in the foreseeable future will
constitute a danger of hazard to the well being, safety or general welfare of
any kind into or across any watercourse, including but not limited to
walls, dams, fences or other restrictive materials, culverts, pipes or
other drainage systems that may cause the obstruction or alternation of
flow through the area. [Amended 12-16-2015 by L.L. No. 3-2015]
C. Fill, obstruct, dam, divert or otherwise change or alter the natural or
artificial flow of waters or drainage or the intensity or quantity of flow
through any stream, ditch, pipe, culvert, watercourse or other
improvement or drainage system. This may include, but is not limited
to, structures, fences, retaining walls, landscaping, pools, or other
appurtenances as determined by the Town. [Amended 12-16-2015 by
L.L. No. 3-2015]
D. Concentrate flow that creates an erosive condition to downstream
channels or creates downstream flooding.
A. Stormwater management and control plans shall be prepared and
reviewed for all land development projects and construction activities
when it is determined that stormwater runoff and/or erosion will have
an effect on the environment. This includes, but is not limited to, the
following activities: [Amended 12-16-2015 by L.L. No. 3-2015]
(1) Land development.
(2) Tree harvesting.
(3) Topsoil stripping and sales.
(4) Pond construction.
(5) Channel modifications.
B. Exemptions. The following activities are exempt from this article:
(1) Agricultural activities, including household gardening.
(2) Any maintenance, alteration, use, or improvement to an existing
structure which will not change the quality, rate, volume, or
location of surface water discharge, or contribute to erosion and
sedimentation.
§ 198-5 PENFIELD CODE § 198-7
1:228
the residents of the Town or any property located therein; may be removed
or corrected by the Town upon 10 days' notice by the Town. The Town
will endeavor to replace improvements necessary for essential use of the
property, such as driveway culverts.
§ 198-8. Drainage design standards.5
This article is intended to support the requirements established by the
following:
§ 198-9. Penalties for offenses.
A. Town of Penfield development and construction specifications.
B. Town of Penfield Drainage Policy.
C. Irondequoit Creek Watershed Collaborative Recommendations for
Comprehensive Stormwater Management.
A. Any person, firm, corporation or entity found to be violating any of the
provisions of this article shall be served with a written notice by the
Town stating the nature of the violation and providing a thirty-day time
limit for the satisfactory correction thereof, subject to appeal to the
Town Board within 10 days.
B. Any person, firm, corporation or entity who or which shall continue any
violation beyond the time limit provided for in Subsection A shall be
guilty as follows:
(1) For a first offense of a violation, punishable by a fine of not more
than $250 or by imprisonment not to exceed 15 days, or by both
such fine and imprisonment; and
(2) For a second offense occurring within one year after the conviction
of a first offense, of a violation, punishable by a fine of not more
than $1,000 or by imprisonment not to exceed 15 days, or by both
such fine and imprisonment; and [Amended 12-16-2015 by L.L.
No. 3-2015]
(3) In addition to the foregoing, by a penalty of $500 to be recovered
by the Town of Penfield in a civil action.
(4) Each and every day that a violation of any of the provisions of this
article exists shall constitute a separate violation.
C. Any person, firm, corporation or entity violating any of the provisions of
this article shall become liable to the Town for any expense or loss or
damage occasioned the Town by reason of such violation. The Town
shall have the right to assess all such expenses against the land on
5. Editor's Note: See the Drainage Design Standards available on the Town website:
www.penfield.org.
§ 198-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 198-9
1:229
§ 198-10. Limitations on liability.
The approval of plans for proposed drainage systems and flood hazard
prevention requirements shall not constitute a representation, guaranty or
warranty of any kind or nature by the Town of Penfield or by an officer
or employee thereof of the safety, operation, adequacy or intent of the
proposed facilities and shall create no liability upon or cause for action
against such public body, officer or employee for any damage that may
result from construction pursuant thereto.
which the violation occurred and to bring legal action to recover such
expenses.
§ 198-9 PENFIELD CODE § 198-10
1:230
ARTICLE III
Control of Land Disturbance Activities During Construction
[Adopted 12-19-2007 by L.L. No. 3-2007]
§ 198-11. Findings and purpose.
A. Land disturbance activities and associated increases in impervious
cover alter the hydrologic response of local watersheds and increase
stormwater runoff rates and volumes, flooding, stream channel erosion,
and sediment transport and deposition. This stormwater runoff
contributes to increased quantities of waterborne pollutants.
Stormwater runoff, soil erosion and nonpoint source pollution can be
controlled and minimized through the regulation of stormwater runoff
from development sites.
B. During the construction process, soil is the most vulnerable to erosion
by wind and water. This eroded soil endangers water resources by
reducing water quality, and causing the siltation of aquatic habitat for
fish and other desirable species. Eroded soil also necessitates
maintenance and/or repair of sewers and ditches, and the dredging of
waterways. In addition, clearing and/or grading during construction
tends to increase soil erosion and causes the loss of native vegetation
necessary for terrestrial and aquatic habitat and to provide a healthy
living environment for citizens of the Town of Penfield. Improper design
and construction of stormwater management practices can increase the
velocity of stormwater runoff, thereby increasing stream bank erosion
and sedimentation. Impervious surfaces allow less water to percolate
into the soil, thereby decreasing groundwater recharge and stream
base flow. Regulation of land disturbance activities by means of
performance standards governing stormwater management and site
design will produce development compatible with the natural functions
of a particular site or an entire watershed and thereby mitigate the
adverse effects of erosion and sedimentation from development.
C. As a result, the purpose of this article is to safeguard public health,
protect property, prevent damage to the environment and promote the
public welfare by guiding, regulating, and controlling the design,
construction, use, and maintenance of any development or other
activity which disturbs or breaks the topsoil or results in the movement
of earth on land in the Town of Penfield. It seeks to meet those purposes
by achieving the following objectives:
(1) Meet the requirements of minimum control measures 4 and 5 of the
SPDES General Permit for Stormwater Discharges from Municipal
Separate Stormwater Sewer Systems (MS4s), Permit No. GP-02-02,
or as amended or revised; [Amended 12-16-2015 by L.L. No.
3-2015]
(2) Require land disturbance activities to conform to the requirements
of the New York State Department of Environmental Conservation
§ 198-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 198-11
1:231
§ 198-12. Applicability.
This article shall be applicable to all land disturbance activities that will
disturb one acre of land or more unless exempted under § 198-16C of this
article. This article also applies to land disturbance activities that are less
than one acre of disturbance if such activities are part of a larger common
plan of development or sale that will disturb one acre or more, even though
multiple separate and distinct land disturbance activities may take place at
different times on different schedules.
§ 198-13. Compatibility with other permits and requirements.
State Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (SPDES) General
Permit for Construction Activities, as amended or revised;
[Amended 12-16-2015 by L.L. No. 3-2015]
(3) Minimize increases in stormwater runoff from land disturbance
activities in order to reduce flooding, siltation, increases in stream
temperature, and stream bank erosion and maintain the integrity of
stream channels;
(4) Minimize increases in pollution caused by stormwater runoff from
land disturbance activities which would otherwise degrade local
water quality;
(5) Minimize the total annual volume of stormwater runoff which flows
from any specific site during and following development to the
maximum extent practicable; and
(6) Reduce stormwater runoff rates and volumes, soil erosion and
nonpoint source pollution, wherever possible, through stormwater
management practices and to ensure that these management
practices are properly maintained and eliminate threats to public
safety.6
A. Compliance with this article does not relieve the applicant of the
obligation and responsibility to obtain separate coverage under the
NYSDEC SPDES General Permit for Construction Activities if required.
For projects also applying for coverage under the NYSDEC SPDES
General Permit for Stormwater Discharges from Construction Activity,
the applicant shall submit a copy of the stormwater pollution
prevention plan (SWPPP), a notice of intent (NOI) with a certification
statement including the date demonstrating submission to the
NYSDEC, a letter of permission from the NYSDEC granting approval to
disturb five acres or greater of land at one time (if applicable) and any
related documents to the Town of Penfield's Engineer for review and
approval.
6. Editor's Note: Original Section 2, Definitions, which immediately followed this section,
was included in Article I of this chapter 12-16-2015 by L.L. No. 3-2015.
§ 198-11 PENFIELD CODE § 198-13
1:232
§ 198-14. Legislative authority.
In accordance with Article 2 of the Municipal Home Rule Law of the State
of New York, the Penfield Town Board has the authority to enact laws for
the purpose of promoting the health, safety, or general welfare of the Town
of Penfield, including the protection and preservation of the property of its
inhabitants. By the same authority, the Penfield Town Board may include in
any such law provisions for the appointment of any municipal employees to
effectuate and administer such law.
§ 198-15. Standards for construction activities.
§ 198-16. Land disturbance activity approval process.
B. The requirements of this article should be considered minimum
requirements, and where any provision of this article imposes
restrictions different from those imposed by any other federal, state, or
local law, rule or regulation, or other provision of law, the provisions
that are more restrictive or impose more stringent requirements shall
take precedence.
C. Construction activities that involve land disturbance may also require
additional compliance measures detailed in other regulations and/or
laws such as Article IV of this chapter, Control of Land Disturbance
Activities Following Construction.
A. The Town of Penfield requires the use of technical standards for erosion
and sediment controls. These are detailed in the Town of Penfield's
development criteria and specifications and the New York State
Department of Environmental Conservation's Standards and
Specifications for Erosion and Sediment Control. For the design of
water quality and water quantity controls (post-construction
stormwater runoff control practices), all practices shall be in
conformance with the NYSDEC's technical standards in the New York
State Stormwater Management Design Manual. [Amended
12-16-2015 by L.L. No. 3-2015]
B. Where stormwater management practices are not in accordance with
the aforementioned technical standards, the applicant or developer
must demonstrate equivalence to these technical standards and the
SWPPP shall be prepared by a licensed/certified professional.
A. Application requirements.
(1) Any applicant requesting site plan approval or a permit for land
disturbance activity which would require the disturbance of less
than or equal to one acre of land shall also include with a
submission a SWPPP that shall be reviewed and approved by the
Town of Penfield prior to issuance of the final site plan approval or a
permit.
§ 198-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 198-16
1:233
(2) No applicant shall be granted site plan approval or a permit which
would require the disturbance of less than or equal to one acre of
land without the review and approval of a SWPPP by the Town of
Penfield.
(3) Furthermore, prior to the issuance of a permit or site plan approval
all projects that would result in the disturbance of less than or
equal to one acre of land will be required to comply with all
applicable provisions of Article IV of this chapter, Control of Land
Disturbance Activities Following Construction. As part of the
SWPPP, the applicant shall include a signed statement that all
applicable requirements of Article IV of this chapter have been met
to the satisfaction of the Town of Penfield.
(4) Each application shall bear the name(s) and address(es) of the
owner or developer of the site, and of any consulting firm retained
by the applicant, together with the name of the applicant's
principal contact at such firm, and shall be accompanied by a filing
fee as set forth in § 198-22.
(5) Each application shall include a comprehensive and complete
SWPPP that shall be prepared in accordance with § 198-18 of this
article.
(6) Each application shall include a statement that any land clearing,
construction, or development involving the movement of land shall
be in accordance with the submitted SWPPP.
(7) All land disturbance activities as defined in Article I of this chapter
not subject to site plan or permit approval shall be required to
submit a SWPPP to the Stormwater Management Officer
designated by the Town of Penfield, who shall approve the SWPPP if
it complies with the requirements of this article.
B. Review and approval of application. The Town of Penfield shall review
each application and shall designate the approval with the authorized
representative's signature on the plans. All applicable permits shall be
acquired from the Town Clerk's office for EPOD disturbances and grade
and fill permits in accordance with Chapter 250, Zoning and Land Use,
of the Penfield Town Code (see Articles III, V, VI, XI and XII).
C. Exemptions. The following activities are exempt from review under this
article:
(1) Any emergency activity which is immediately necessary for the
protection of public health, property or natural resources.
(2) Agricultural activity as defined in this article.
(3) Silvicultural activity, except that landing areas and log haul roads
are subject to this article.
§ 198-16 PENFIELD CODE § 198-16
1:234
§ 198-17. Financial guarantees.
The Town of Penfield may, at its discretion, require the applicant to submit
a financial guarantee in a form acceptable to the Town of Penfield prior
to issuance of site plan approval or a permit in order to insure that the
stormwater pollution prevention and erosion and sediment control practices
are implemented and maintained by the applicant as required by the
approved SWPPP. The amount of the financial guarantee shall be the total
estimated construction cost of the stormwater pollution prevention and
erosion and sediment control practices approved, plus a contingency. The
financial guarantee shall contain forfeiture provisions for failure to
complete work specified in the SWPPP. The financial guarantee shall be
released in full only upon satisfaction of the requirements listed in § 198-20
of this article. At its discretion, the Town of Penfield may allow for a
partial release of the financial guarantee based on the completion of various
development stages.
§ 198-18. Stormwater pollution prevention plan requirements.
(4) Routine maintenance activities that disturb fewer than five acres
and are performed to maintain the original line and grade,
hydraulic capacity or original purpose of a facility.
(5) Repairs to any stormwater treatment practice deemed necessary
by the Town of Penfield.
A. The Town of Penfield shall designate a Stormwater Management Officer
who shall accept and review all SWPPPs and forward such plans to the
applicable municipal board. A consultant cannot be appointed as a
Stormwater Management Officer. The Stormwater Management Officer
may:
(1) Review the plans;
(2) Upon approval by the Town Board, engage the services of a New
York State licensed professional engineer to review the plans,
specifications and related documents at a cost not to exceed a fee
schedule established by said governing board; or
(3) Accept the certification of a licensed/certified professional that the
plans conform to the requirements of this article.
B. Prior to any permit/final approval of a land disturbance activity, a
SWPPP shall be prepared by the applicant in accordance with the
specifications outlined by the Town of Penfield and submitted to the
Stormwater Management Officer designated by the Town of Penfield for
review by the appropriate board. This plan must be prepared in
accordance with sound engineering practices by a qualified
professional as defined in Article I of this chapter. The final plan must
be signed by a New York State licensed professional engineer (PE), who
will certify that the design of all stormwater pollution prevention and
§ 198-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 198-18
1:235
erosion and sediment control practices meets the requirements
outlined in the Town of Penfield design criteria and the New York
Standards and Specifications for Erosion and Sediment Control and
shall be adequate to prevent transportation of sediment from the site to
the satisfaction of the Town of Penfield.
C. The requirements to have a SWPPP prepared by a qualified professional
and to have the final plan signed and certified by a New York State
licensed professional engineer (PE) are not applicable to land
disturbance activities that meet technical standards and are five acres
or less occurring on a single-family residence which is not part of a
larger common plan of development, or an agricultural property. In
addition, these land disturbance activities must not discharge directly
to a 303(d) impaired water body or must not be located in a total
maximum daily load (TMDL) watershed unless otherwise directed by
the Stormwater Management Officer.
D. Minimum requirements.
(1) All SWPPPs shall provide the following background information
and erosion and sediment controls:
(a) Background information about the scope of the project,
including location, type and size of project and contact
information that includes the name, address, and telephone
number of all persons having a legal interest in the property
and the tax reference number and parcel number of the subject
property or properties.
(b) Site map/construction drawing(s) for the project, including a
general location map and a topographic base map of the site at
a scale of one inch equal 100 feet which extends a minimum of
100 feet beyond the limits of the proposed development. At a
minimum, the site map should show the total site area; all
improvements; areas of disturbance; areas that will not be
disturbed; existing vegetation; on-site and adjacent off-site
surface water(s), including receiving waters (name of the
water), streams, ponds, culverts, ditches, and wetlands as well
as drainage patterns that could be affected by the construction
activity; existing and final slopes; locations of utilities, roads,
soils types, forest cover, and significant natural and man-made
features not otherwise shown; locations of off-site material,
waste, borrow or equipment storage areas, proposed concrete
clean out basin(s) and construction entrance; and location(s) of
the stormwater discharge(s); and resources protected under
other chapters of this Code or by easements.
(c) Description of the soil(s) present at the site.
(d) Construction phasing plan describing the intended sequence of
construction activities, including clearing and grubbing,
excavation and grading, utility and infrastructure installation,
§ 198-18 PENFIELD CODE § 198-18
1:236
final grading and landscaping, and any other activity at the site
that results in soil disturbance. Sequencing shall identify the
estimated duration of exposure of cleared areas. Consistent
with the New York State Standards and Specifications for
Erosion and Sediment Control, not more than five acres shall
be disturbed at any one time unless pursuant to an approved
SWPPP and a letter of permission from the NYSDEC.
(e) A description of the pollution prevention measures that will be
used to control litter and prevent construction chemicals and
construction debris from becoming a pollutant source in the
stormwater discharges; a description of construction and
waste materials expected to be stored on-site, with updates as
appropriate; a description of controls that will be implemented
to reduce pollutants from these materials, including storage
practices to minimize exposure of the materials to stormwater;
and a description of spill prevention and response measures.
(f) A description of the temporary and permanent structural and
vegetative measures to be used for soil stabilization, runoff
control and sediment control for each stage of the project, from
initial land disturbance to project closeout, including who will
be responsible for the maintenance and implementation of said
features at the site and what practices will be employed to
ensure that adequate vegetative cover is established and
preserved. For temporary and permanent vegetative control
measures, the seeding mixtures and rates, types of sod,
method of seedbed preparation, depth of topsoil, expected
seeding dates, type and rate of lime and fertilizer application,
and kind and quantity of mulching shall be provided.
(g) A site map/construction drawing(s) specifying the location(s),
size(s) and length(s) of each erosion and sediment control
practice.
(h) Illustration of all necessary erosion and sediment control
measures, including the siting and sizing of any temporary
sediment basins and providing the dimensions, material
specifications and installation details for each throughout all
phases of construction and completion of development of the
site. Depending upon the complexity of the project, the
drafting of intermediate plans may be required at the close of
each season.
(i) Identification of all temporary practices that will be converted
to permanent control measures.
(j) Implementation schedule for staging temporary erosion and
sediment control practices, including the timing of initial
placement and duration that each practice should remain in
place.
§ 198-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 198-18
1:237
(k) Identification of the parts or components of the SWPPP that
require maintenance. Furthermore, it shall also provide a
schedule of required maintenance and identify the party
responsible for such work.
(l) Description of structural practices designed to divert flows
from exposed soils, store flows, or otherwise limit runoff and
the discharge of pollutants from exposed areas of the site to
the degree attainable.
(m) Any existing data that describes the stormwater runoff at the
site.
(n) Assurance that all other applicable access and environmental
permits have been acquired for the site prior to initial land
disturbance. Copies of the applicable environmental permits
shall be provided to the Town of Penfield.
(o) Assurance that the applicant or its responsible individual shall
be on site at all times when earthwork takes place and shall
inspect and document the effectiveness of all erosion and
sediment control practices.
(p) Assurance that all contractors and subcontractors involved in
soil disturbance and/or stormwater management practice
installation and maintenance shall be identified in the SWPPP.
All such contractors and subcontractors shall sign a copy of the
following certification statement before undertaking any land
disturbance activity at the site:
"I certify under penalty of law that I understand and agree
to comply with the terms and conditions of the SWPPP. I also
understand that it is unlawful for any person to cause or
contribute to a violation of the water quality standards."
(2) The certification must include the name and title of the person
providing the signature, address and telephone number of the
contracting firm; the address (or other identifying description) of
the site; and the date the certification is made. The certification
statement must be included in the SWPPP.
E. Modifications to the plan after approval.
(1) Major amendments of the SWPPP shall be submitted to the Town of
Penfield and shall be approved or modified as directed.
(2) The applicant shall amend the SWPPP whenever:
(a) There is a significant change in design, construction,
operation, or maintenance which may have a significant effect
on the potential for the discharge of pollutants to the waters of
the United States and which has not otherwise been addressed
in the SWPPP; or
§ 198-18 PENFIELD CODE § 198-18
1:238
§ 198-19. Inspections.
(b) The SWPPP proves to be ineffective in providing the proper
stormwater pollution prevention and erosion and sediment
control as required by this article. Amendments to the SWPPP
may be reviewed by the Town of Penfield. A copy of the newly
amended SWPPP must be provided to the Town of Penfield
within five business days.
(3) Additionally, the SWPPP shall be amended to identify any new
contractor or subcontractor that will implement any measure of the
SWPPP. The Town of Penfield may request copies of signed
contractor certification statements from new contractors/
subcontractors working on the site.
(4) Field modifications of a minor nature may be authorized by the
Town of Penfield by written authorization to the applicant.
A. Town of Penfield inspections.
(1) The Town of Penfield or its designated agent as defined in Article I
of this chapter shall make inspections as hereinafter required and
shall either approve that portion of the work completed or shall
notify the applicant that the work fails to comply with the SWPPP.
In addition, the Town of Penfield reserves the right to enter the
work site at any reasonable time for purposes of inspection. The
SWPPP and the records of any inspections completed by the owner
or its agent shall be maintained at the site in the site logbook from
the date of initiation of construction activities to the date of final
stabilization. To obtain inspections, the applicant shall notify Town
of Penfield at least 48 hours before the following activities occur:
(a) Start of construction.
(b) Erosion and sediment control measures have been installed
and stabilized.
(c) Site clearing has been completed.
(d) Rough grading has been completed.
(e) Final grading has been completed.
(f) Close of the construction season.
(g) Final landscaping.
(h) Closeout inspection.
(2) The above inspection timetable does not relieve the owner of the
obligation under this or any other permit or regulation to conduct
regular inspections as set forth in said permit and/or regulation.
§ 198-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 198-19
1:239
§ 198-20. Duration of permit; facility maintenance; project
closeout.
(3) If any violations are found, the applicant and developer shall be
notified in writing of the nature of the violation and the required
corrective actions. No further earthwork shall be conducted on the
site, except for site stabilization, until the violations are corrected
and approved by the Town of Penfield.
B. Property owner/developer inspections.
(1) The applicant shall employ a "responsible individual" as defined in
Article I of this chapter who will oversee the implementation of the
SWPPP on a daily basis. The responsible individual shall be on site
at all times when construction or grading activity takes place and
shall inspect and document the effectiveness of all erosion and
sediment control practices. The applicant shall also employ the
services of a qualified professional in erosion and sediment control
who will inspect and document the effectiveness of all erosion and
sediment control practices. The documentation will be kept in a site
logbook. Inspection reports will be completed every seven days and
within 24 hours of any storm event producing 0.5 inch of
precipitation or more. A monthly summary of reports will be copied
to the site logbook and delivered to the Town of Penfield within five
days after the month's end.
(2) The requirement to employ a qualified professional to inspect and
document the effectiveness of all erosion and sediment control
practices is not applicable to land disturbance activities five acres
or less occurring on a single-family residence, which is not part of a
larger common plan of development or on an agricultural property.
In addition, these land disturbance activities must not discharge
directly to a 303(d) impaired water body or must not be located in a
total maximum daily load (TMDL) watershed.
A. Duration.
(1) For a project that requires a NYSDEC SPDES permit, the SWPPP
approved by the Town of Penfield shall be in effect until:
(a) The site has been stabilized; [Amended 12-16-2015 by L.L.
No. 3-2015]
(b) A notice of termination (NOT) is submitted to the NYSDEC in
accordance with the general permit; and
(c) A final inspection has been completed by the Town of Penfield.
(2) For projects that do not require a NYSDEC NOT, the SWPPP is in
effect until a final inspection is conducted and the Town of Penfield
has issued the applicant written approval.
§ 198-19 PENFIELD CODE § 198-20
1:240
B. Maintenance.
(1) The applicant shall at all times properly operate and maintain all
stormwater management facilities and erosion and sediment
control measures which are installed or used by the applicant to
achieve compliance with the conditions of this article. Sediment
shall be removed from sediment traps or sediment ponds whenever
their design capacity has been reduced by 50%. The land
disturbance activity shall not cause an increase in turbidity that
will result in substantial visible contrast to natural conditions in
surface waters of the State of New York.
(2) At the end of the construction season, when soil disturbance
activities will be finalized or suspended until the following spring, it
may be desirable to reduce the frequency of the required weekly
site inspections to monthly inspections. In order to reduce
inspection frequencies, the applicant must complete stabilization
activities before proper installation is precluded by snow cover or
frozen ground. If vegetation is used as a stabilization method,
seeding, planting, and/or sodding must be scheduled to avoid fall
frosts and to allow for proper germination/establishment.
Installations and maintenance must be done according to the New
York State Standards and Specifications for Erosion and Sediment
Control.
C. Closeout. The applicant must satisfy the following project closeout
requirements:
(1) Reestablish grade of all permanent stormwater facilities.
(2) Inspect grading of all drainage structures and provide elevation asbuilts
to the Town of Penfield.
(3) Establish perennial vegetative cover to a density of 80% over 100%
of the site.
(4) Remove all debris and temporary erosion and sediment control
practices.
(5) Provide a written certification by a New York State licensed/
certified professional that the site has undergone final stabilization
(as defined in Article I of this chapter) and that all temporary
erosion and sediment controls not needed for long-term erosion
control have been removed.
(6) Complete any other measure deemed appropriate and necessary by
the Town of Penfield to stabilize the project site.
(7) All permanent stormwater control facilities have been cleaned of
silt, sediment and other debris. [Amended 12-16-2015 by L.L.
No. 3-2015]
§ 198-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 198-21
1:241
§ 198-21. Enforcement; penalties for offenses.
A. Stop-work order. The Town of Penfield may issue a stop-work order for
violations of this article. Persons receiving a stop-work order shall be
required to halt all land disturbance activities, except those activities
that address the violations leading to the stop-work order. The stopwork
order shall be in effect until the Town of Penfield confirms that the
land disturbance activity is in compliance and the violation has been
satisfactorily addressed. Failure to address a stop-work order in a
timely manner may result in civil, criminal, or monetary penalties in
accordance with the enforcement measures authorized in this article.
B. Notice of violation. When the Town of Penfield determines that an
activity is not being carried out in accordance with the requirements of
this article, it shall issue a written notice of violation to the owner of the
property. The notice of violation shall contain:
(1) The name and address of the owner or applicant.
(2) The address, when available, or a description of the building,
structure or land upon which the violation is occurring.
(3) A statement specifying the nature of the violation.
(4) A description of the remedial measures necessary to bring the
development activity into compliance with this article and a time
schedule for the completion of such remedial action.
(5) A statement of the penalty or penalties that shall or may be
assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation is
directed.
(6) A statement that the determination of violation may be appealed to
the municipality by filing a written notice of appeal within 15 days
of service of the notice of violation.
C. Violation and penalties. No person shall construct, enlarge, alter, repair,
or maintain any grading, excavation, or fill, or cause the same to be
done, contrary to or in violation of any terms of this article. Violations of
any provision or requirement of this article, or violation of any
statement, plan, application, permit or certification approved under the
provisions of this article, shall be considered an offense punishable by a
fine and/or imprisonment, as provided for in the Town Law of the State
of New York. Each day on which any violation of any of the provisions of
this article occurs shall constitute one offense, and each successive day
of violation shall constitute a separate and distinct offense. Upon
conviction of any such violation, such person, partnership, or
corporation shall be punished by a fine of not more than $500 for each
offense. In addition to any other penalty authorized by this section, any
person, partnership, or corporation convicted of violating any of the
provisions of this article shall be required to bear the expense of such
restoration.
§ 198-21 PENFIELD CODE § 198-21
1:242
§ 198-22. Fees. [Amended 12-16-2015 by L.L. No. 3-2015]
Fees shall be paid in accordance with those adopted by the Town Board.
All costs to review the documents and plans, including all inspection costs,
shall be reimbursed to the Town of Penfield.
D. Withholding of building permits/certificates of occupancy. Building and/
or occupation permits may not be granted until corrections to all
stormwater management practices have been made and accepted by
the Town of Penfield.
§ 198-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 198-22
1:243

ARTICLE IV
Control of Land Disturbance Activities Following Construction
[Adopted 12-19-2007 by L.L. No. 4-2007]
§ 198-23. Findings and purpose.
§ 198-24. Applicability.
A. Land development projects and associated increases in impervious
cover alter the hydrologic response of local watersheds and increase
stormwater runoff rates and volumes, flooding, stream channel erosion,
and sediment transport and deposition. This stormwater runoff
contributes to increased quantities of waterborne pollutants.
Stormwater runoff, soil erosion and nonpoint source pollution can be
controlled and minimized through the regulation of stormwater runoff
from development sites.
B. The purpose of this article is to establish minimum stormwater
management requirements and controls to protect and safeguard the
general health, safety, and welfare of the public residing in the
watersheds within the Town of Penfield. Therefore, the Town of Penfield
establishes this set of water quality and quantity policies to provide
reasonable guidance for the regulation of stormwater runoff and to, in
addition to the above, safeguard persons, protect property, prevent
damage to the environment in Town of Penfield, and comply with the
NYSDEC State Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (SPDES)
General Permit for Stormwater Discharges from Municipal Separate
Storm Sewer systems (MS4s), for the purpose of protecting local water
resources from degradation. It is determined that the regulation of
stormwater runoff discharges from land development projects and
other construction activities in order to control and minimize increases
in stormwater runoff rates and volumes, soil erosion, stream channel
erosion, and nonpoint source pollution associated with stormwater
runoff is in the public interest and will prevent threats to public health
and safety.7
A. This article shall be applicable to land disturbance activities as defined
in Article I of this chapter, and those activities meeting Condition A, B,
C or D below shall include water quantity and water quality controls
(post-construction stormwater runoff controls) as set forth in § 198-30
as applicable unless eligible for an exemption or granted a waiver by
the Town of Penfield in accordance with § 198-28 of this article:
(1) Condition A: stormwater runoff from land disturbance activities
discharging a pollutant of concern to either an impaired water
identified on the Department's 303(d) list of impaired waters or a
total maximum daily load (TMDL) designated watershed for which
7. Editor's Note: Original Section 2, Definitions, which immediately followed this section,
was included in Article I of this chapter 12-16-2015 by L.L. No. 3-2015.
§ 198-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 198-24
1:245
§ 198-25. Compatibility with other permits and requirements.
pollutants in stormwater have been identified as a source of the
impairment.
(2) Condition B: stormwater runoff from land disturbance activities
disturbing five or more acres.
(3) Condition C: stormwater runoff from land disturbance activity
disturbing between one acre and five acres of land during the
course of the project, exclusive of the construction of single-family
residences and construction activities at agricultural properties.
(4) Condition D: stormwater runoff from land disturbance activity that
is smaller than one acre of disturbance if such activities are part of
a larger common plan of development, even though multiple
separate and distinct land disturbance activities may take place at
different times on different schedules.
B. All plans, documents and information required by this article must be
reviewed by the Town of Penfield to ensure that established water
quality standards will be maintained during and after development of
the site and that post-construction runoff levels are consistent with any
local and regional watershed plans.
C. When a site development plan is submitted that qualifies as a
redevelopment project as defined in Article I of this chapter, decisions
on permitting and on-site stormwater requirements shall be governed
by special stormwater sizing criteria found in the current New York
State Stormwater Management Design Manual. Final authorization of
all redevelopment projects will be determined after a review by the
Town of Penfield. This applies to all redevelopment projects that are
greater than or equal to one acre.
D. The following activities may be exempt from the requirements of this
article:
(1) Any emergency activity which is immediately necessary for the
protection of life, property or natural resources.
(2) Agricultural activity as defined in Article I of this chapter.
(3) Silvicultural activity, except that landing areas and log haul roads
are subject to this article.
(4) Routine maintenance activities that disturb fewer than five acres
and are performed to maintain the original line and grade,
hydraulic capacity or original purpose of a facility.
(5) Repairs to any stormwater treatment practice deemed necessary
by the Town of Penfield.
§ 198-24 PENFIELD CODE § 198-25
1:246
§ 198-26. Legislative authority.
In accordance with Article 2 of the Municipal Home Rule Law of the State
of New York, the Penfield Town Board has the authority to enact laws for
the purpose of promoting the health, safety, or general welfare of the Town
of Penfield, including the protection and preservation of the property of its
inhabitants. By the same authority, the Penfield Town Board may include in
any such law provisions for the appointment of any municipal employees to
effectuate and administer such law.
§ 198-27. Compliance.
A. This article is not intended to interfere with, abrogate, or annul any
other laws, rule or regulation, statute, or other provision of law. The
requirements of this article should be considered minimum
requirements, and where any provision of this article imposes
restrictions different from those imposed by any other laws, rule or
regulation, or other provision of law, whichever provisions are more
restrictive or impose higher protective standards for human health and/
or the environment shall be considered to take precedence.
B. Construction activities that involve land disturbance may also require
additional compliance measures detailed in other regulations and/or
laws.
A. No person(s) shall receive any of the building, grading or other land
disturbance approvals or permits required for land disturbance
activities without first meeting the requirements of this article to the
satisfaction of the Town of Penfield.
B. Unless specifically excluded by this article, any landowner or operator
desiring approval or a permit for a land disturbance activity shall
comply with all applicable provisions of this article and shall submit all
required plans, documentation and information as required under this
article to the Town of Penfield for review and approval.
C. Unless otherwise accepted by this article, the following items shall be
submitted prior to the issuance of a permit or site plan approval:
(1) Stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPPP). (See § 198-31.)
(2) Maintenance easement(s). (See § 198-32.)
(3) Maintenance agreement(s). (See § 198-32.)
(4) Any applicable fees. (See § 198-37.)
D. The SWPPP shall be prepared to meet the requirements of §§ 198-30
through 198-33 of this article. The maintenance agreement shall be
prepared to meet the requirements of § 198-32 of this article, and
applicable fees shall be those as set forth in § 198-40 of this article.
§ 198-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 198-27
1:247
§ 198-28. Waivers and mitigation requirements.
E. The SWPPP and all other documents required by this article must be
reviewed by the Town of Penfield to ensure that established water
quality standards will be maintained after development of the site and
that post-construction runoff levels are consistent with any local and
regional watershed plans. Information shall be submitted as a single,
logical package, with all information bound together.
A. All persons shall comply with the requirements of this article, unless a
written request is filed to waive the requirements in part or whole for
land disturbance activities that disturb less than one acre of land.
Requests to waive any requirements of this article shall be submitted to
the Town of Penfield for approval.
B. The minimum requirements for stormwater management may be
waived in whole or in part upon written request of the applicant,
provided that at least one of the following conditions applies:
(1) It can be demonstrated that the proposed development is not likely
to impair attainment of the objectives of this article.
(2) Alternative minimum requirements for on-site management of
stormwater discharges have been established in a stormwater
pollution prevention plan that has been approved by the Town of
Penfield and the implementation of the plan is required by local law.
These practices are encouraged in order to minimize the reliance
on structural practices. Credit in the form of reductions in the
amount of stormwater that must be managed can be earned
through the use of nonstructural practices that reduce the
generation of stormwater from the site. These nonstructural
practices are explained in detail in the manual, Better Site Design:
A Handbook for Changing Development Rules in Your Community.
Applicants wishing to obtain credit for use of nonstructural
practices must ensure that these practices are documented and
remain unaltered by subsequent property owners.
(3) Provisions are made to manage stormwater by an off-site facility.
The off-site facility is required to be in place, to be designed and
adequately sized to provide a level of stormwater control that is
equal to or greater than that which would be afforded by on-site
practices and there is a legally obligated entity responsible for
long-term operation and maintenance of the stormwater practice.
(4) The Town of Penfield finds that meeting the minimum on-site
management requirements is not feasible due to the natural or
existing physical characteristics of a site.
(5) Nonstructural practices will be used on the site that reduce:
(a) The generation of stormwater from the site;
§ 198-27 PENFIELD CODE § 198-28
1:248
§ 198-29. Fee in lieu of dedication and dedication or easement of
land.
(b) The size and cost of stormwater storage; and
(c) The pollutants generated at the site.
C. In instances where one of the conditions above applies, the Town of
Penfield may grant a waiver from strict compliance with these
stormwater management provisions, as long as acceptable mitigation
measures are provided. However, to be eligible for a variance, the
applicant must demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Town of Penfield
that the variance will not result in the following impacts to downstream
waterways:
(1) Deterioration of existing culverts, bridges, dams, and other
structures.
(2) Degradation of biological functions or habitat.
(3) Accelerated stream bank or streambed erosion or siltation.
(4) Increased threat of flood damage to public health, life, property.
D. Furthermore, where compliance with minimum requirements for
stormwater management is waived, the applicant will satisfy the
minimum requirements by meeting one of the mitigation measures
selected by the Town of Penfield. Mitigation measures may include, but
are not limited to, the following:
(1) The purchase and donation of privately owned lands, or the grant of
an easement to be dedicated for preservation and/or reforestation
(dedication or easement of land, see § 198-29B below). These lands
should be located adjacent to the stream corridor in order to
provide permanent buffer areas to protect water quality and
aquatic habitat.
(2) The creation of a stormwater management facility or other
drainage improvements on previously developed properties, public
or private, that currently lack stormwater management facilities
designed and constructed in accordance with the purposes and
standards of this article.
(3) Monetary contributions (fee in lieu of, see § 198-29A below) to a
dedicated fund for stormwater management activities.
E. No waivers or mitigation plans will be considered for land disturbance
activity that disturbs one acre or greater of land.
A. Fee in lieu of dedication. Where the Town of Penfield waives all or part
of the minimum stormwater management requirements, or where the
waiver is based on the provision of adequate stormwater facilities
provided downstream of the proposed development, the applicant shall
§ 198-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 198-29
1:249
§ 198-30. General design and performance criteria.
be required to pay a fee in an amount as determined by the Town of
Penfield. All monetary contributions shall be made to a dedicated fund
for stormwater management activities. The fee structure shall be based
on the cubic feet of storage required for stormwater management of
the development in question. All of the monetary contributions shall be
made by the applicant prior to the issuance of any permit or approval
for the development.
B. Dedication or easement of land. In lieu of a monetary contribution, an
applicant may obtain a waiver of the required stormwater management
by entering into an agreement with the Town of Penfield for the
granting of an easement or the dedication of land by the applicant, to be
used for the construction of an off-site stormwater management facility.
The agreement shall be entered into by the applicant and the Town of
Penfield prior to the recording of plats or, if no record plat is required,
prior to the issuance of the permit.
A. The applicant shall consult the Town of Penfield's design criteria, the
New York State Stormwater Management Design Manual and the New
York Standards and Specifications for Erosion and Sediment Control for
standards and specifications related to stormwater management design
criteria. Stormwater management practices that are designed and
constructed in accordance with these technical documents shall be
presumed to meet the standards imposed by this article. If there is a
conflict between any of the standards, the more stringent standard shall
apply. Where stormwater management practices are not in accordance
with technical standards, the applicant or developer must demonstrate
equivalence to the technical standards set forth in this § 198-30 and
§ 198-31 of this article and the SWPPP shall be prepared by a licensed/
certified professional.
B. The following design and performance criteria shall be addressed for
stormwater management at all sites:
(1) All site designs shall establish stormwater management practices
to control the peak flow rates of stormwater discharge associated
with specified design storms and reduce the generation of
stormwater. These practices should seek to utilize pervious areas
for stormwater treatment and to infiltrate stormwater runoff from
driveways, sidewalks, rooftops, parking lots, and landscaped areas
to the maximum extent practicable to provide treatment for both
water quality and quantity.
(2) No stormwater runoff generated from new development shall
discharge untreated stormwater directly into a jurisdictional
wetland or local water body without adequate treatment. Where
such discharges are proposed, the impact of the proposal on
wetland functional values shall be assessed using a method
acceptable to the Town of Penfield. In no case shall the impact on
§ 198-29 PENFIELD CODE § 198-30
1:250
§ 198-31. Stormwater pollution prevention plan requirements.
functional values be any greater than that allowed by the Army
Corps of Engineers (ACOE) or the NYSDEC representative
responsible for natural resources.
(3) An attempt shall be made to maintain annual groundwater
recharge rates, by promoting infiltration through the use of
structural and nonstructural methods. At a minimum, an attempt
shall be made for annual recharge from the post-development site
to mimic the annual recharge from predevelopment site conditions.
(4) In order to protect stream channels from degradation, a specific
channel protection criteria shall be provided as prescribed in the
Town of Penfield's design criteria and/or the New York State
Stormwater Management Design Manual.
(5) Stormwater discharges to critical areas with sensitive resources
may be subject to additional performance criteria, or may need to
utilize or restrict certain stormwater management practices.
(6) Stormwater discharges from land uses or activities with higher
potential pollutant loadings, known as "hotspots," may require the
use of specific structural stormwater treatment practices and
pollution prevention practices.
(7) Prior to design, applicants are required to consult with the Town of
Penfield to determine if they are subject to additional stormwater
design requirements.
(8) The calculations for determining peak flows (WQv), as found in the
New York State Stormwater Management Design Manual, shall be
used for sizing all stormwater management practices.
A. A SWPPP is required as part of compliance with this article. This plan
must be prepared by a qualified professional and must indicate whether
stormwater will be managed on-site or off-site and, if on-site, the
general location and type of practices, and shall also include sufficient
information (e.g., maps, hydrologic calculations, etc.) to evaluate the
environmental characteristics of the project site, the potential impacts
of all proposed development of the site, both present and future, on the
water resources, and the effectiveness and acceptability of the
measures proposed for managing stormwater generated at the project
site. The plan must be signed by a New York State licensed professional
engineer (PE), who will verify that the design of all stormwater
management practices meets the submittal requirements outlined in
the New York State Stormwater Management Design Manual. No
building or grading permit or site plan approval shall be issued until a
satisfactory stormwater pollution prevention plan, or a waiver thereof,
has undergone a review and been approved by the Town of Penfield
§ 198-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 198-31
1:251
after determining that the plan or waiver is consistent with the
requirements of this article.
B. The applicant shall employ a "responsible individual" as defined in
Article I of this chapter who will oversee the implementation of the
SWPPP on a daily basis. The applicant shall also employ the services of
a qualified professional in erosion and sediment control who will
inspect and document the effectiveness of all erosion and sediment
control practices. The documentation will be kept in a site logbook.
Inspection reports will be completed every seven days and within 24
hours of any storm event producing 0.5 inch of precipitation or more. A
monthly summary of reports will be copied to the site logbook and
delivered to Town of Penfield within five days after the month's end.
C. All SWPPPs shall provide the following information:
(1) All information listed in Article I of this chapter, Control of Land
Disturbance Activities During Construction, § 198-18.
(2) Description of each post-construction stormwater management
practice.
(3) Site map/construction drawing(s) showing the specific location(s)
and size(s) of each post-construction stormwater management
practice. The map(s) will also clearly show proposed land use, with
tabulation of the percentage of surface area to be adapted to
various uses. A written description of the site plan and justification
of proposed changes in natural conditions may also be required.
(4) Hydrologic and hydraulic analysis for all structural components of
the stormwater management system for the applicable design
storms, including calculations such as a description of the design
storm frequency, intensity and duration; time of concentration; soil
curve numbers or runoff coefficients; peak runoff rates and total
runoff volumes for each watershed area; infiltration rates, where
applicable; culvert capacities; flow velocities; data on the increase
in rate and volume of runoff for the design storms referenced in the
New York State Stormwater Management Design Manual, and
documentation of sources for all computation methods and field
test results.
(5) Comparison of post-development stormwater runoff conditions
with predevelopment conditions.
(6) Dimensions, material specifications and installation details for each
post-construction stormwater management practice.
(7) The design and planning of all stormwater management facilities
shall include detailed maintenance and repair procedures,
including a schedule to ensure their continued function. These
plans will identify the parts or components of a stormwater
management facility that need to be maintained and the equipment
§ 198-31 PENFIELD CODE § 198-31
1:252
and skills or training necessary. Provisions for the periodic review
and evaluation of the effectiveness of the maintenance program
and the need for revisions or additional maintenance procedures
shall be included in the plan.
(8) The applicant must ensure access to all stormwater treatment
practices at the site for the purpose of inspection and repair by
securing all the maintenance easements needed on a permanent
basis. These easements will be recorded with the plan and will
remain in effect even with transfer of title to the property. See
§ 198-33 of this article for additional information.
(9) The applicant must execute an easement or an inspection and
maintenance agreement binding on all subsequent owners of land
served by the on-site stormwater management measure(s) in
accordance with the specifications of this article. See § 198-33 of
this article for additional information.
(10) The SWPPP shall be prepared by a qualified professional and the
final plan must be signed by a New York State licensed professional
engineer, who shall certify that the design of all stormwater
management practices meets the requirements in this article.
(11) A written or graphic inventory of the natural resources at the site
and surrounding area as it exists prior to the commencement of the
project and a description of the watershed and its relation to the
project site. This description should include a discussion of soil
conditions, forest cover, topography, wetlands, and other native
vegetative areas on the site. Particular attention should be paid to
environmentally sensitive features that provide particular
opportunities or constraints for development.
(12) The Town of Penfield may also require a concept plan to consider
the maximum development potential of a site under existing
zoning, regardless of whether the applicant presently intends to
develop the site to its maximum potential.
(13) The applicant must present a detailed plan for management of
vegetation at the site after construction is finished, including who
will be responsible for the maintenance of vegetation at the site
and what practices will be employed to ensure that adequate
vegetative cover is preserved. This plan must be prepared by a
registered landscape architect or by the soil and water
conservation district and in compliance with landscaping
specifications outlined in the New York State Stormwater
Management Design Manual.
(14) The applicant shall assure that all other applicable environmental
permits have been acquired for the site prior to approval of the
final stormwater design plan.
§ 198-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 198-32
1:253
§ 198-32. Maintenance of stormwater management facilities.
A. Maintenance easement/agreement. The applicant or owner of the site
must execute a maintenance easement/agreement that shall be binding
on all subsequent owners of land served by the stormwater
management facility. The agreement shall provide for access to the
facility at reasonable times for periodic inspection by the Town of
Penfield, or its contractor or agent, to ensure that the facility is
maintained in proper working condition to meet design standards and
any other provisions established by this article and to, if necessary,
implement emergency repairs to protect the health, safety and welfare
of the public. The easement dimensions shall be as directed by the Town
of Penfield and the easement agreement shall be recorded in the office
of the County Clerk, with a copy provided to the Town of Penfield.
B. Maintenance after construction. The owner or operator of permanent
stormwater management practices installed in accordance with this
article shall ensure they are operated and maintained to achieve the
goals of this article. Proper operation and maintenance also includes, as
a minimum, the following:
(1) A preventive/corrective maintenance program for all critical
facilities and systems of treatment and control (or related
appurtenances) which are installed or used by the owner or
operator to achieve the goals of this article.
(2) Written procedures for operation and maintenance and training
new maintenance personnel.
(3) Discharges from the stormwater management practices shall not
exceed design criteria or cause or contribute to water quality
standard violations in accordance with Article I of this chapter.
C. Maintenance agreements.
(1) The maintenance and proper operation of all privately owned
stormwater management facilities, including nonstructural
practices, shall be ensured through the creation of a formal and
enforceable maintenance agreement that must be approved by the
Town of Penfield and recorded in the office of the County Clerk as a
deed restriction on the property prior to final plan approval. This
agreement will include any and all maintenance easements
required to access and inspect the stormwater management
practices, and will outline the procedures and schedule to be
followed to perform routine maintenance as necessary to ensure
proper functioning of the stormwater management practice. In
addition, the legally binding agreement shall identify the parties
responsible for the proper maintenance of all stormwater
treatment practices and include plans for periodic inspections by
the owners, or their designated agent, to ensure proper
performance of the facility. The maintenance agreement shall be
§ 198-32 PENFIELD CODE § 198-32
1:254
§ 198-33. Inspection and right of entry.
consistent with the terms and conditions of the stormwater control
facility maintenance agreement.
(2) The Town of Penfield, in lieu of a maintenance agreement, may
accept dedication of any existing or future stormwater
management facility for maintenance, provided such facility meets
all the requirements of this article and includes adequate and
perpetual access and sufficient area, by easement or otherwise, for
inspection and regular maintenance.
D. Requirements of maintenance agreements. All stormwater
management facilities must undergo, at the minimum, an annual
inspection to document maintenance and repair needs to ensure
compliance with the requirements of this article and accomplishment of
its purposes. These needs may include removal of silt, litter and other
debris from all catch basins, inlets and drainage pipes, grass cutting
and vegetation removal, and necessary replacement of landscape
vegetation. Any maintenance needs found must be identified in writing,
along with the schedule and methods to be employed to complete the
maintenance. The maintenance repairs and restoration schedule are to
be approved by the Town of Penfield prior to commencing the work, and
the Town of Penfield shall inspect the facility upon completion of the
work. The inspection and maintenance requirement may be increased
by the Town of Penfield as deemed necessary to ensure proper
functioning of the stormwater management facility.
E. Records of installation and maintenance activities. Parties responsible
for the operation and maintenance of a stormwater management facility
shall make records of the installation and of all maintenance and
repairs, and shall retain the records for at least five years. These
records shall be made available to the Town of Penfield during
inspection of the facility and at other reasonable times upon request.
F. Maintenance guarantees for privately owned stormwater facilities.
Where stormwater management and erosion and sediment control
facilities are to be operated and maintained by the applicant or by a
corporation that owns or manages a commercial or industrial facility,
the applicant, prior to construction, may be required to provide the
Town of Penfield with an irrevocable letter of credit from an approved
financial institution or surety to ensure proper operation and
maintenance of all stormwater management and erosion control
facilities both during and after construction, and until the Town of
Penfield acknowledges compliance with all details of an approved site
plan. If the applicant or landowner fails to properly operate and
maintain stormwater management and erosion and sediment control
facilities, the Town of Penfield may draw upon the account to cover the
costs of proper operation and maintenance, including engineering and
inspection costs, until the Town of Penfield acknowledges compliance
with all details of an approved site plan.
§ 198-32 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 198-33
1:255
§ 198-34. As-built plans.
All applicants are required to submit actual "as built" plans for any
stormwater management practices located on site after final construction
is completed. The plan must show the final design specifications for all
stormwater management facilities and must be certified by a New York
State licensed professional engineer. A final inspection by the Town of
Penfield is required before the release of any performance securities can
occur.
§ 198-35. Landscape alterations.
All applicants are responsible for maintaining the grading of the site so
that it is consistent with the certified "as-built" plans. Any post-construction
alterations to the landscape shall receive prior approval from the Town of
Penfield. Temporary landscape alterations, such as those associated with
utility excavations and landscaping activities, must be restored to
conditions that are consistent with the certified "as-built" plans.
A. The Town of Penfield or its designated agent shall make inspections at
any reasonable time for purposes of inspecting the construction of the
stormwater management facilities. Inspections may include, but are not
limited to: routine inspections; random inspections; inspections based
upon complaints or other notice of possible violations; inspection of
drainage basins or areas identified as higher than typical sources of
sediment or other contaminants or pollutants; inspections of businesses
or industries of a type which is more likely than the typical discharge to
cause violations of state or federal water or sediment quality standards
or the SPDES stormwater permit; and joint inspections with other
agencies inspecting under environmental or safety laws. Inspections
may include, but are not limited to: reviewing maintenance and repair
records; sampling discharges, surface water, groundwater, and
material or water in drainage control facilities; and evaluating the
condition of drainage control facilities and other stormwater
management practices. The applicant must notify the Town of Penfield
in advance before the commencement of construction. If any violations
are found, the property owner shall be notified of the nature of the
violation and the required corrective actions. No added work shall
proceed until any violations are corrected and all work previously
completed has received approval by the Town of Penfield.
B. Furthermore, when any new drainage control facility is installed on
private property, or when any new connection is made between private
property and a public drainage control system, or combined sewer, the
property owner shall grant to the Town of Penfield the right to enter the
property at reasonable times and in a reasonable manner for the
purpose of inspection. This includes the right to enter a property when
it has a reasonable basis to believe that a violation of this article is
occurring or has occurred, and to enter when necessary for abatement
of a public nuisance or correction of a violation of this article.
§ 198-33 PENFIELD CODE § 198-36
1:256
§ 198-36. Enforcement; penalties for offenses.
A. Failure to maintain practices. If a responsible party fails or refuses to
meet the requirements of the maintenance agreement, the Town of
Penfield, after reasonable notice, may correct a violation of the design
standards or maintenance needs by performing all necessary work to
place the facility in proper working condition. In the event that the
stormwater management facility becomes a danger to public safety or
public health, the Town of Penfield shall notify the party responsible for
maintenance of the stormwater management facility in writing. Upon
receipt of that notice, the responsible person shall have five days to
effect maintenance and repair of the facility in an approved manner.
After proper notice, the Town of Penfield may assess the owner(s) of the
facility for the cost of repair work and any penalties; and the cost of the
work shall be a lien on the property, or prorated against the beneficial
users of the property, and may be placed on the tax bill and collected as
ordinary taxes by the county.
B. Violations. Any development activity that is commenced or is conducted
contrary to this article may be restrained by injunction or otherwise
abated in a manner provided by law.
C. Notice of violation. When the Town of Penfield determines that an
activity is not being carried out in accordance with the requirements of
this article, it shall issue a written notice of violation to the owner of the
property. The notice of violation shall contain:
(1) The name and address of the owner or applicant.
(2) The address, when available, or a description of the building,
structure or land upon which the violation is occurring.
(3) A statement specifying the nature of the violation.
(4) A description of the remedial measures necessary to bring the
development activity into compliance with this article and a time
schedule for the completion of such remedial action.
(5) A statement of the penalty or penalties that shall or may be
assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation is
directed.
(6) A statement that the determination of violation may be appealed to
the municipality by filing a written notice of appeal within 15 days
of service of the notice of violation.
D. Stop-work orders. Persons receiving a notice of violation will be
required to halt all construction and/or maintenance activities. This
stop-work order will be in effect until the Town of Penfield confirms in
writing that the activity is in compliance and the violation has been
satisfactorily addressed. Failure to address a notice of violation in a
§ 198-36 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 198-36
1:257
§ 198-37. Fees.
All fees shall be paid as defined by the Town Board.
§ 198-38. Performance bond; security.
The Town of Penfield may, at its discretion, require the submittal of a letter
of credit, cash, or performance bond prior to approval in order to insure
that the stormwater practices are installed as required by the approved
stormwater pollution prevention plan. The amount of the installation
performance security shall be the total estimated construction cost of the
stormwater management practices approved by the Town of Penfield, plus
4% for inspection and 10% for contingencies. The performance security
shall contain forfeiture provisions for failure to complete work specified
in the stormwater pollution prevention plan. The installation performance
security shall be released in full only upon submission of "as built" plans
and written certification by a New York State licensed professional engineer
that the stormwater practice has been installed in accordance with the
approved plan and other applicable provisions of this article. The Town of
Penfield will make a final inspection of the stormwater practice to ensure
that it is in compliance with the approved plan and the provisions of this
article. Provisions for a partial pro-rata release of the performance security
based on the completion of various development stages can be done at the
discretion of the Town of Penfield.
timely manner can result in civil, criminal, or monetary penalties in
accordance with the enforcement measures authorized in this article.
E. Civil and criminal penalties. In addition to or as an alternative to any
penalty provided herein or by law, any person who violates the
provisions of this article shall be punished by a fine of not less than
$500 or by imprisonment for a period not to exceed five days, or by both
such fine and imprisonment. Such person shall be guilty of a separate
offense for each day during which the violation occurs or continues.
F. Holds on occupation permits. Occupation permits may not be granted
until corrections to all stormwater management practices have been
made and accepted by the Town of Penfield.
§ 198-36 PENFIELD CODE § 198-38
1:258
Chapter 207
TAXATION AND ASSESSMENT
§ 198-38 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 198-38
1:259

ARTICLE I
Senior Citizens Exemption
[Adopted 6-29-1977 by L.L. No. 1-1977]
§ 207-1. Title.
This article shall be known and may be cited as "Local Law No. 1 of the
Year 1977, Raising the Real Property Tax Exemption for Owners, Age 65 and
Over."
§ 207-2. Legislative intent.
It is the purpose of this article to grant partial exemption from taxation of
real property owned by persons 65 years of age or over in certain cases in
accordance with Chapter 187 of the Laws of 1977 of the State of New York
and Real Property Tax Law § 467.
§ 207-3. Eligibility. [Last amended 2-21-2007 by L.L. No. 1-2007]
A. Notwithstanding any other provision of law, any person otherwise
qualifying for the senior citizen tax exemption pursuant to Real
Property Tax Law § 467 shall not be denied the exemption if he or she
becomes 65 years of age after the appropriate taxable status date and
before December 31 of the same year.
B. The income of the owner, or the combined income of the owners, of the
property for the income tax year immediately preceding the date of
making application for exemption must exceed the sum of $3,000 or
such other sum not less than $26,000. "Income tax year" shall mean the
twelve-month period for which the owner or owners filed a federal
personal income tax return or, if no such return is filed, the calendar
year. Where title is vested in either the husband or wife, their combined
income may not exceed such sum, except where the husband or wife, or
ex-husband or ex-wife, is absent from the property due to divorce, legal
separation or abandonment, then only the income of the spouse or exspouse
residing on the property shall be considered and may not exceed
such sum. [Amended 12-16-2015 by L.L. No. 3-2015]
C. Such income shall include social security and retirement benefits,
interest, dividends, total gain from the sale or exchange of a capital
asset, which may be offset by a loss from the sale or exchange of a
capital asset in the same income tax year, net rental income, salary or
earnings, and net income from self-employment, but shall not include a
return of capital, gifts or inheritances. In computing net rental income
and net income from self-employment, no depreciation deduction shall
be allowed for the exhaustion, wear and tear of real or personal
property held for the production of income.
D. Exemption qualifications.
§ 207-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 207-3
1:261
§ 207-4. Administration.
Annual Income
Percentage of Assessed
Valuation Exempt from
Taxation
$0 to $25,999 50%
$26,000 to $26,999 45%
$27,000 to $27,999 40%
$28,000 to $28,999 35%
$29,000 to $29,899 30%
$29,900 to $30,799 25%
$30,800 to $31,699 20%
$31,700 to $32,599 15%
$32,600 to $33,499 10%
$33,500 to $34,399 5%
$34,400 and over 0%
(1) The eligible income levels will then increase $1,000 annually
through 2009, such that in 2009 there will be a fifty-percent
exemption for incomes up to $28,999 and a graduated reduction in
exemption for incomes more than $28,999 but less than $37,400.
(2) This article shall take effect immediately upon filing with the
Secretary of State and shall be effective for assessment rolls of the
Town of Penfield prepared on or after March 1, 2007.
E. Only those persons meeting the requirements of Real Property Tax Law
§ 467 shall be entitled to the exemption hereby provided. [Added
12-16-2015 by L.L. No. 3-2015]
A. The Assessor shall, within five days after the adoption of this article,
prepare forms for an exemption pursuant to § 207-3.
B. Applicants may file for exemption on such forms until the completion of
the assessment roll as set forth in Real Property Tax Law § 516 relating
to the completion of assessment rolls which legally supersedes such
section.8
C. Applicants who file such forms on or before such completion of the
assessment roll shall be granted the exemption pursuant to the
provisions of this article.
8. Editor's Note: See also, Art. III of this chapter, Extension of Filing Date for Senior Citizen
Exemption.
§ 207-3 PENFIELD CODE § 207-4
1:262
ARTICLE II
Business Investment Exemption
[Adopted 3-5-1979 by L.L. No. 1-1979]
§ 207-5. Exemption adopted.
The Town Board of the Town of Penfield, New York hereby establishes a
changed exemption in order to limit the effect of the business investment
exemption authorized under the provisions of Real Property Tax Law
§ 485-b, and any and all amendments thereto.
§ 207-6. Amount. [Amended 7-17-1989 by L.L. No. 2-1989]
The exemption hereby authorized shall be in assessed value thereof
attributable to construction, alteration, installation or improvement of the
eligible business facility. The schedule of yearly percentable exemptions
authorized is set forth in the following table:
Year of Exemption Percentage of Exemption
1 50%
2 45%
3 40%
4 35%
5 30%
6 25%
7 20%
8 15%
9 10%
10 5%
§ 207-7. Effective date.
This article is to take effect immediately upon filing with the Secretary of
State in accordance with Municipal Home Rule Law § 27 and the Board of
Equalization and Assessments, and shall apply to assessment rolls prepared
on the basis of taxable status dates occurring on or after May 1, 1979.
§ 207-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 207-7
1:263

ARTICLE III
Extension of Filing Date for Senior Citizen Exemption
[Adopted 3-3-1986 by L.L. No. 1-1986]
§ 207-8. Extension of filing date for renewal applications.
In the event the owner, or all of the owners, of property which has received
an exemption pursuant to Real Property Tax Law § 467 or § 467-d fails
to file the application required pursuant to said sections on or before the
taxable status date, such owners may file the application, executed as if
such application had been filed on or before the taxable status date, with
the Assessor on or before the date for the hearing of complaints, and the
Town Assessor is authorized to accept such applications for renewal of such
exemptions.
§ 207-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 207-8
1:265

ARTICLE IV
Agricultural Assessments
[Adopted 4-7-1993 by L.L. No. 2-1993]
§ 207-9. Use for fire or ambulance district purposes.
Whenever an agricultural assessment is established for real property in
accordance with the Agriculture and Markets Law of the State of New York,
such assessment shall be used for a benefit assessment or a special ad
valorem levy of a fire or ambulance district.
§ 207-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 207-9
1:267

ARTICLE V
Exemption for Persons with Disabilities and Limited Income
[Adopted 2-18-1998 by L.L. No. 1-1998]
§ 207-10. Purpose and intent; statutory authority.
It is the purpose and intent of this article to implement legislation which
amended the Real Property Tax Law by adding a new § 459-c. The new
section allows a real property tax exemption for persons with disabilities
and limited incomes, provided that they meet certain criteria as set forth in
Real Property Tax Law § 459-c, Subdivision 2, Paragraph B.
§ 207-11. Findings.
The Town Board of the Town of Penfield recognizes that there are property
owners in the Town of Penfield who are disabled and have a limited income
as a result of their disability.
§ 207-12. Qualification for exemption. [Amended 12-20-2000 by L.L.
No. 6-2000; 11-20-2002 by L.L. No. 2-2002; 12-17-2003 by L.L. No.
5-2003; 2-21-2007 by L.L. No. 2-2007; 12-16-2015 by L.L. No.
3-2015]
Real property must meet the following criteria in order to be eligible for this
exemption:
A. Be owned by a person or persons with disabilities or owned by a
husband, wife, or both, or by siblings, at least one of whom has a
disability and whose income is limited by reason of such disability. A
disabled person is a person with a physical or mental impairment, not
due to the current use of alcohol or illegal drug use, which substantially
limits such person's ability to engage in one or more major life
activities, such as caring for one's self, performing manual tasks,
walking, seeing, hearing, speaking, breathing, learning and working,
and who is 1) certified to receive Social Security Disability Insurance
(SSDI) or Supplemental Security Income (SSI) benefits under the
Federal Social Security Act or 2) is certified to receive Railroad
Retirement Disability Benefits under the Federal Railroad Retirement
Act, or 3) has received a certificate from the State Commission for the
Blind and Visually Handicapped stating that such person is legally
blind, 4) or is certified to receive a United States Postal Service
disability pension, or 5) is certified to receive a United States
Department of Veterans Affairs disability pension pursuant to 38 U.S.C.
§ 1521. An award letter from the Social Security Administration or the
Railroad Retirement Board, or a certificate from the State Commission
for the Blind and Visually Handicapped, or an award letter from the
United States Postal Service, or an award letter from the United States
Department of Veterans Affairs shall be submitted as proof of disability.
§ 207-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 207-12
1:269
§ 207-13. Administration.
The Assessor of the Town of Penfield is hereby directed to accept
applications for real property tax exemptions for persons with disabilities
and limited incomes and, when satisfied that the application meets all
criteria, approve the application and to appropriately code the assessment
roll of the Town of Penfield to accurately reflect the exemption on the
entitled property.
§ 207-14. Effective date.
This article shall take effect immediately upon filing with the Secretary of
State and shall be used in the preparation of assessment rolls on or after
March 1, 1998.
B. The combined income of all the owners of the real property cannot
exceed $25,999 in order to receive a fifty-percent exemption and cannot
exceed $34,400 to receive a pro-rated exemption in accordance with
the graduated income scale applicable to Real Property Tax Law § 467,
in accordance with the following schedule:
Annual Income
Percentage of Assessed
Valuation Exempt from
Taxation
$0 to $25,999 50%
$26,000 to $26,999 45%
$27,000 to $27,999 40%
$28,000 to $28,999 35%
$29,000 to $29,899 30%
$29,900 to $30,799 25%
$30,800 to $31,699 20%
$31,700 to $32,599 15%
$32,600 to $33,499 10%
$33,500 to $34,399 5%
$34,400 and over 0%
(1) The eligible income levels will then increase $1,000 annually
through 2009, such that in 2009 there will be a fifty-percent
exemption for incomes up to $28,999 and a graduated reduction in
exemption for incomes more than $28,999 but less than $37,400.
(2) This article shall take effect immediately upon filing with the
Secretary of State and shall be effective for assessment rolls of the
Town of Penfield prepared on or after March 1, 2007.
C. Only those persons meeting the requirements of Real Property Tax Law
§ 459-c shall be entitled to the exemption hereby provided.
§ 207-12 PENFIELD CODE § 207-14
1:270
ARTICLE VI
Historic Property Exemption
[Adopted 1-20-1999 by L.L. No. 1-1999]
§ 207-15. Title.
This article shall be known as the "Real Property Tax Exemption for Altered
or Rehabilitated Historic Property of the Town of Penfield."
§ 207-16. Purpose and intent.
It is the purpose and intent of this article to implement legislation which
amended the Real Property Tax Law by adding a new § 444-a. The new
section allows a real property tax exemption for historic property altered or
rehabilitated subsequent to the effective date of this article, provided that
the real property meets the criteria set forth in this article.
§ 207-17. Findings.
The Town Board of the Town of Penfield recognizes that there are historic
landmarks or properties that contribute to the character of an historic
district in the Town of Penfield. Many of these properties need to be
rehabilitated, renovated or altered in order to continue to be useful
properties.
§ 207-18. Qualification for exemption.
Real property must meet the following criteria in order to be eligible for this
exemption:
§ 207-19. Exemption schedule.
Historic property shall be exempt from taxation to the extent of any increase
in assessed value attributable to such alteration or rehabilitation pursuant
to the following schedule:
A. The property must be designated as a landmark or is a property that
contributes to the character of an historic district, created by a local
law passed pursuant to General Municipal Law § 96-A or 119-DD.
B. Alterations or rehabilitation must be made for means of historic
preservation.
C. Such alterations or rehabilitation of historic property must meet
guidelines and review standards in the local preservation law.
D. Such alterations or rehabilitation of historic property must be approved
by the local preservation board prior to commencement of work.
E. Alterations or rehabilitation must be commenced subsequent to the
effective date of this article.
§ 207-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 207-19
1:271
Year of Exemption Percentage of Exemption
1 100%
2 100%
3 100%
4 100%
5 100%
6 80%
7 60%
8 40%
9 20%
10 0%
§ 207-20. Administration. [Amended 12-16-2015 by L.L. No. 3-2015]
The Assessor of the Town of Penfield is hereby directed to accept
applications, on a form prescribed by the State Board of Real Property
Services, for real property tax exemption for alteration or rehabilitation
of historic property filed on or before the appropriate taxable status date.
If the Assessor is satisfied that the property is entitled to an exemption
pursuant to this article and state law, the Assessor may approve the
application and appropriately code the assessment roll of the Town of
Penfield to accurately reflect the exemption on the entitled property.
§ 207-21. Effective date.
This article shall take effect immediately upon filing with the Secretary of
State and shall be used in the preparation of assessment rolls on or after
March 1, 1999.
§ 207-19 PENFIELD CODE § 207-21
1:272
ARTICLE VII
Alternative Veterans Exemption
[Adopted 3-1-2006 by L.L. No. 1-2006]
§ 207-22. Title.
This article shall be known as the "Increase in the Exemption Amount
Allowed for the Alternative Veterans Exemption Law of the Town of
Penfield."
§ 207-23. Purpose and intent.
It is the purpose and intent of this article to implement legislation which
amends Real Property Tax Law § 458-a, Subdivision 2, to allow the Town
of Penfield to increase the maximum exemption allowable in Paragraphs
(a), (b), and (c) of said Subdivision 2 to $36,000, $24,000, and $120,000,
respectively.
§ 207-24. Findings.
The Town Board of the Town of Penfield hereby recognizes that the total
assessed value of the real property for which an exemption had been
granted pursuant to Real Property Tax Law § 458-a, Subdivision 2,
Paragraphs (a), (b) and (c), has increased substantially since the original
enactment of § 458-a in 1984 and that the original maximum exemption
allowable under Subdivision 2, Paragraphs (a), (b) and (c), has significantly
decreased as a percentage of the total assessed value of the real property.
§ 207-25. Increase in allowable amount of exemption.
The Assessor of the Town of Penfield is hereby directed to increase the
maximum exemption allowable for the alternative veterans exemption in
Real Property Tax Law § 458-a, Subdivision 2, Paragraphs (a), (b) and (c),
to $36,000, $24,000, and $120,000, respectively, and to appropriately code
all alternative veterans exemptions on the assessment roll of the Town of
Penfield to accurately reflect the increase.
§ 207-26. Effective date.
This article shall take effect immediately upon filing with the Secretary
of State and shall be used solely prospectively in the preparation of
assessment rolls on or after the next taxable status date, which is March 1,
2006.
§ 207-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 207-26
1:273

ARTICLE VIII
Exemption for Disabled Persons
[Adopted 8-2-2006 by L.L. No. 2-2006]
§ 207-27. Title.
This article shall be known as the "Partial Tax Exemption for Real Property
of Persons Who Are Physically Disabled of the Town of Penfield."
§ 207-28. Purpose and intent.
It is the purpose and intent of this article to implement legislation which
amended the Real Property Tax Law by adding a new § 459. The new section
allows a real property tax exemption for real property of persons who are
physically disabled, provided that they meet certain criteria as set forth in
Real Property Tax Law § 459, Subdivision 2.
§ 207-29. Findings.
The Town Board of the Town of Penfield hereby recognizes that there are
physically disabled owners or members in a household that need certain
improvements that facilitate the disabled person's accessibility to the
property.
§ 207-30. Qualification for exemption.
The real property must meet the following criteria in order to be eligible for
this exemption:
§ 207-31. Administration.
The Assessor of the Town of Penfield is hereby directed to accept
applications for real property tax exemption of persons who are physically
disabled and, when satisfied that the application meets all criteria, approve
the application and to appropriately code the assessment roll of the Town of
Penfield to accurately reflect the exemption on the entitled property.
A. Property must be owned by the physically disabled person or by a
person having a physically disabled member in the household.
B. Property must be occupied by the physically disabled resident of the
property. The person must have a permanent physical impairment that
substantially restricts one or more of his/her major life activities, and
such impairment must be certified by a qualified physician or the State
Commission for the Blind and Visually Handicapped, as appropriate. To
be eligible for the exemption, the improvement to the property must be
one which facilitates the disabled person's use of and accessibility to
the property.
C. The property must be a one-, two-, or three-family residence.
§ 207-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 207-32
1:275
§ 207-32. Effective date.
This article shall take effect immediately upon filing with the Secretary
of State and shall be used solely prospectively in the preparation of
assessment rolls on or after the next taxable status date, which is March 1,
2007.
§ 207-32 PENFIELD CODE § 207-32
1:276
ARTICLE IX
Condominium Conversions
[Adopted 11-16-2011 by L.L. No. 2-2011]
§ 207-33. Title.
This article shall be known as the "Condominium Conversion Law of the
Town of Penfield, New York."
§ 207-34. Definitions.
For the purposes of this article, a converted condominium unit shall be
defined as a dwelling unit held in condominium form of ownership that
has previously been on an assessment roll as a dwelling unit in other than
condominium form of ownership and has not been previously subject to
the provisions of Real Property Tax Law § 581, Paragraph (1)(a), or Real
Property Law § 339-y, Paragraph (1)(b).
§ 207-35. Statutory authority.
This article is adopted pursuant to the authority of Real Property Tax Law
§ 581(1)(c) and Real Property Law § 339-y, Subdivision a(f), which allows for
the adoption of a local law providing that the provisions of Real Property
Tax Law § 581, Paragraph (1)(a), and Real Property Law § 339-y, Paragraph
(1)(b), shall not apply to converted condominium units within a taxing
jurisdiction.
§ 207-36. Jurisdiction.
This article shall apply to the entire area of the Town of Penfield.
§ 207-37. Administration.
The Assessor of the Town of Penfield is hereby directed to not apply the
provisions of Real Property Tax Law § 581, Paragraph (1)(a), and Real
Property Law § 339-y, Paragraph (1)(b), to converted condominium units
within the Town of Penfield, unless such conversion was completed prior to
the effective date of this article.
§ 207-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 207-37
1:277

ARTICLE X
Solar, Wind Energy, and Farm Waste Energy System Exemptions
[Adopted 5-3-2017 by L.L. No. 2-2017]
§ 207-38. Title.
This article shall be entitled "Solar, Wind Energy and Farm Waste Energy
Systems."
§ 207-39. Authority.
This article is adopted pursuant to the Authority of New York Real Property
Tax Law § 487.
§ 207-40. Exemption.
Exemptions from taxation to the extent of any increase in assessed value
due to the construction of such systems set forth above shall not apply to
any such systems constructed within the Town of Penfield after the effective
date of this article.
§ 207-41. When effective.
This Local Law shall take effect immediately.
§ 207-38 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 207-41
1:279
Chapter 211
TOWN PARKS AND PROPERTIES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Animals — See Ch. 90. Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 220.
§ 211-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Penfield Town Parks and Properties
Ordinance."
§ 211-2. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter shall be to preserve the public peace and
good order on lands owned or controlled by the Town of Penfield, and
to contribute to the safety and enjoyment of the users of such properties
by regulating the hours of use, the use of motorized vehicles, and by
prohibiting certain activities inimical to the safe and orderly utilization of
Town properties.
§ 211-3. Jurisdiction and administration. [Amended 12-16-2015 by
L.L. No. 3-2015]
The authorized Town department of the Town of Penfield is charged with
the administration of this chapter and the posting of signs designating park
lands within the Town of Penfield. The provisions set forth herein shall apply
to and be in effect in all parks, Town-owned property, and properties under
the control, supervision, and jurisdiction of the Town of Penfield.
§ 211-4. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AUTHORIZED TOWN OFFICIAL — A person or persons employed by the
Town of Penfield so designated by the Supervisor or Town Board to perform
the duties of enforcing the provisions of this chapter.[Added 12-16-2015
by L.L. No. 3-2015]
NONPROFIT SERVICE ORGANIZATION — An organization exempt from the
payment of income tax under the Internal Revenue Code.
PARKS — The grounds, buildings thereon, waters therein, and any other
property thereof, which is now or hereafter will be owned by, maintained
by, operated by, or controlled by the Town of Penfield, including, but not
restricted to, for public park purposes.
PARKS WATERS — Any waterway or body of water located within a park or
on Town of Penfield property.
§ 207-41 PENFIELD CODE § 211-4
1:280
PERSON — Any individual, firm, partnership, corporation, or association of
persons; and the singular number shall include the plural.
STORM MANAGEMENT AREA — All areas that include any retention or
detention facility for the control of and management of stormwater. This
includes approaches, access, or adjoining lands that are needed to access,
inspect or maintain said facilities. This includes all structures, swales, and
areas owned, leased or operated by the Town of Penfield. These are defined
as the area encompassed by the static water level plus an additional 20 feet
of horizontal projection from the static water level.[Added 12-16-2015 by
L.L. No. 3-2015]
VEHICLE — Every device in, upon, or by which a person or property is or
may be transported.
§ 211-5. Hours of operation. [Amended 12-16-2015 by L.L. No.
3-2015]
No person shall be permitted to remain, stop, or park within the confines of
any Town park or property between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.,
prevailing local time in the Town of Penfield, except in an emergency or
with authorization of an authorized Town official. In case of an emergency,
or when, in the judgment of the authorized Town official, the public interest
demands it, any portion of a park may be closed to the public or the
designated persons until permission is given to reopen.
§ 211-6. Permits. [Amended 10-2-1996; 12-16-2015 by L.L. No.
3-2015]
A. A permit must be obtained from the authorized Town department for
the following uses and activities:
(1) Reserved use: the reserved use of park lodges, pavilions, formal
baseball fields, athletic fields, tennis courts, basketball courts or
bocce courts.
(2) Picnicking: picnicking on park grounds, in lodges or pavilions, or
the use of any playing fields or other park facilities by groups larger
than 24 persons.
(3) Camping: camping within any park allowed only upon the written
authorization of the authorized Town official.
(4) Vending: vending of food and drink (excluding all alcoholic
beverages) by nonprofit service organizations.
(5) Those acts prohibited without a written permit as set forth in
§ 211-9 of this chapter.
B. Permits shall be issued by the authorized Town department at the
Penfield Community Center, Penfield, NY 14526.
§ 211-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 211-6
1:281
C. All permit applicants must be 21 years of age or older. All permits must
be signed prior to use of a park facility, or prior to the activities for
which a permit is obtained. The signer of a permit shall be responsible
for any and all damages to park facilities or contents thereof, and shall
agree to indemnify the Town of Penfield for such damages.
D. All permits shall be issued by the authorized Town department and shall
be subject to park rules and regulations. The issued permit must be in
the possession of the applicant during the permitted function or activity.
A permit to do any act shall authorize the same only insofar as it may be
performed in strict accordance with the written terms and conditions
thereof and not in violation of any law, ordinance, rule, or regulation
governing parks. Any violation of any term or condition thereof, or any
law, ordinance, rule, or regulation governing parks, shall constitute
grounds for revocation of said permit by the authorized Town official,
whose action thereon shall be final. No permit for the same purpose
shall be issued to the person whose permit has been revoked during the
year in which the revocation is made.
E. Prior to permit issuance, the applicant shall pay a permit fee to the
Town of Penfield in an amount established by the Town Board of the
Town of Penfield. Such fee may vary according to the activity permitted
and the facilities used.
F. Prior to permit issuance, the organization that is going to be occupying
or using the Town's premises, as set forth by the authorized Town
official in the rental policies, shall obtain a certificate of insurance for
review to verify that there is coverage in force, with the Town of
Penfield named as an additional insured, to protect the Town's interest.
G. All entities reserving Town facilities for use shall be required to
complete a Town of Penfield application for parks and properties use.
(1) As part of the application approval process, the following groups or
organizations shall be required to provide an insurance certificate
naming the Town of Penfield as additional insured and providing
liability coverage in an amount determined by the Town Board:
(a) Established community groups and organizations requesting a
facility to be utilized for activities whose primary focus would
generally be considered to be "movement-oriented and/or
active in nature."
(b) Established community groups and organizations sponsoring
an event or activity that will be open to the general public, with
the exception of a sit-down meeting or lecture whose attendees
are likely to be (primarily) Penfield residents.
(c) Any group intending to serve food or offer food sales to the
general public. This intention must be stated at the time of the
permit application. Events involving food service must be in
compliance with Monroe County Health Department standards
§ 211-6 PENFIELD CODE § 211-6
1:282
§ 211-7. Park lodges and pavilions. [Amended 12-16-2015 by L.L.
No. 3-2015]
§ 211-8. Camping. [Amended 12-16-2015 by L.L. No. 3-2015]
When camping sites are made available within any park, as set forth in
§ 211-6A(3) of this chapter, campers shall abide by rules and regulations
particular to each site, as established by the authorized Town official.
§ 211-9. Acts prohibited without written permit. [Amended
7-6-1976; 10-2-1996; 12-16-2015 by L.L. No. 3-2015]
No person shall commit any of the following acts within any parks without
a written permit from the authorized Town official:
and therefore may require training and certification by that
entity.
(d) Any commercial business establishment renting the parks/
pavilion facilities to conduct company-related meetings or
social functions.
(2) In general, unless meeting the criteria described above, groups
requesting facility use on an occasional basis for events such as
meetings, lectures, discussion groups, i.e., activities primarily
considered "sedentary" in nature, shall not be required to submit a
certificate of insurance.
A. Park lodges and pavilions may only be reserved for use upon obtaining a
permit as provided herein.
B. Posted rules. Rules and regulations particular to each park's lodge or
pavilion shall be established by the authorized Town official and posted
within such facility.
C. Park lodges or pavilions may be made available for overnight use upon
written permission of the authorized Town official.
D. All keys for park lodges and pavilions must be picked up at the
authorized Town department during regular weekday business hours at
least 24 hours prior to use.
E. Pavilions not already reserved may be used on a first-come, first-served
basis.
A. Posting: post or display any sign, banner, or advertisement of any kind
within any park.
B. Noise: use any loudspeaker, other sound-amplifying equipment, or band
equipment.
C. Fires: picnic or cook in any area not designated by the authorized Town
official for that purpose; or make or kindle any fire, except in places
§ 211-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 211-9
1:283
§ 211-10. Park regulations.
provided therefor, and then subject to such regulations as may be
prescribed.
D. Temporary structures: erect or construct any tents, canopies, or other
temporary structure.
E. Lodging: sleep, camp, lodge, or reside in any park building, except in
such places as designated for said purpose by the authorized Town
official.
F. Stunts: ascend or land with any aircraft, gliders, or parachutes, except
in an emergency situation, or engage in rappelling, stunt flying, radiocontrolled
device usage, model airplane flying, model rocket launching,
or any other equipment using liquid or solid fuel as a propellant.
G. Defacing: write, paint, or carve on any tree, bench, or park structure.
H. Altering: construct, repair, or relocate utility fixtures, such as sewers,
hydrants, posts, lines, and conduits, or create trenches or excavations,
or engage in any construction in or on park lands.
I. Damaging: plant any flowers or shrubs; carry any slingshot, ax, saw,
shovel, or spade within the parks; violate the regulations of the
authorized Town official relating to any building or place; cut parkway
curbs for private drives; locate, grade, or construct paths, driveways,
and roadways across or along any parkway or park road.
J. Relocating: move or carry any tables, equipment, or any other park
property found within a park for park use to a different area of the park.
K. Soliciting: beg, hawk, peddle, or solicit within any park.
A. Disorderly conduct.
(1) Disrupting. No person shall disturb the peace and good order in
any park by fighting, quarreling, or wrangling with loud voice or
shouts, threatening by violence to the person or property of others,
or engaging in riotous clamor or tumult.
(2) Congregating. No person shall congregate with others in a public
place and refuse to comply with a lawful order of the police, the
authorized Town official or his authorized agents, or public safety
officers to disperse or leave the park. [Amended 12-16-2015 by
L.L. No. 3-2015]
(3) Gambling. No person shall play or bet at or against any game which
is played, conducted, dealt, or carried on with cards, dice, or other
device for money, chips, credit, or any other representative of
value; nor shall any person be allowed to maintain or exhibit any
gaming table or other instrument of gambling or gaming.
§ 211-9 PENFIELD CODE § 211-10
1:284
(4) Profanity. No person shall use obscene, profane, or abusive
language or gestures while in the parks.
(5) Weapons. No person, except peace officers of the county or other
law enforcement officers, shall have or carry any pistol, rifle,
switchblade, hunting knife, slingshot, dagger, metal knuckles, or
other dangerous weapons concealed or about his/her person while
in the parks.
B. Games regulated. [Amended 10-2-1996; 12-16-2015 by L.L. No.
3-2015]
(1) Horseplay. No person shall engage in potentially dangerous games,
activities, or horseplay that involves thrown or propelled objects,
such as footballs, baseballs, golf balls, bocce balls, horseshoes,
bicycles, roller skates, roller blades, skateboards, or similar
objects, except in areas specifically designated for such usage, and
then only subject to such rules as may be prescribed by the
authorized Town official. All games or activities of any description
must be conducted in a safe and orderly manner, and no rough or
boisterous practices will be allowed.
(2) Competitions. A prior written permit is required for organized
groups, clubs, or any other assemblage to schedule or participate
in any athletic competitions, and then only subject to such rules as
may be prescribed by the authorized Town official.
(3) No one shall play games for which a permit or fee may be required
without first obtaining such permit and paying such fee.
C. Environmental conservation.
(1) No person shall take or attempt to take any fish from, or send, or
throw any animal or thing into a pond or any of the waters of the
parks, except that fishing may be permitted in season in certain
park waters designated by the authorized Town official. No person
shall kill, injure, or unnecessarily disturb any fish, waterfowl, birds,
or animals. No person within the confines of a park shall hunt,
pursue with dogs, trap, or in any other way molest any wild bird or
animal found within the confines of a park, or rob, or molest any
bird nest or take the eggs of any bird.
(2) Notwithstanding the above prohibition against trapping, the Town
Board is authorized to grant limited permits for the trapping of wild
animals on Town-owned land to correct circumstances that caused
or contributed to a threat to public health, safety or welfare.
[Added 12-16-2015 by L.L. No. 3-2015]
D. Property preservation. No person shall injure, deface, disturb, or befoul
any part of a park, or any building, signs, equipment, or other property
found therein; nor shall any tree, flower, shrub, rock, or other mineral
be removed, injured, or destroyed.
§ 211-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 211-10
1:285
E. Littering.
(1) Dumping. No person shall, without the specific written consent of
the authorized Town official, bring into, leave behind, or dump any
material of any kind in a park, except the refuse, ashes, garbage,
and other material of a picnic, camp, or other permitted activity,
and such material shall be deposited in receptacles or pits provided
for such purposes. Refuse is not to be dropped, thrown, or
scattered on park property. Tin cans, plastic bottles or glassware,
or metallic substances containing sharp edges shall be deposited in
park receptacles. [Amended 12-16-2015 by L.L. No. 3-2015]
(2) Polluting. No person shall, either within or outside of a park,
discharge into, throw, cast, lay, drop, or leave in any waterway,
storm sewer, or drain flowing into or through a park any substance,
matter, or thing, either liquid or solid, which may result in the
pollution of said waterway within a park, or interfere with the
conservation of the natural resources of the park, or endanger the
health of visitors in the park.
F. Alcoholic beverages. The consumption of alcoholic liquors or
beverages, including beer, and the bringing of such items into the parks
are permitted under the following conditions: [Amended 7-6-1976,
3-7-1983, 10-20-1986; 12-16-2015 by L.L. No. 3-2015]
(1) Underage drinking. No person under the legally established
drinking age shall bring into any park or drink in any park any
alcoholic liquors or beverages, including beer; nor shall any person
or organization sell or give away alcoholic liquors or beverages,
including beer, to anyone under the legal drinking age, in any park.
Proof of age may be required for purposes of enforcing this
regulation.
(2) Unauthorized drinking. No person shall bring into or drink any
alcoholic liquors or beverages, including beer, in any park, except
in bleacher areas, at picnic tables, in pavilions, in shelters, or other
such areas designated by the authorized Town official; nor shall any
person drink any alcoholic beverages, including beer, in any
parking areas, roadways, or any rights-of-way within any park.
(3) Dispensing. Beer may be brought into the parks for consumption at
private family or social picnic parties approved by the authorized
Town official, but may not be dispensed or displayed at temporary
bars or from kegs or other bulk dispensing units unless permission
is obtained from the authorized Town official.
G. Illegal substances. [Amended 10-2-1996]
(1) Possession. No person shall be in possession of any quantity of
illegal narcotics or drugs while in any park; nor shall any person be
in possession of any devices or any other paraphernalia associated
§ 211-10 PENFIELD CODE § 211-10
1:286
with the use or manufacture of illegal narcotics or drugs while in
any park.
(2) Distribution. No person shall sell or distribute any quantity of
illegal narcotics or drugs while in any park; nor shall any person
sell or distribute abused dosages of any legal prescription drugs
while in any park.
(3) Usage. No person shall, in any way, use any quantity of illegal
narcotics or drugs while in any park; nor shall any person use
abused dosages of any legal prescription drugs while in any park.
H. Animal control. [Amended 10-2-1996; 6-21-2000; 12-16-2015 by
L.L. No. 3-2015]
(1) Dangerous. No person shall bring, permit, have or keep in any park
any vicious or dangerous dog, cat, household pet, or any other
animal that causes persons lawfully conducting themselves to be
fearful of immediate bodily harm, or which is destructive to another
dog, cat, household pet, birds, fish or any wildlife.
(2) Unleashed. No person shall bring into, have or keep in any park a
dog, cat, or other household pet unless the animal is equipped with
a collar or harness to which is attached a leash or retractable lead
of not more than 15 feet in length. The collar, harness, leash and
lead must be of sufficient strength to control and restrain the
animal and must be held by a person having the ability to do so. A
dog used in law enforcement, rescue tracking, or as a service or
guide dog, when working or training, may be unleashed.
(3) Nuisance. No person shall permit any dog, cat, or other household
pet to enter public buildings, parks waters, damage or deface
property, deposit waste, or commit a nuisance in any park. The pet
owner or harborer shall clean up and remove any waste deposited
by the pet on Town or other public property.
I. Horseback riding. No horseback riding is permitted in any parks,
except by authorization of an authorized Town official. [Amended
12-16-2015 by L.L. No. 3-2015]
J. Parks waters (stormwater management areas). [Amended
12-16-2015 by L.L. No. 3-2015]
(1) Swimming. No person, including diapered infants, shall bathe or
swim in any park waters.
(2) Boating. The use of boats, life rafts, inner tubes, or any other
flotation device intended to support persons is prohibited in any
park waters, except in the case of emergencies or as otherwise
authorized by an authorized Town official.
(3) Grass cutting within the water management area is not permitted,
except by Town staff or their agents or contractors.
§ 211-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 211-10
1:287
(4) Docks. No person shall install a dock, deck or platform within a
water management area.
(5) No person shall construct, repair or relocate any structure,
including, but not limited to, a birdhouse, bridge, bench or shelter,
unless authorized by a Town official.
(6) No person shall install an aeration device, bubbler, fountain, or any
other device.
(7) No person shall discharge into any pond or waterway any nontoxic
chemical, colorant, herbicide or algaecide.
(8) No one shall block control structures, alter pond control structures,
or interfere with control gates or valves.
K. Snow vehicles, motorbikes, and bicycles. [Amended 12-16-2015 by
L.L. No. 3-2015]
(1) Snowmobile operation. No motorized snow vehicles shall be
operated in any park.
(2) Motorbike operation. No unregistered motorbikes shall be
operated in any park.
(3) Bicycle operation. Riders of bicycles shall comply with the rules for
the regulation of other vehicles and, in addition thereto, shall be
subject to the following rules and regulations:
(a) Riding. Bicycle riders shall wear protective helmets, shall
proceed in the extreme right-hand lane of the roadway in
single file, shall not continually ride in a manner curving or
swerving across the roadway, shall not ride recklessly, and
shall not take both hands off the handles or steering
mechanism, at all times.
(b) Towing. A bicycle shall not be towed by a rope or otherwise,
nor shall any bicycle rider hold onto any moving vehicle.
(c) Small bicycles. Children under the age of 12 riding small
bicycles with wheels less than 20 inches in diameter may use
the footwalks. All other bicycles larger in size shall not use the
footwalks, except those areas as may be designated by the
authorized Town official.
(d) Bicycle parking. Wherever and whenever possible, bicycles
shall be parked in places provided for such purpose and be
kept locked.
L. Indecent acts. No person shall appear in a park in a state of nudity; nor
shall any person commit, perform, or engage in any lewd, lascivious,
obscene, or indecent act or behavior; nor shall any person make any
indecent exposure of his/her person.
§ 211-10 PENFIELD CODE § 211-11
1:288
§ 211-11. Traffic rules.
A. No parking. No person shall park or permit to stand any automobile,
motorcycle, motorized bike, or other vehicle of traffic or burden upon
the roadways, or any part thereof, so as to congest traffic or obstruct
the roadway. No parking shall be allowed on the major roadways or
lawn areas of any park, which will be designated by "no parking" signs.
Parking areas in the parks are established for the convenience of
patrons while using the facilities of the parks. It shall be unlawful for
any person to park, stop, or leave standing any vehicle on any roadway
or in any parking area in any park, except during the time he/she
remains in the park, other than temporarily with the authorization of
the authorized Town official, or while actively engaging in loading,
unloading, or while standing in obedience to traffic regulations or
traffic signals. [Amended 12-16-2015 by L.L. No. 3-2015]
B. Attending. No person operating any taxi, bus, limousine, or other
vehicle for hire shall attend upon any part of the roadways or parking
areas of any parks for the purpose of soliciting, taking passengers, or
persons other than those carried to the park by said vehicle.
C. Off roadway. No person shall operate any automobile, motorcycle,
motorized bike, or other vehicle of traffic or burden upon any part of the
parks, or any other Town-owned property, except on the proper
roadways and parking areas. Paths established as footpaths or bicycle
paths shall not be used for vehicular traffic, except in the case of
emergency vehicles or as otherwise authorized by the authorized Town
official. [Amended 12-16-2015 by L.L. No. 3-2015]
D. Passing. No vehicle shall pass another vehicle proceeding in the same
direction if the center of the roadway is marked with a double yellow
line, except in the case of emergency vehicles. [Amended 12-16-2015
by L.L. No. 3-2015]
E. Traffic control. It shall be the duty of every person operating an
automobile, motorcycle, motorbike, or other vehicle of traffic or burden
within the parks to comply with the Vehicle and Traffic Law of the State
of New York, and with all orders, directions, and regulations issued by
traffic officers, public safety officers, or signage officially displayed on
any post, standard, or device installed for the regulation of traffic,
including but not limited to stop signs, "one way" signs, and "do not
enter" signs.
F. Speeding. No vehicle shall be operated on any roadway or in any
parking area in any park at a speed exceeding 15 miles per hour, unless
otherwise posted.
G. After hours. No person shall park any vehicle or permit any vehicle to
remain standing on any roadway, parking area, or any other area within
the boundaries of any park, or any other Town-owned property, in
excess of the length of time and between the hours hereinafter
§ 211-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 211-11
1:289
§ 211-12. Parental responsibility.
No parent, guardian, or custodian of any minor shall knowingly permit or
allow said minor to do any act which would constitute a violation of this
chapter.
§ 211-13. Compliance with enforcement officials.
specified, except in the case of emergency vehicles or as otherwise
authorized by the authorized Town official. No parking or standing shall
be allowed in any parks between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.
prevailing local time in the Town of Penfield. [Amended 12-16-2015
by L.L. No. 3-2015]
H. Under the influence. No person who is under the influence of
intoxicating liquor, beer, wine, illegal drugs or narcotics, or abused
dosages of prescription drugs shall operate any vehicle within any park
or any other Town-owned property.
I. Reckless driving. No person shall operate a vehicle on any roadway,
parking area, or any other area within the boundaries of any park, or
any other Town-owned property, in a reckless manner or without due
regard for the safety and the rights of pedestrians and drivers and
occupants of other vehicles, so as to endanger the life, limb, or property
of any person lawfully conducting himself/herself within said park or
Town-owned property.
J. Spotlighting. No person shall use or shine spotlights, other highintensity
lights, or unnecessarily shine automobile headlights onto park
lands or other Town-owned property, except under the direction of a
police officer, public safety officer, or the authorized Town official,
except in the case of emergency vehicles. [Amended 12-16-2015 by
L.L. No. 3-2015]
K. Unsafe driving. No person shall drive, move, cause, or knowingly
permit to be driven or moved within any park, or any other Town-owned
property any vehicle or combination of vehicles which is in an unsafe
condition so as to endanger any person or cause damage to any park
property; nor shall any person operate any vehicle in any park, or any
other Town-owned property, with one or more other individuals hanging
onto, clinging to, or otherwise riding in an unsafe manner on the
outside of said vehicle; nor shall any person participate in a drag race
within any park or any other Town-owned property.
A. Noncompliance. No person shall fail or refuse to comply with any
reasonable order relating to the regulation, direction, or control of
traffic, or to the enforcement of this chapter, or to any other order
lawfully given by any police officer, public safety officer, or Town official
in the execution of his/her office or duties, in any park or any other
Town-owned property. [Amended 12-16-2015 by L.L. No. 3-2015]
§ 211-11 PENFIELD CODE § 211-13
1:290
§ 211-14. Enforcement.
§ 211-15. Liability for damages; penalties for offenses.
B. Liability. No official or employee of the Town of Penfield shall, while
acting pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, be personally liable for
any damage that may accrue to persons or property as the result of any
act required or permitted in the discharge of his official duties,
provided that such acts are performed in good faith and without gross
negligence.
A. This chapter shall be enforced by the authorized Town official, his/her
authorized agents, any other authorized Town of Penfield officials,
public safety officers, the Monroe County Sheriff's Department, the
New York State Police, and any other police agency having jurisdiction
within the Town of Penfield. [Amended 12-16-2015 by L.L. No.
3-2015]
B. Any police officer may issue an appearance ticket, pursuant to Article
150 of the Criminal Procedure Law of the State of New York, as well as
any other person authorized to issue appearance tickets under Chapter
7, Appearance Tickets, of the Town Code, to any person when he/she
has reasonable cause to believe that such person has committed a
violation of this chapter. Said appearance ticket shall direct the
designated person to appear in the Justice Court of the Town of Penfield
at a designated future date and time not later than 30 days from the
issuance of the appearance ticket in connection with the alleged
violation. Any police officer may, without a warrant, arrest any person in
violation of any park rules or regulations as set forth in this chapter or
as posted within such park, and take such person so arrested forthwith
before a judge having competent jurisdiction, and he/she shall have at
all times the right to enter the premises of any building, structure, or
enclosure, or any park, or any other Town-owned property, including
such grounds, buildings, and structures which may be leased or set
aside for private or exclusive use of any individuals or group of
individuals, for the purpose of arresting violators hereof, and may use
all necessary means to attain that end.
A. Any person damaging any park property, or any other Town-owned
property, shall be liable for any and all damages incurred.
B. Failure to observe any provision of this chapter shall constitute a
violation. Any person convicted of a violation of this chapter shall be
subject to a fine not to exceed $250 and/or imprisonment for a term not
to exceed 15 days, or both such fine and imprisonment. [Amended
7-6-1976]
§ 211-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 211-15
1:291
Chapter 215
VEHICLE PARKING AND STORAGE ON PRIVATE PROPERTY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 220. Zoning and land use — See Ch. 250.
§ 215-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter shall be to promote a clean, wholesome,
attractive environment and to promote and preserve the health, safety,
welfare, and good order of the community by prohibiting the maintenance of
junkyards and the exposure of dangerous or unsightly vehicles to the public
view.
§ 215-2. Scope.
§ 215-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ABANDONED VEHICLE — A vehicle that is left unattended for more than
48 hours on the property of another, if left without the permission of the
property owner.
COMMERCIAL VEHICLE — Any vehicle that is used in conjunction with any
business or trade or any vehicle including or similar in nature to, but not
limited to, those illustrated in Figure 1b of this chapter.9
CONSTRUCTION VEHICLE — Any vehicle customarily used in the
construction trades, including, but not limited to, vehicles used for
excavation and moving of earth and vehicles used for transporting
construction equipment or materials.
DEALER — A person who is engaged in the business of buying, selling or
dealing in motor vehicles. Any person who sells or offers for sale more than
five vehicles per calendar year or who displays or permits the display of
A. The provisions of this chapter shall apply to the parking, storage and
display of all vehicles within the Town of Penfield, with the exception of
vehicles used directly and solely for agricultural purposes by a farmer
engaged in a farming operation as defined in the New York State
Agriculture and Markets Law.
B. Where, in any specific case, different sections of this chapter or any
other applicable law, ordinance, rule or regulation specifies different or
conflicting requirements, the more restrictive requirements shall apply.
9. Editor's Note: Figure 1b is included in an attachment to this chapter.
§ 211-15 PENFIELD CODE § 215-3
1:292
three or more vehicles at any one time or within any one calendar month
shall be considered to be a dealer.
DRIVEWAY — An asphalt, concrete, crushed stone or other hard surface,
generally constructed between a public or private road and a garage or
dwelling, used for the parking of motor vehicles.
JUNK VEHICLE —
JUNKYARD — Any place where waste, discarded or salvaged materials are
bought, sold, exchanged, stored, baled, cleaned, packed, disassembled or
handled, or where vehicle wrecking takes place.
MOTOR VEHICLE — Any vehicle originally designed and intended to be
operated, drawn, or driven upon a public highway by any power other than
muscular power.
PARK or PARKING — The standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, on
any public or private property outside of a completely enclosed building.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — Any device or vehicle which is used for
recreational purposes. For purposes of this chapter, the definition of
"recreational vehicle" shall include, but not be limited to, travel trailers,
pickup campers, motor homes, boats, boat trailers, snow vehicles, racing
vehicles, cycle trailers, utility trailers or similar vehicles or equipment.
STORE or STORAGE — The parking of a vehicle for a period in excess
of seven consecutive days, unless otherwise restricted or permitted. The
incidental movement of a vehicle on or off the property shall not affect the
calculation of the seven-day time period.
UNINSPECTED, UNREGISTERED VEHICLE — Any vehicle that is without
a valid registration in any state of the United States or any province of
Canada or, if registered in New York State, that lacks a valid and current
New York State inspection sticker or, if registered outside New York State,
Any vehicle that is:
Wrecked, dismantled or which is no longer in condition for its
intended use; or
(1)
Being held or used for the purpose of resale of used parts or for the
purpose of reclaiming for use some or all of the materials therein
or for the purpose of disposing of the same; or
(2)
In such condition as to cost more to repair or place in operating
condition than its reasonable market value after such repair; or
(3)
Detrimental to a clean, wholesome or attractive environment,
taking into consideration the proximity of the vehicle to established
residential or recreational areas, main access routes, or other
areas from which the vehicle may be seen.
(4)
A.
Any motor vehicle that has remained unused for more than three
months and is not in condition to be removed under its own power shall
be presumptive evidence that such motor vehicle is a junk vehicle.
B.
§ 215-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 215-3
1:293
that lacks a valid and current inspection sticker of the state or province in
which it is registered if so required by such state or province.
VEHICLE — Any machine or vessel designed to travel along the ground or
water by the use of wheels, treads or other mechanical means that is used
to carry or convey people, animals or other objects.
VEHICLE WRECKING — The dismantling or disassembling of new or used
vehicles, or the storage, sale or dumping of dismantled, partially
dismantled, obsolete or wrecked vehicles or parts.
YARD, FRONT — The area between that part of the principal structure
nearest the public or private right-of-way line and the public or private
right-of-way line, bounded on each side by the side property lines of the lot.
On corner lots, irregularly shaped lots or in the case of an irregularly placed
principal structure on a lot, the "front yard" shall mean the area between
the wall determined by the Code Enforcement Official to be the front wall
of the principal structure and the right-of-way line and all areas within the
front setback described in Chapter 250, Zoning and Land Use, § 250-5.1F,
as amended or as described in any successor thereto.
YARD, REAR — The area between that part of the principal dwelling or
structure nearest the rear property line and the rear property line, bounded
on each side by the side property lines of the lot. On corner lots, irregularly
shaped lots or in the case of an irregularly placed principal structure on a
lot, the "rear yard" shall mean the area between the wall determined by the
Code Enforcement Official to be the rear wall of the principal structure and
the nearest property line(s), exclusive of the area located within the front
setback.
YARD, SIDE — The area between that part of the principal structure nearest
the side property line and the side property line of the lot. On corner lots,
irregularly shaped lots or in the case of an irregularly placed principal
structure on a lot, the "side yard" shall mean the area between the wall
determined by the Code Enforcement Official to be the side wall of the
principal structure and the nearest property line(s), exclusive of the area
located within the front setback.
§ 215-4. Abandoned vehicles.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to maintain or permit
to be maintained any abandoned vehicles in the Town of Penfield.
§ 215-5. Junk vehicles.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation, either as owner,
occupant, lessee, agent, tenant or otherwise, of a property within the Town
of Penfield to park, store, deposit or cause to suffer or permit to be parked,
stored or deposited, a junk vehicle or part or piece thereof on any private or
public property within the Town of Penfield unless he/she complies with any
of the following requirements:
§ 215-3 PENFIELD CODE § 215-5
1:294
§ 215-6. Uninspected, unregistered vehicles.
§ 215-7. Recreational vehicles.
A. Such vehicle shall be parked, stored or deposited in a completely
enclosed structure; or
B. Such vehicle shall be under active repair, reconstruction or
refurbishing by the owner thereof, who must be actually residing upon
the premises, and provided that only one such vehicle shall be stored or
deposited at any time on any premises; and further provided that such
vehicle must be shielded, maintained and protected so as not to create
any safety hazard, nuisance or unsightliness to surrounding property
owners or adjacent properties. Further, no such vehicle shall remain on
any premises for more than 60 days; or
C. Such vehicle shall be temporarily stored on the premises of a duly
authorized motor vehicle service station while awaiting service.
A. The parking and storage of uninspected, unregistered vehicles outside
of a completely enclosed structure is permitted on occupied residential
properties, provided they comply with the following:
(1) No more than one such vehicle shall be parked or stored on each
property.
(2) Such vehicle shall not be a junk vehicle.
(3) Such vehicle shall be located in the driveway.
(4) Such vehicle shall not interfere with the safe use of adjoining
premises or any public or private road.
(5) Such vehicle shall be owned by a resident of the premises.
(6) Such vehicle shall comply with all other requirements of this
chapter.
B. The parking and storage of uninspected, unregistered vehicles on a
nonresidential property is prohibited unless specifically approved by
the Town of Penfield for such use.
A. The parking or storage of recreational vehicles is permitted on
occupied residential properties, provided they comply with the
following:
(1) Such vehicles shall be owned by a resident of the premises except
that one recreational vehicle designed for use or capable of being
used as sleeping or living quarters, owned by a guest of the
resident of the premises, is permitted to be parked or stored on a
residential property for a period not to exceed 30 days in any
calendar year.
§ 215-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 215-7
1:295
§ 215-8. Commercial vehicles.
(2) Such vehicles shall not be junk vehicles.
(3) No more than one such vehicle shall be located in the driveway.
(4) Such vehicles shall not interfere with the safe use of adjoining
premises or any public or private road.
(5) Any and all additional recreational vehicles, beyond the one
permitted to be parked in the driveway, that are parked or stored
on the property, must be located in the side or rear yard and comply
with the minimum setback requirements for accessory structures
of the district in which they are located.
B. The parking and storage of recreational vehicles on an occupied
nonresidential property is prohibited unless specifically approved by
the Town of Penfield for such use.
A. The parking or storage of commercial vehicles is permitted on occupied
residential properties provided they comply with the following:
(1) Such vehicle shall be owned by either a resident of the premises or
the employer of such resident, shall be located in the driveway and
shall be a private passenger type vehicle as illustrated in Figure
1a;10 or
(2) One vehicle, which is not a private passenger-type vehicle as
illustrated in Figure 1a, may be parked on the property for a period
not to exceed three hours in any twenty-four-hour period, provided
such vehicle is located in the driveway and is owned by either a
resident of the premises or by the employer of such resident; or
(3) Such vehicle shall be parked or stored on the property temporarily
in connection with a bona fide commercial sale, service or delivery
to the property.
(4) Such vehicle shall not interfere with the safe use of adjoining
premises or any public or private road.
(5) Such vehicle shall comply with all other requirements of this
chapter.
B. The parking or storage of commercial vehicles is permitted on occupied
nonresidential properties, provided they comply with the following:
(1) The vehicle shall be owned by the business operating on the
property and shall be integral to the business operation; or
10.Editor's Note: Figure 1a is included in an attachment to this chapter.
§ 215-7 PENFIELD CODE § 215-8
1:296
§ 215-9. Construction vehicles.
§ 215-10. Vehicle sales.
(2) Such vehicle shall be on the property temporarily in connection
with a bona fide commercial sale, service or delivery to the
property.
(3) Such vehicle shall not interfere with the safe use of adjoining
premises or any public or private road.
(4) Such vehicle shall comply with all other requirements of this
chapter and Chapter 250, Zoning and Land Use, of the Town Code.
A. The parking or storage of construction vehicles is permitted on
occupied residential properties, provided they comply with the
following:
(1) Such vehicles shall be owned by a resident of the premises and
shall be used solely for the upkeep and maintenance of the property
on which they are being parked or stored. Such vehicles shall not
be used in conjunction with any commercial business, and such
vehicles shall be parked or stored in the side yard or rear yard and
comply with the minimum setback requirements for accessory
structures of the district in which they are located; or
(2) Such vehicle shall be parked or stored on the property temporarily
in connection with a bona fide commercial service to the property.
(3) Such vehicle shall not interfere with the safe use of adjoining
premises or any public or private road.
B. The parking or storage of construction vehicles is permitted on
occupied nonresidential properties, provided they comply with the
following:
(1) Such vehicles shall be owned by the business operating on the
property and shall be integral to the business operation.
Additionally, the parking or storage of such vehicles on the
property must have been previously approved by the Town of
Penfield and shall comply with the requirements of Chapter 250,
Zoning and Land Use; or
(2) Such vehicle shall be parked or stored on the property temporarily
in connection with a bona fide commercial service or to the
property.
(3) Such vehicle shall not interfere with the safe use of adjoining
premises or any public or private road.
A. Residential properties. The sale or display of vehicles for sale is
permitted on occupied residential properties, provided they comply
with the following:
§ 215-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 215-10
1:297
§ 215-11. Parking and storage on vacant property.
No vehicle shall be parked or stored on any privately owned vacant property
in any zoning district.
§ 215-12. Junkyards.
No lot in any zoning district may hereafter be used, nor any structure
erected, reconstructed, structurally altered, or moved in any zoning district
for use as a junkyard.
§ 215-13. Administration and enforcement.
The Code Enforcement Official of the Town of Penfield shall be responsible
for the administration and enforcement of this chapter.
§ 215-14. Penalties for offenses.
(1) Such vehicle shall be owned by a resident of the premises; and
(2) Such vehicles shall be limited to no more than two vehicles per
calendar year and no more than one at any one time; and
(3) Such vehicles shall not interfere with the safe use of adjoining
premises or any public or private road.
(4) Such vehicles shall not be owned by a dealer or display dealer
license plates.
(5) Such vehicles shall comply with all other requirements of this
chapter.
B. The sale or display of vehicles for sale is permitted on occupied
nonresidential properties, provided they comply with the following:
(1) The property displaying the vehicle or vehicles for sale must have
been previously approved by the Town of Penfield for such use.
(2) The parking of a vehicle which is displaying a "for sale" sign on any
occupied nonresidential property shall not be considered to be a
vehicle displayed for sale, provided the owner of said vehicle is
engaged in a permitted activity on the property, the vehicle is not
left to remain on the property during non-business hours, and the
vehicle is not in violation of any other applicable requirements.
(3) Any motor vehicle displaying a "for sale" sign that is temporarily
parked or stored on the premises of a duly authorized motor vehicle
service station while awaiting service shall not be considered to be
a vehicle displayed for sale.
A. Any person, firm, company or corporation owning or controlling any lot
or structure wherein or whereon there shall be placed or there exists
anything in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter; and any
§ 215-10 PENFIELD CODE § 215-14
1:298
Chapter 220
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
GENERAL REFERENCES
Vehicle parking and storage on private
property — See Ch. 215.
Recreational vehicles — See Ch. 224.
person, firm, company or corporation who or which shall assist in
the commission of any violation of this chapter; and any person, firm,
company or corporation who or which shall omit, neglect or refuse to
do any act required by this chapter shall be guilty as follows:
(1) For a first offense, punishable by a fine of not more than $350 or by
imprisonment not to exceed 15 days, or both; and
(2) For a second offense, both of which were committed within a period
of five years, punishable by a fine of not less than $350 nor more
than $700 or imprisonment for a period not to exceed 15 days, or
both; and
(3) Upon conviction for a third or subsequent offense, all of which were
committed within a period of five years, punishable by a fine of not
less than $700 nor more than $1,000 or imprisonment for a period
not to exceed 15 days, or both.
(4) In addition to the foregoing, by a penalty of not more than $500 to
be recovered by the Town of Penfield.
B. Each and every day that a violation of any of the provisions of this
chapter continues after written notice shall have been served upon the
person in violation of this chapter pursuant to the Civil Practice Law
and Rules shall constitute a separate violation. In addition to the
remedies set forth, the Town Board may institute an appropriate action
to proceed to abate any violation of the provisions of this chapter or to
compel compliance therewith.
§ 215-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 215-14
1:299

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 220-1. Purpose.
It is the purpose of this chapter to provide for the safety, health, protection
and general welfare of persons and property in the Town of Penfield by
enacting legislation pertaining to vehicles and traffic in the Town of
Penfield.
§ 220-2. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Vehicle and Traffic Law of the Town of
Penfield."
§ 220-3. Definitions.
§ 220-4. Applicability.
The regulations of this chapter relate to all roads in the Town of Penfield,
except those roads and highways operated and maintained by the New York
State Department of Transportation (DOT) pursuant to NYS V&T § 1684.
§ 220-5. Authority to install traffic control devices.
The Town Superintendent of Highways shall, on Town roads, and the
Monroe County DOT shall, on county roads, provide for the installation
and maintenance of traffic control devices when and as required under the
provisions of this chapter, to make effective the provisions of this chapter,
and may install and maintain such additional traffic control devices as
the Town Board may deem necessary to regulate, warn or guide traffic
under NYS V&T §§ 1660, 1682 and 1684. All traffic control devices shall be
installed and maintained consistent with the latest version of the MUTCD.
§ 220-6. Regulations and schedules.
A. The words and phrases used in this chapter shall, for the purposes of
this chapter, have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by Article
1 of the Vehicle and Traffic Law of the State of New York (NYS V&T).
B. The following words and phrases, which are not defined by NYS V&T
Article 1, shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this
section for the purpose of this chapter:
CURBLINE — The prolongation of the lateral line of a curb or, in the
absence of a curb, the lateral boundary line of the roadway.
HOLIDAYS — New Year's Day, Memorial Day, Independence Day, Labor
Day, Thanksgiving Day and Christmas Day.
MUTCD — The Federal Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices and
the appropriate New York State supplement.
§ 220-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-6
1:301
A. Regulations shall be adopted by the Town Board, in accordance with the
provisions of NYS V&T § 1660.
B. For the purpose of maintaining an accurate record of all regulations
adopted under the provisions of this chapter, there is hereby
established a system of schedules, appearing as Article VI of this
chapter, in which shall be entered all regulations after adoption. Such
schedules shall be deemed a part of the section to which they refer. All
regulations shall be adopted with reference to the appropriate schedule
as indicated in the various sections of this chapter.
§ 220-6 PENFIELD CODE § 220-6
1:302
ARTICLE II
Traffic Regulations
§ 220-7. Traffic control signals.
Traffic control signals shall be installed, maintained and operated at the
intersections and locations described in Schedule I (§ 220-22). No person
shall fail to obey any traffic signal so installed.
§ 220-8. One-way streets.
The streets or parts of streets described in Schedule II (§ 220-23) are
hereby designated as one-way streets, and vehicles shall proceed along
those streets or parts of streets only in the direction indicated.
§ 220-9. Prohibited turns at intersections.
No persons shall make a turn of the kind designated (left, right, all) at any of
the locations described in Schedule III (§ 220-24) during the hours indicated
on the day indicated.
§ 220-10. Turns on red signal.
In accordance with the provisions of NYS V&T § 1111(d)(2), no persons shall
make a right turn on a steady red signal at the locations designated on
Schedule IV (§ 220-25).
§ 220-11. Stop intersections.
The intersections described in Schedule V (§ 220-26) are hereby designated
as stop intersections, and stop signs shall be erected as indicated. No
person shall fail to come to a complete stop at any intersection so
designated and signed.
§ 220-12. Yield intersections.
The intersections described in Schedule VI (§ 220-27) are hereby
designated as yield intersections, and yield signs shall be erected as
indicated. No person shall fail to yield the right-of-way at any intersection
so designated and signed.
§ 220-13. Speed regulations.
The maximum speed at which vehicles may proceed on or along any Town or
county street or highway within the Town of Penfield is hereby established
at 25 miles per hour, except that the maximum speed limit for vehicles
proceeding on or along those streets, parts of streets or highways described
in Schedule VII (§ 220-28) shall be as indicated in said schedule.
§ 220-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-13
1:303

ARTICLE III
Parking, Standing and Stopping
§ 220-14. Applicability.
The provisions of this article shall apply except when it is necessary to
stop a vehicle to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the
directions of a police officer or official traffic control device.
§ 220-15. Winter parking restrictions.
Pursuant to NYS V&T § 1660, Subdivision 8, parking of any vehicle is
prohibited on all roads and shoulders, including New York State highways,
from November 15 to April 1 between the hours of 2:00 a.m. to 7:00 a.m.
(local time).
§ 220-16. No parking any time.
No person shall park a vehicle in any of the following places, whether or not
such places are marked by official signs:
A. Any vehicles left, abandoned or permitted to remain parked unattended
in violation of this section shall be deemed a nuisance and a menace to
the safe and proper regulation of traffic. The Superintendent of
Highways, his/her employees or any police officer may remove or cause
to be removed any such vehicles to any location without any liability for
damages to the vehicle. The owner or person in charge of such vehicle
shall be required to reimburse the Town for the actual and necessary
costs of removal and storage thereof before he/she is entitled to regain
possession. Such reimbursement shall be in addition to any penalty for
violation of this chapter as set forth in § 220-21.
B. It shall be the duty of the Superintendent of Highways and/or police
officer, as the case may be, to ascertain to the extent possible the owner
of the vehicle or person having same in charge and notify him/her of the
removal and disposition of any vehicle removed as provided in this
section and the amount which will be required to redeem same.
A. Within 15 feet of a fire hydrant.
B. In front of or within five feet of a public or private driveway.
C. In front of, in or within 20 feet of the driveway, entrance or paved
approach to any fire station.
D. Within a fire lane.
E. Within a traffic lane.
F. On a sidewalk.
G. In an area or space posted as a no-parking zone.
§ 220-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-16
1:305
§ 220-17. Standing prohibited.
No person shall stand a vehicle in any of the following places, whether or
not such places are marked by official signs:
§ 220-18. Stopping prohibited.
The stopping of vehicles at any time is hereby prohibited in the locations
described in Schedule X (§ 220-31).
§ 220-19. Parking prohibited certain hours.
The parking of vehicles is hereby prohibited in the locations described in
Schedule XI (§ 220-32) during the times indicated on any day indicated.
H. Outside of designated and striped parking spaces within a parking area.
I. In a fire lane or in an area or space posted as a no-parking zone on all
school properties, whether public or private, within the Town of
Penfield, provided that the school district or private institution owning
such property shall first file with the Penfield Town Clerk a written
consent that these restrictions be enforced on its property.
J. On any street or parts of streets described in Schedule VIII (§ 220-29).
A. Within 15 feet of a fire hydrant.
B. In front of or within five feet of a public or private driveway.
C. In front of, in or within, 20 feet of the driveway, entrance or paved
approach to any fire station.
D. Within a fire lane.
E. Within a traffic lane.
F. On a sidewalk.
G. In an area or space posted as a no-parking zone.
H. Outside designated and striped parking spaces within a parking area.
I. In a fire lane or in an area or space posted as a no-parking zone on all
school properties, whether public or private, within the Town of
Penfield, provided that the school district or private institution owning
such property shall first file with the Penfield Town Clerk a written
consent that these restrictions be enforced on its property.
J. In any addition locations described in Schedule IX (§ 220-30).
§ 220-16 PENFIELD CODE § 220-19
1:306
ARTICLE IV
Truck Regulations
§ 220-20. Restrictions on trucks.
A. All trucks, tractors and tractor-trailer combinations in excess of the
indicated gross weights are hereby excluded from the streets and
highways, or parts thereof, described in Schedule XII (§ 220-33).
B. The regulations established in this section shall not be construed to
prevent the delivery or pickup of merchandise or other property along
the highways from which such vehicles and combinations are otherwise
excluded.
§ 220-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-20
1:307

ARTICLE V
Penalties
§ 220-21. Penalties for offenses.
Every person convicted of a traffic infraction for a violation of any provision
of this chapter which is not a violation of any provision of the NYS V&T
shall, for a first conviction thereof, be punished by a fine of not more
than $50 or by imprisonment for not more than 15 days, or by both such
fine and imprisonment; for a second such conviction within 18 months
thereafter, such person shall be punished by a fine of not more than $100
or by imprisonment for not more than 15 days, or by both such fine and
imprisonment; upon a third or subsequent conviction within 18 months after
the first conviction, such person shall be punished by a fine of not more than
$250 or by imprisonment for not more than 15 days, or by both such fine
and imprisonment.
§ 220-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-21
1:309

ARTICLE VI
Schedules
§ 220-22. Schedule I: Traffic Control Signals.
In accordance with the provisions of § 220-7, traffic control signals shall
be installed, maintained and operated at the following intersections and
locations:
Intersection
(location) Type of Signal
(Reserved)
§ 220-23. Schedule II: One-Way Streets.
In accordance with the provisions of § 220-8, the following described streets
or parts of streets are designated as one-way streets in the direction
indicated:
Name of Street Direction Hours Limits
Creek Street
Extension
Southbound — —
§ 220-24. Schedule III: Prohibited Turns At Intersections.
In accordance with the provisions of § 220-9, no person shall make a turn of
the kind designated below at any of the following locations during the hours
indicated on any day:
Location Controlling Traffic
Prohibited Turn/
Hours
(Reserved)
§ 220-25. Schedule IV: Turns on Red Signal.
In accordance with the provisions of § 220-10, no person shall make a right
turn at a steady red signal at the following intersections:
Controlling Traffic On Direction Traffic At Intersection of
(Reserved)
§ 220-26. Schedule V: Stop Intersections.
In accordance with the provisions of § 220-11, the following described
intersections are designated as stop intersections:
§ 220-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-26
1:311
Stop Sign On Details
Number of
Signs At Intersection of
Abbotswood
Crescent
Westbound 1 Baird Road
Alberta Drive 1 Embury Road
Anthony Circle Southbound 1 Yorktown Drive
Avonmore Way 1 Foxbourne Road
Avonmore Way 1 Hillrise Drive
Baird Road 1 Community Center
Balsam Lane 1 Penbrooke Drive
Beacon Hills Drive 2 Blue Ridge Trail
Beacon Hills Drive 1 Scribner Road
Beacon Hills Drive
South
1 B. H. Drive
Beacon Hills Drive
South
2 Cove Circle
Bella Drive 1 Shoecraft Road
Belvista Drive 1 Longsworth Drive
Belvue Court 1 Wheelock Road
Berkshire Court 1 Willow Pond Way
Black Forest Drive 1 Harris Road
Bunker Hill Drive 1 Holley Ridge Circle
Burrows Hills Drive 1 Burrows Drive
Camberley Place 1 New Wickham Drive
Canyon Trail 1 Panorama Trail
Cardogan Square 1 Embury Road
Cascade Drive 1 Dublin Road
Cassidy Court 1 Jackson Road
Chatworth Circle
North
1 Braunston Drive
Chatworth Circle
South
1 Braunston Drive
Chippenham Drive Northbound 1 Folkestone Lane
City View Drive 1 Bunker Hill Drive
City View Drive 1 Qualtrough Road
Claireon Woods
Drive
1 Baird Road
Clark Road 2 Harwood Circle
§ 220-26 PENFIELD CODE § 220-26
1:312
Stop Sign On Details
Number of
Signs At Intersection of
Clearview Drive 2 Hillcrest Drive
Clearview Drive 2 Woodline Drive
Cloister Lane Private 1 State Road
Cobblestone
Crossing
1 Highland Drive
Courtshire Lane 1 Courtshire Lane
Crowne Pointe Drive 1 Plank Road
Denonville Ridge 1 Denonville Ridge and
Clark Road
Devonshire Circle 1 Willow Pond Way
Devonshire Circle 1 Willow Pond Way
Dogwood Glen 1 Panorama Trail
Dublin Road 1 Sweets Corner Road
Embury Road 2 Scribner Road
Embury Road
Extension
1 Crest View Drive
Fallbrook Circle 1 Tree Brook Drive
Farmbrook Drive 1 Panorama Trail
Fiddlers Hollow 1 Jackson Road
Fiddlers Hollow Northbound 1 Pipers Meadow Trail
Fiddlers Hollow Southbound 1 Pipers Meadow Trail
Folkestone Lane Eastbound 1 Chippenham Drive
Foxbourne Road 1 Hillrise Drive
Glendonwood Drive Northbound 1 Saybrooke Drive
Glendonwood Drive Southbound 1 Saybrooke Drive
Gloria Drive 2 Sweets Corner Road
Graham Creek
Heights [Added
4-6-2016]
Eastbound 1 Creek Street
Green Pine Lane 1 Shoecraft Road
Guygrace Lane Northwest
side
1 Anthony Circle
Guygrace Lane Southeast
side
1 Anthony Circle
Hallmark Road 1 City View Drive
Hallmark Road 1 Qualtrough Road
Hampstead Drive 1 State Road
§ 220-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-26
1:313
Stop Sign On Details
Number of
Signs At Intersection of
Harwood Circle 1 Clark Road
Hatch Road 1 Anytrell Drive
Havenshire Drive 1 Longsworth Drive
Henderson Drive 1 Baird Road
Hickory Ridge Road 1 Panorama Trail
Hidden Meadow 1 Hillrise Drive
Highland Drive 1 Gebhardt Road
Highland Drive 1 Liberty Street
Highledge Drive 2 Hillcrest Drive
Hillcrest Drive 2 Clearview Drive
Hillcrest Drive 2 Highledge Drive
Hillrise Drive 2 Avonmore Way
Hillrise Drive 1 Brentwood Drive
Hogan Road 1 Kennedy Road
Holley Brook Drive 1 Willowbend Drive
Holley Ridge Circle 2 Hallmark Road
Hotchkiss Circle 1 Wheelock Road
Hunters Drive North 1 Foxhill Drive
Hunters Drive South 1 Foxhill Drive
Huntington Meadow 1 Clark Road
Huntington Meadow 1 Panorama Trail
Katsura Court 1 Willow Pond Way
Kenmont Drive 1 Baird Road
Keyel Drive 1 Keyel Drive
Kings Mill Court 1 Five Mile Line Road
LaTerra Way Private 1 State Road
Lazy Trail 2 Valley Green Drive
Leonard Crescent 1 Henderson Drive
Live Oak Court 1 Willow Pond Way
Lone Oak Circle Eastern
section
1 Tall Tree Drive
Lone Oak Circle Western
section
1 Tall Tree Drive
Longsworth Drive 1 Belvista Drive
Mapleview Circle 1 Penbrooke Drive
§ 220-26 PENFIELD CODE § 220-26
1:314
Stop Sign On Details
Number of
Signs At Intersection of
Maryview Drive Southbound 1 Plank Road
Middleton Lane 1 Scribner Road
Mountain Road 1 Panorama Trail
Mt. View Crescent 1 Woodfield Drive
New Wickham Drive 1 Courtshire Lane
Oak Briar Court 1 Willow Pond Way
Old Barn Circle 1 Scribner Road
Old Penfield Road on
Circle
1 Old Penfield Road
Old Pond Road 1 Aspen Drive
Old Pond Road 1 Panorama Trail
Panorama Trail West 1 Panorama Trail
Parham Drive Northbound 1 Folkestone Lane
Parkview Drive 1 Old Browncroft
Boulevard
Pen Creek Drive Northbound 1 Yorktown Drive
Penshire Circle 1 Devonshire Circle
Perriwinkle Way 1 Woodfield Drive
Pine Meadow Drive Southbound 1 Walnut Hill Drive
Pineview Drive 1 Hillcrest Drive
Plank Road 1 Shoecraft Road,
eastbound and
westbound
Plank Road Eastbound 1 Jackson Road
Plank Road Eastbound 1 Salt Road
Plank Road Westbound 1 Jackson Road
Plank Road Westbound 1 Salt Road
Prospect Street 1 Harmon Road
Robert Road 1 Scribner Road
Rodney Lane 1 Belvista Drive
Rodney Lane 1 Embury Road
Rossbrook Drive 1 Aspen Drive
Rossbrook Drive 1 Panorama Trail
St. James Drive 2 Pen Creek Drive
Samson Drive 2 Timberline Drive
Samson Drive Northbound 1 Woodfield Drive
§ 220-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-26
1:315
Stop Sign On Details
Number of
Signs At Intersection of
Scarborough Park 1 Dundas Drive
(eastern intersection)
Scarborough Park 1 Dundas Drive
(western
intersection)
Seawatch Trail 1 Five Mile Line Road
Shire Court 1 Whalen Road
Shire Court Northbound 1 Chippenham Drive
Skyview Lane 1 Clark Road
Sovran Drive 1 Creek Street
Splendor Wood
Drive
1 Jackson Road,
eastbound
Spring Side Lane Eastbound 1 Jackson Road
Squire Circle 1 Jackson Road
Tall Tree Drive Southbound 1 Tall Tree Drive
Tammy Drive 1 Meadow View Drive
Terrace Hill Drive 1 Five Mile Line Road,
eastbound
Terrel Drive 1 Helen Drive
Thorntree Circle 2 Jackson Road (both
intersections)
Timber Brook Drive 1 Willowbend Drive
Timber Brook Lane 1 Holleybrook Drive
Timber Brook Lane 2 Wishing Well Circle
Timber Glen Trail 1 Whalen Road
Timberline Drive 1 Scribner Road
Tolewood Drive 1 Baird Road
Treebrook Drive 1 Fallbrook Circle
Tuscany Lane 1 State Road
Walnut Hill Drive West side 1 North of Walnut Hill
Drive and Glen Valley
Circle
Watersong Trail 1 Five Mile Line Road,
westbound
Wedgewood Drive 1 Gebhardt Road
Whalen Road 2 Random Knolls Drive
Wheelock Road 1 Baird Road
§ 220-26 PENFIELD CODE § 220-26
1:316
Stop Sign On Details
Number of
Signs At Intersection of
Willowbend Drive 1 Baird Road
Willowbend Drive 1 Wishing Well Circle
Willowhurst Drive 2 Brentwood Drive
Willow Pond Way Eastbound 1 Devonshire Circle
Willow Pond Way Southbound 1 Devonshire Circle
Willow Pond Way South side 1 Willow Pond Way
Winterset Drive 1 Panorama Trail
Witherspoon Lane 1 Embury Road
Witherspoon Lane 1 Rodney Lane
Woodfield Drive Northbound 1 Mt. View Crescent
Woodfield Drive Northbound 1 Perriwinkle Way
Woodfield Drive Southbound 1 Mt. View Crescent
Woodfield Drive Southbound 1 Perriwinkle Way
Woodline Drive 2 Clearview Drive
Woody Lane 1 Qualtrough Road
Yorktown Drive 1 Pen Creek Drive
§ 220-27. Schedule VI: Yield Intersections.
In accordance with the provisions of § 220-12, the following described
intersections are designated as yield intersections:
Yield Sign
Direction
of Travel
Number of
Signs At Intersection of
Burning Tree Lane East 2 Hilltop Drive
Corral Drive South Corral Drive
Helen Drive South 1 Terrel Drive
Hilltop Drive South 1 Tammy Drive
Jacaranda Court North 1 Willow Pond Way
Pennicott Circle North Pennicott Circle
Thoroughbred Trail East Corral Drive
Whalen Road East 1 Dublin Road
Woodlyn Way East At stem of Rolling
Meadows Way
Woody Lane North 1 Keyel Drive
§ 220-28. Schedule VII: Speed limits.
§ 220-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-28
1:317
A. In accordance with the provisions of § 220-13, the maximum speed
limits are hereby established as indicated upon the following streets or
parts of streets:
Street Name Location
Maximum Speed
Limit
(mph)
(*indicates a Monroe County road)
Allen Road 40
*Bay Road 35
Baird Road NYS Route 441 to
NYS Route 286
35
*Baird Road NYS Route 441 to
Perinton Town line
35
*Carter Road 35
County Line Road 40
*Creek Street 35
Dublin Road 30
Embury Road 35
Fellows Road 35
*Five Mile Line Road 500 feet north of
Whalen Road to
Perinton Town line
30
*Five Mile Line Road 500 feet north of
Whalen Road to
Webster Town line
35
Gloria Drive 40
*Harris Road 40
Hatch Road 35
Hermance Road 35
Hogan Road 40
*Huber Road 40
*Jackson Road Webster Town line to
Jackson Road
Extension
35
*Jackson Road
Extension
35
(Old) Jackson Road Jackson Road
Extension to Whalen
Road
35
Kennedy Road 40
§ 220-28 PENFIELD CODE § 220-28
1:318
Street Name Location
Maximum Speed
Limit
(mph)
(*indicates a Monroe County road)
*Linden Avenue 35
Marchner Road 40
Northrup Road 35
Panorama Trail From Dogwood Glen
to Penfield Road
35
*Panorama Trail From Penfield Road
to NYS Route 441
35
Panorama Trail Between NYS Route
441 and Irondequoit
Creek
40
*Penfield Road Panorama Trail to
Brighton Town Line
35
Penfield Road Panorama Trail to
NYS Route 441
35
Old Penfield Road 35
Penfield Center Road Jackson Road to NYS
Route 250
35
Penfield Center Road NYS Route 250 to
Harris Road
40
*Plank Road NYS Route 404 to
Five Mile Line Road
35
*Plank Road Five Mile Line Road
to NYS Route 250
40
*Plank Road NYS Route 250 to
Wayne County line
45
Qualtrough Road 35
*Salt Road 40
Scribner Road 35
*State Road 40
Sweets Corners Road 40
*Watson Road 35
Watson Hulbert Road 40
*Whalen Road NYS Route 286 to
NYS Route 250
35
Whalen Road NYS Route 250 to
Dublin Road
35
§ 220-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-29
1:319
§ 220-29. Schedule VIII: No Parking Anytime.
A. Parking prohibited. In accordance with § 220-16J, no person shall park
a vehicle in any of the following places:
Name of Street Side Location
Brentwood Drive From Penfield Road to Hillrise
Drive
Courtshire Lane Both Between 37 and 85 Courtshire
Lane; 800 feet
Embury Road North From west boundary of Greenwood
Park to intersection with Scribner
Road; 703 feet
Five Mile Line Road In front of 2070; 800 feet
Gebhardt Road Both 300-foot section for St. Joseph's
Church parking; 1,400 feet
Harris Road West From the intersection of Route 441
(Penfield Road), to the north a
distance of approximately 325 feet
Liberty Street Both Entire length
Linden Avenue South Between the Brighton and Pittsford
Town lines
Linden Park 750 feet
Linear Park 500 feet
Motts Lane Both 250 feet
Panorama Creek
Drive
Both Entire length
Panorama West At circle 200 feet
Robert Road South Within 200 feet of Scribner Road
Sawmill Drive At circle 250 feet
B. Time-limited parking. In accordance with § 220-16J, no person shall
park a vehicle in any of the following places for longer than the period
indicated:
Name of Street Side Time Limit Location
Five Mile Line
Road
On-street
parking
(striped)
2 hours North and south of
Penfield Road
Penfield Road North; onstreet
parking
2 hours East of Five Mile Line
Road
§ 220-29 PENFIELD CODE § 220-30
1:320
§ 220-30. Schedule IX: Standing Prohibited.
In accordance with the provisions of § 220-17J, no person shall stand a
vehicle in any of the following places:
Name of Street Location
Gebhardt Road Within 500 feet of St. Josephs Church
§ 220-31. Schedule X: Stopping Prohibited.
In accordance with the provisions of § 220-18, the stopping of vehicles at
any time is hereby prohibited in the following locations:
Name of Street Side Location
Scribner Road East From Embury Road to the north
across from Greenwood Park
§ 220-32. Schedule XI: No Parking Certain Days/Hours.
In accordance with the provisions of § 220-19, the parking of vehicles is
prohibited in the following locations during the hours indicated on any day
indicated:
Name of Street Side Hours/Days Location
Belvue Court Both 7:00 a.m. to 4:00
p.m./ School days
Entire length
Cedarbrook Circle Both April 1 to
November 1
Entire length
Coachman Drive
and Brougham
Drive
Both 10:00 p.m. to 6:00
a.m.
From terminus of
gutters on Coachman
Drive to terminus of
gutters on Brougham
Drive
Corwin Road Both 7:00 a.m. to 4:00
p.m./ School days
Entire length
Devonshire Drive Both 7:00 a.m. to 4:00
p.m./ School days
Entire length
Hotchkiss Circle Both 7:00 a.m. to 4:00
p.m./ School days
Entire length
Peachtree Road Both 7:00 a.m. to 4:00
p.m./ School days
Entire length
Corner of Scribner
Road, Hatch Road
and Plank Road
May to August 1 1,000 feet on Scribner
Road, south of Plank
Road; 1,000 feet on
Plank Road
Wheelock Road Both 7:00 a.m. to 4:00
p.m./ School days
Entire length
§ 220-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-33
1:321
§ 220-33. Schedule XII: Truck Exclusions.
In accordance with the provisions of § 220-20, all truck, tractors and
tractor-trailer combinations in excess of the indicated gross weight are
excluded from the streets or parts of streets described below:
Name of Street
Weight Limit
(tons)
Baird Road (within Town limits) 5
Bunker Hill Drive 5
Clark Road 5
County Line Road 8
Daytona Drive 8
Dublin Road 8
Embury Road 5
Farm Brook Drive 5
Fellows Road 5
Gloria Drive 5
Hatch Road 5
Helen Drive 5
Kirkland Drive 5
Liberty Street 4
Marchner Road 8
Midland Drive 5
Northrup Road 5
Old Penfield Road (by Skyline
Apartments) 8
Panorama Trail 5
Penfield Center Road 5
Qualtrough Road 5
Scribner Road 5
Shoecraft Road 5
Sweets Corner Road 8
Terrel Drive 5
Watson-Hulburt Road 8
Whalen Road (Town section) 8
§ 220-34. Schedule XIII: Turning Restrictions.
A. Right turn only.
§ 220-33 PENFIELD CODE § 220-34
1:322
Name of Street Direction of Travel Right Turn Only Onto
Penfield Road Eastbound Panorama Plaza, 500 feet
west of Panorama Trail
Penfield Road Eastbound Panorama Plaza, 800 feet
west of Panorama Trail
Penfield Road Eastbound Panorama Trail
Penfield Road Eastbound and
westbound
Panorama Trail at Tops/
Home Depot
Penfield Road Eastbound Top's Supermarket,
1,300 feet west of
Panorama Trail
B. Left turn only.
Name of Street Direction of
Travel
Left Turn Only Onto
Panorama Trail Northbound and
southbound
Penfield Road
Penfield Road Eastbound,
northbound and
southbound
Panorama Trail at Tops/
Home Depot
§ 220-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-34
1:323
Chapter 224
VEHICLES, USE AND OPERATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Town parks and properties — See Ch. 211.
Vehicle parking and storage on private
property — See Ch. 215.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 220.
§ 224-1. Legislative intent.
It is the purpose of this chapter to preserve and promote the health, safety
and general welfare of those inhabitants of the Town of Penfield who wish
to use and operate motor-driven vehicles on private property or municipal
property. It is also the purpose of this chapter to prevent those inhabitants
of the Town of Penfield who wish to use and operate motor-driven vehicles
from trespassing on public or private property in the Town of Penfield, from
annoying inhabitants and from creating a public nuisance.
§ 224-2. Prohibited operation.
It shall be unlawful to operate or for the owner to permit the operation of
any type of motor-driven vehicle or conveyance, including, but not limited
to, two-wheel vehicles known as minibikes, trailbikes, motorcycles, fourwheel
motor vehicles known as go-carts and no-wheel vehicles such as
snowmobiles, under the following circumstances:
A. On private property of another person without permission of the owner
or occupant of said property.
B. Any property owned, leased or controlled by the Town of Penfield
except on trails duly designated by the Town for the use of such vehicles
at the times and in the manner so designated.
C. On property owned by the Town of Penfield and on privately owned
property as follows:
(1) In such a manner as to create loud, unnecessary or unusual noise
so as to disturb or interfere with the peace and quiet of other
persons.
(2) In a careless, reckless or negligent manner so as to endanger, or be
likely to endanger, the safety or property of any person, including
the operator of said vehicle.
(3) At a rate of speed greater than reasonable or proper under the
surrounding circumstances.
§ 220-34 PENFIELD CODE § 224-2
1:324
§ 224-3. Enforcement.
The Monroe County Sheriff's Department and any other peace or police
officer shall enforce the provisions of this chapter.
§ 224-4. Exceptions.
This chapter shall not apply to police and emergency vehicles.
§ 224-5. Confiscation of vehicles in violation; penalties for offenses.
(4) While in an intoxicated condition or under the influence of
narcotics or drugs as defined by Vehicle and Traffic Law § 1194-a.
(5) Between sunset and sunrise or when lights are required for safety
without displaying at least one lighted headlight and taillight.
A. Any member of the Monroe County Sheriff's Department or any other
enforcement officer who shall encounter any person operating a motordriven
vehicle or conveyance in violation of this chapter shall remove
said vehicle or conveyance to a place designated by the Sheriff. The
owner or duly designated agent of the owner of such vehicle or
conveyance may regain same upon payment of all expenses and
charges necessarily and actually incurred by the removal and/or
storage of said vehicle or conveyance.
B. Any person, firm or corporation violating or permitting the violation of
any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a violation and shall be
subject to a fine of not less than $10 nor more than $250 or to
imprisonment of not more than 15 days, or both such fine and
imprisonment. Any vehicle or conveyance which is confiscated pursuant
to this section will be sold at public auction according to the
appropriate procedures and laws affecting public auctions by
municipalities.
C. In addition, any and all persons, firms or corporations violating or
permitting a violation of any of the provisions of this chapter, or
omitting or refusing to do any act required by this chapter, shall
severally, for each and every violation and noncompliance respectively,
be liable for a civil penalty of $50. This imposition of all penalties for
any violation of this chapter shall not excuse the violation or permit it to
continue. The application of the above penalties or the provisions of this
chapter shall not be held to prevent the enforcement of this chapter by
other action.
§ 224-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 224-5
1:325
Chapter 232
WATERWAYS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Zoning and land use — See Ch. 250.
§ 224-5 PENFIELD CODE § 224-5
1:326
Part 1
[AdoWpatetedrf3r-o4n-2t 0C1o5nsBiystLe.nLc. yN Roe. v1i-e2w015]
ARTICLE I
Review of Actions in Coastal Areas
§ 232-1. Title.
This Part 1 will be known as the "Town of Penfield Waterfront Consistency
Review Law."
§ 232-2. Authority and purpose.
§ 232-3. Definitions.
As used in this Part 1, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ACTIONS — Include all the following, except minor actions:
A. This Part 1 is adopted under the authority of the Municipal Home Rule
Law and the Waterfront Revitalization of Coastal Areas and Inland
Waterways Act of the State of New York (Article 42 of the Executive
Law).
B. The purpose of this Part 1 is to provide a framework for agencies of the
Town of Penfield to incorporate the policies and purposes contained in
the Town of Penfield Local Waterfront Revitalization Program (LWRP)
when reviewing applications for actions or direct agency actions within
the waterfront revitalization area boundary; and to assure that such
actions and direct actions by Town agencies are consistent with the
LWRP policies and purposes.
C. It is the intention of the Town of Penfield that the preservation,
enhancement and utilization of the unique waterfront area of the Town
takes place in a coordinated and comprehensive manner to ensure a
proper balance between protection of natural resources and the need to
accommodate limited population growth and economic development.
Accordingly, this Part 1 is intended to achieve such a balance,
permitting the beneficial use of waterfront resources while preventing
loss and degradation of living waterfront resources and wildlife;
diminution of open space areas or public access to the waterfront;
disruption of natural waterfront processes; impairment of scenic,
cultural or historical resources; losses due to flooding, erosion and
sedimentation; impairment of water quality; or permanent adverse
changes to ecological systems.
D. The substantive provisions of this Part 1 shall only apply when there is
in existence a Town of Penfield Local Waterfront Revitalization Program
which has been adopted in accordance with Article 42 of the Executive
Law of the State of New York.
§ 232-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 232-3
1:327
AGENCY — Any board, agency, department, office, other body, or officer of
the Town of Penfield.
CONSISTENT — The action will fully comply with the LWRP policy
standards, conditions and objectives and, whenever practicable, will
advance one or more of them.
DIRECT ACTIONS — Actions planned and proposed for implementation
by an agency, such as, but not limited to, a capital project, rule-making,
procedure-making and policy-making.
ENVIRONMENT — All conditions, circumstances and influences
surrounding and affecting the development of living organisms or other
resources in the waterfront area.
ENVIRONMENTAL ASSESSMENT FORM or EAF — A form used in
determining the environmental significance or nonsignificance of actions in
accordance with the State Environmental Quality Review Act (SEQRA).
LOCAL WATERFRONT REVITALIZATION PROGRAM (LWRP) — The Local
Waterfront Revitalization Program of the Town of Penfield, approved by
the Secretary of State pursuant to the Waterfront Revitalization of Coastal
Areas and Inland Waterways Act (Executive Law, Article 42), a copy of which
is on file in the office of the Clerk of the Town of Penfield.
MINOR ACTIONS — Include the following actions, which are not subject to
review under this Part 1:
Projects or physical activities, such as construction or any other
activities that may affect natural, man-made or other resources in the
waterfront area or the environment by changing the use, appearance or
condition of any resource or structure, that:
(1) Are directly undertaken by an agency; or
(2) Involve funding by an agency; or
Require one or more new or modified approvals, permits, or review
from an agency or agencies;
(3)
A.
Agency planning and policy-making activities that may affect the
environment and commit the agency to a definite course of future
decisions;
B.
Adoption of agency rules, regulations and procedures, including local
laws, codes, ordinances, executive orders and resolutions, that may
affect waterfront resources or the environment; and
C.
D. Any combination of the above.
Maintenance or repair involving no substantial changes in an existing
structure or facility;
A.
Replacement, rehabilitation or reconstruction of a structure or facility,
in kind, on the same site, including upgrading buildings to meet
building or fire codes, except for structures in areas designated by the
B.
§ 232-3 PENFIELD CODE § 232-3
1:328
coastal erosion hazard area (CEHA) law where structures may not be
replaced, rehabilitated or reconstructed without a permit;
Repaving or widening of existing paved highways not involving the
addition of new travel lanes;
C.
Street openings and right-of-way openings for the purpose of repair or
maintenance of existing utility facilities;
D.
Maintenance of existing landscaping or natural growth, except where
threatened or endangered species of plants or animals are affected, or
within significant coastal fish and wildlife habitat areas;
E.
Granting of individual setback and lot line variances, except in relation
to a regulated natural feature, a bulkhead or other shoreline defense
structure;
F.
Minor temporary uses of land having negligible or no permanent impact
on waterfront resources or the environment;
G.
Installation of traffic control devices on existing streets, roads and
highways;
H.
Mapping of existing roads, streets, highways, natural resources, land
uses and ownership patterns;
I.
Information collection, including basic data collection and research,
water quality and pollution studies, traffic counts, engineering studies,
surveys, subsurface investigations and soils studies that do not commit
the agency to undertake, fund or approve any action;
J.
Official acts of a ministerial nature involving no exercise of discretion,
including building where issuance is predicated solely on the
applicant's compliance or noncompliance with the relevant local
building code;
K.
Routine or continuing agency administration and management, not
including new programs or major reordering of priorities that may
affect the environment;
L.
Conducting concurrent environmental, engineering, economic,
feasibility and other studies and preliminary planning and budgetary
processes necessary to the formulation of a proposal for action,
provided those activities do not commit the agency to commence,
engage in or approve such action;
M.
N. Collective bargaining activities;
Investments by or on behalf of agencies or pension or retirement
systems, or refinancing existing debt;
O.
Inspections and licensing activities relating to the qualifications of
individuals or businesses to engage in their business or profession;
P.
§ 232-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 232-3
1:329
WATERFRONT ASSESSMENT FORM (WAF) — The form, a sample of which
is appended to this Part 1, used by an agency to assist in determining the
consistency of an action with the Local Waterfront Revitalization Program.
WATERFRONT REVITALIZATION AREA BOUNDARY — The waterfront
revitalization area boundary as delineated in the Town of Penfield Local
Waterfront Revitalization Program.
§ 232-4. Management and coordination of LWRP.
Purchase or sale of furnishings, equipment or supplies, including
surplus government property, other than the following: land,
radioactive material, pesticides, herbicides, storage of road deicing
substances, or other hazardous materials;
Q.
Adoption of regulations, policies, procedures and local legislative
decisions in connection with any action on this list;
R.
Engaging in review of any part of an application to determine
compliance with technical requirements, provided that no such
determination entitles or permits the project sponsor to commence
the action unless and until all requirements of this Part 1 have been
fulfilled;
S.
Civil or criminal enforcement proceedings, whether administrative or
judicial, including a particular course of action specifically required
to be undertaken pursuant to a judgment or order, or the exercise of
prosecutorial discretion;
T.
U. Adoption of a moratorium on land development or construction;
V. Interpreting an existing code, rule or regulation;
Designation of local landmarks or their inclusion within historic
districts;
W.
Emergency actions that are immediately necessary on a limited and
temporary basis for the protection or preservation of life, health,
property or natural resources, provided that such actions are directly
related to the emergency and are performed to cause the least change
or disturbance, practicable under the circumstances, to waterfront
resources or the environment. Any decision to fund, approve or directly
undertake other activities after the emergency has expired is fully
subject to the review procedures of this Part 1;
X.
Local legislative decisions such as rezoning where the Town Board
determines the action will not be approved.
Y.
A. The Town of Penfield Planning Department shall be responsible for
coordinating review of actions in the Town's waterfront revitalization
area for consistency with the LWRP, and will advise, assist and make
consistency recommendations to other Town agencies in the
implementation of the LWRP, its policies and projects, including
§ 232-3 PENFIELD CODE § 232-4
1:330
§ 232-5. Review of actions.
physical, legislative, regulatory, administrative and other actions
included in the program.
B. The Planning Board shall coordinate with the New York State
Department of State regarding consistency review of actions by federal
agencies and with state agencies regarding consistency review of their
actions.
C. The Planning Department shall assist the Town Board in making
applications for funding from state, federal, or other sources to finance
projects under the LWRP.
D. The Planning Department shall perform other functions regarding the
waterfront area and direct such actions or projects as the Town Board
may deem appropriate to implement the LWRP.
A. Whenever a proposed action is located within the Town's waterfront
area, each Town agency shall, prior to approving, funding or
undertaking the action, make a determination that it is consistent with
the LWRP policy standards summarized in Subsection H herein. No
action in the waterfront area shall be approved, funded or undertaken
by that agency without such a determination.
B. Whenever a Town agency receives an application for approval or
funding of an action, or as early as possible in the agency's formulation
of a direct action to be located in the waterfront area, the agency shall
refer a copy of the completed WAF to the Planning Board within 10 days
of its receipt and, prior to making its determination, shall consider the
recommendation of the Planning Board with reference to the
consistency of the proposed action.
C. After referral from an agency, the Planning Board (or the Town Board in
the case of the LaSalle's Landing District) shall consider whether the
proposed action is consistent with the LWRP policy standards set forth
in Subsection H herein. The Planning Board shall require the applicant
to submit all completed applications, WAFs, EAFs, and any other
information deemed necessary to its consistency recommendation.
(1) The Planning Board (or the Town Board in the case of the LaSalle's
Landing District) shall render its written recommendation to the
agency within 30 days following referral of the WAF from the
agency, unless extended by mutual agreement of the Planning
Board and the applicant or, in the case of a direct action, the
agency. The Planning Board’s recommendation shall indicate
whether the proposed action is consistent with or inconsistent with
one or more of the LWRP policy standards and shall elaborate in
writing the basis for its opinion. The Planning Board (or the Town
Board in the case of the LaSalle's Landing District) shall, along with
a consistency recommendation, make any suggestions to the
§ 232-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 232-5
1:331
agency concerning modification of the proposed action, including
the imposition of conditions, to make it consistent with LWRP policy
standards or to greater advance them.
(2) In the event that the Planning Board’s recommendation is not
forthcoming within the specified time, the agency shall make its
consistency decision without the benefit of the Planning Board’s
recommendation.
(3) In the event that an action requires approval by the Planning Board
or the Town Board, the consistency review shall be included in the
Planning Board's or Town Board's review and a written consistency
determination shall be made prior to any decision on the action
before the Board having jurisdiction.
D. If an action requires approval of more than one Town agency, decisionmaking
will be coordinated between the agencies to determine which
agency will conduct the final consistency review, and that agency will
thereafter act as designated consistency review agency for the specific
action being reviewed. Only one WAF per action will be prepared. If the
agencies cannot agree, the Town Board shall designate the consistency
review agency.
E. Determination of consistency.
(1) Upon receipt of the Planning Board’s recommendation, the agency
shall consider whether the proposed action is consistent with the
LWRP policy standards summarized in Subsection H herein. The
agency shall consider the consistency recommendation of the
Planning Board, the WAF and other relevant information in making
its written determination of consistency. No approval or decision
shall be rendered for an action in the waterfront area without a
written determination of consistency having first been rendered by
a Town agency.
(2) The Zoning Board of Appeals is the designated agency for the
determination of consistency for variance applications subject to
this Part 1. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall consider the written
consistency recommendation of the Planning Board in the event
and at the time it makes a decision to grant such a variance and
shall impose appropriate conditions on the variance to make the
activity consistent with the objectives of this Part 1. The Town
Board shall have jurisdiction of all such matters within the
LaSalle's Landing District.
F. Where an EIS is being prepared or required, the draft EIS must identify
applicable LWRP policies standards in Subsection H and include a
thorough discussion of the effects of the proposed action on such policy
standards.
G. In the event the Planning Board’s recommendation is that the action is
inconsistent with the LWRP, and the agency makes a contrary
§ 232-5 PENFIELD CODE § 232-5
1:332
determination of consistency, the agency shall elaborate in writing
the basis for its disagreement with the recommendation and state the
manner and extent to which the action is consistent with the LWRP
policy standards.
H. Actions to be undertaken within the waterfront area shall be evaluated
for consistency in accordance with the following summary of LWRP
policy standards, which are derived from and further explained and
described in Section III (Policies) of the Town of Penfield LWRP, a copy
of which is on file in the Town Clerk's office and available for inspection
during normal business hours. Agencies which undertake direct actions
must also consult with Section IV (Proposed Uses and Projects) in
making their consistency determination. The action must be consistent
with the policies to:
(1) Policy 1: foster a pattern of development in the waterfront area that
enhances the community character, preserves open space, makes
efficient use of infrastructure, makes beneficial use of a waterfront
location, and minimizes adverse effects of development.
(2) Policy 2: preserve historic resources of the waterfront area.
(3) Policy 3: enhance visual quality and protect scenic resources
throughout the waterfront area.
(4) Policy 4: minimize loss of life, structure, and natural resources from
flooding and erosion.
(5) Policy 5: protect and improve water quality and supply.
(6) Policy 6: protect and restore the quality and function of the
ecosystem.
(7) Policy 7: protect and improve air quality in the waterfront area.
(8) Policy 8: minimize environmental degradation in the waterfront
area from solid waste and hazardous substances and waste.
(9) Policy 9: provide for public access to, and recreational use of, the
waterway, public lands, and public resources of the waterfront
area.
(10) Policy 10: protect water-dependent and water-enhanced uses and
promote siting of these uses in suitable locations.
(11) Policy 11: promote sustainable use of living aquatic resources.
(12) Policy 12: protect agricultural lands.
(13) Policy 13: promote appropriate use and development of energy and
mineral resources.
I. The Town shall maintain a file for each action made the subject of a
consistency determination, including any recommendations received
§ 232-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 232-5
1:333
§ 232-6. Enforcement.
No action within the Penfield waterfront area which is subject to review
under this Part 1 shall proceed until a written determination has been
issued from a Town agency that the action is consistent with the Town's
LWRP policy standards. In the event that an activity is being performed in
violation of this Part 1 or any conditions imposed thereunder, the Building
Inspector or any other authorized official of the Town shall issue a stopwork
order and all work shall immediately cease. No further work or activity
shall be undertaken on the project so long as a stop-work order is in effect.
The Town Attorney and Code Enforcement Officer shall be responsible for
enforcing this Part 1.
§ 232-7. Penalties for offenses.
§ 232-8. Applicability.
This Part 1 shall supersede and repeal any previous local regulations
regarding Town of Penfield waterfront consistency review.
from the Planning Board. Such files shall be made available for public
inspection upon request.
A. A person who violates any of the provisions of, or who fails to comply
with any condition imposed by, this Part 1 shall have committed a
violation, punishable by a fine not exceeding $250 for a conviction of a
first offense and punishable by a fine of $1,000 for a conviction of a
second or subsequent offense. For the purpose of conferring
jurisdiction upon courts and judicial officers, each week of continuing
violation shall constitute a separate additional violation.
B. The Town Attorney is authorized and directed to institute any and all
actions and proceedings necessary to enforce this Part 1. Any civil
penalty shall be in addition to and not in lieu of any criminal
prosecution and penalty.
§ 232-5 PENFIELD CODE § 232-8
1:334
Part 2
[AIrdoonpdteeqdu9o-i1t 7B-2a0y 0H8aBrbyoLr. LM. aNnoa.g 2e-m20e0n8t ]
ARTICLE II
General Provisions
§ 232-9. Findings and purpose.
§ 232-10. Jurisdiction.
§ 232-11. Definitions.
As used in this Part 2, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ANCHOR — Any weighted device used to secure a vessel temporarily to the
harbor bottom.
A. The Town of Penfield accommodates a range of public and private
waterfront uses and activities, including recreational and commercial
boating, anchorage and mooring areas, marinas, and other maritime
festivals, special events and regattas, charter vessels, sport fishing,
small craft recreation, personal watercrafts, and swimming.
B. The purpose of this Part 2 is to establish standards, requirements and
procedures for the environmental protection of the Irondequoit Bay
sensitive natural areas and resources; improve and protect its water
quality for desired uses which emphasize a healthy aquatic ecosystem;
ensure that development around the Bay occurs without impacting
significant resources (e.g., environmental, historical, archeological, and
aesthetic features); regulate the operation of vessels and matters
relevant to navigation and safety; minimize and resolve water surface
use conflicts and conflicts among all users and stakeholders of the Bay;
improve public access to diverse recreational opportunities on
Irondequoit Bay; and make it an integral part of local and regional
tourism development efforts.
A. This Part 2 is adopted pursuant to Navigation Law § 46-a and Article
IX(2)c of the State Constitution, Municipal Home Rule Law and
Executive Law Article 42, § 922, Waterfront Revitalization of Coastal
Areas and Inland Waterways.
B. The provisions of this Part 2 shall apply to all structures and activities
on Irondequoit Bay within the corporate limits of the Town of Penfield
and to a distance of 1,500 feet from the shore as described on the
official Water Surface Use Map.
C. All activities conducted on Irondequoit Bay within the limits of the Town
of Penfield shall also comply with the requirements of Chapter 250,
Zoning and Land Use, § 250-7.7, Noise.
§ 232-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 232-11
1:335
AUTHORIZED TOWN OFFICIAL — The Harbormaster, Building Inspector,
Code Compliance Officer, Town Clerk or any other official designated by the
Town Board.
BERTH — See "boat slip."
BOAT HOIST — Any mechanical device or structure used for the purpose of
raising a boat out of the water and storing it on or off site.
BOAT RAMPS (LAUNCHES) — Public and private facilities that may provide
boarding piers (sometimes called a courtesy pier, launch dock, pontoon
or jetty) where boats are temporarily moored for embarking and
disembarking, one or more (paved or unpaved) launch ramps that are
sloped surfaces designed for launching and retrieving trailered boats and
parking areas for boats and trailers.
BOAT SLIP — The area of any dock or pier or any other facility the purpose
of which is the storage of one boat.
BOAT STORAGE — Any wet berth or dry berth facility used for the purpose
of docking, mooring, or indoor or outdoor on-land storage (including racks
and trailers) of marine vessels.
BUBBLER/AERATION SYSTEM — A mechanical device designed to keep ice
from forming around docks or docked vessels.
CHANNEL — Water area specifically reserved for unobstructed free flow of
vessels operating in Irondequoit Bay, as identified on the official Irondequoit
Bay Harbor Management Plan Water Surface Use Map.
DECORATIVE STRUCTURE — Any waterside man-made structure (e.g.,
fountain, aerator, light, canopy) for use in enabling water-dependent
activities, the profile of which is visible above the surface of the water and
which is affixed in some way to the shore or the Bay bottom to hold its
position.
DOCK — A structure that extends from the shoreline into the water and
designed to provide riparian access and/or securing of watercraft.
DREDGING — To dig or deepen a waterway by manual or mechanical
means.
DRY STORAGE — The vertical storage of boats in rack systems for in-andout
launching and retrieval of boats as well as winter storage. Dry stack
racks can be located either outside or inside and are usually located on near
a waterfront, often at a marina or boatyard. Dry stack storage facilities can
stack boats from two levels to six levels high. Boats are loaded and unloaded
from the racks using forklifts.
ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION OVERLAY DISTRICTS (EPODS) —
Environmentally sensitive areas within the Town such as steep slopes,
watercourses, floodplains, wetlands and woodlots where certain activities
are regulated through a permit process.
FAIRWAY — Areas depicted on the Irondequoit Bay Harbor Management
Plan Water Surface Use Map; an unmarked navigation way where previous
§ 232-11 PENFIELD CODE § 232-11
1:336
dredging operations have created a channel to access dock facilities. (These
channels are considered preexisting, nonconforming uses in the Harbor
Management Plan. Fairways function as overlay zones and are primarily
designed to maintain clear paths of travel connecting berthing areas and
destinations.)
FLOAT — A structure buoyant on the water surface, anchored to the
underwater lands by cables or lines, and detached and independent of a
dock or bulkhead, which provides an offshore surface for swimmers or other
recreational, water-dependent purposes.
FLOATING HOME — Any vessel used, designed, or occupied as a permanent
dwelling unit, business office, base of occupation, or private or social club
of whatever nature, including but not limited to a structure constructed
upon a barge primarily immobile and out of navigation which functions
substantially as a land structure while the same is moored or docked in
Irondequoit Bay.
HARBOR AREAS — Areas depicted on the Irondequoit Bay Harbor
Management Plan Water Surface Use Map to provide public access, safe
refuge, transient berthing and economic development opportunity. All
designated harbor areas meet three primary locational criteria, including
water depth, waterfront development district zoning and landside support
(parking and utilities). Four harbor areas are designated on the Water
Surface Use Map and include the North Harbor, the Center Harbor, Glen
Edith and the South.
HARBOR MANAGEMENT COMMITTEE — A committee comprised of
representatives from state, county and local agencies with permit and
oversight jurisdiction on Irondequoit Bay.
HARBOR MANAGEMENT PLAN — A plan adopted by the Towns of
Irondequoit, Penfield and Webster and approved by the New York State
Secretary of State and composed of policies, goals, objectives and standards
for harbor management within Irondequoit Bay.
HARBORMASTER — Appointed by the Town Boards of Irondequoit, Penfield
and Webster, whose primary responsibility is the administration and
enforcement of the Irondequoit Bay Harbor Management Plan and local
laws pertaining to the management of Irondequoit Bay.
LIFT — See "boat hoist."
MARINA — Any dock, pier, or other facility operated for profit, or to which
public patronage is invited, providing moorings, dockage or other marine
services primarily for power and sailing vessels and other watercraft.
MEAN LOW AND HIGH WATER LEVELS — The approximate average low
water level or high water level for Irondequoit Bay, determined by the U.S.
Army Corps of Engineers based on 1985 International Great Lakes Datum
(IGLD). According to the New York State Department of Environmental
Conservation, Division of Environmental Permits, the mean high water level
for Irondequoit Bay is 247.3 feet (75.4 m) and the mean low water level is
243.3 feet (74.2 m) above sea level.
§ 232-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 232-11
1:337
MOORING — A device with its associated tackle, such as chains, floats, and
other equipment, manufactured and used specifically for the long-term or
transient securing of a vessel to the harbor bottom. This device typically
consists of an anchoring weight (mushroom or other) which is placed on the
bottom and is connected to a floating device (i.e., ball), cables, chains, or
lines.
NAVIGATIONAL AID — A sign, buoy or floating object, buoyant or affixed
to land or a structure, and possibly lighted or emitting a sound, that has
been installed by a local, state, or federal agency, or a private entity with
the approval of such government agency, for the sole purpose of assisting in
the safe operation of a vessel or identifying a way to port or other marinerelated
destination.
NAVIGATION CHANNEL — Depicted as the Outlet Channel on the
Irondequoit Bay Harbor Management Plan Water Surface Use Map. This
channel is considered a federal navigation channel, is identified with
channel markers and extends from Stony Point through the Outlet to Lake
Ontario. This navigation channel is regulated with a no-wake/five-mile-perhour
zone pursuant to the New York State Navigation Law.
NAVIGATION WAYS — Areas depicted on the Irondequoit Bay Harbor
Management Plan Water Surface Use Map to ensure that travel is not
limited or impacted by water surface use or structures and to ensure
safe use of the Bay. Navigation ways delineate the navigation channel and
fairways.
NEAR-SHORE AREAS — Areas depicted on the Irondequoit Bay Harbor
Management Plan Water Surface Use Map, defined in this Part 2 as being
all areas within 300 feet of shore.
OPEN WATER AREA — Area depicted on the Irondequoit Bay Harbor
Management Plan Water Surface Use Map not encumbered by any other
designations. This area supports active recreational use.
PERMIT HOLDER — A person or entity granted a permit.
PERSONAL WATERCRAFT (PWC) — A vessel that uses an inboard motor
powering a water jet pump as its primary source of motive power, such
as Jetskies™, Wave-runners™, Sea-doo™, or hybrids thereof, and which is
designed to be operated by a person sitting, standing or kneeling on the
vessel.
PIER — A structure, usually wood or masonry, extending into the water,
used as a landing place for boats and ships.
RAFT — See "float."
RAFTING — Two or more boats anchored together on a temporary basis.
RAMP/RAIL SYSTEM — See "boat hoist."
RECREATIONAL STRUCTURES — Structures such as slides and
trampolines and their support systems.
§ 232-11 PENFIELD CODE § 232-11
1:338
RESOURCE PROTECTION AREAS — Areas depicted on the Irondequoit
Bay Harbor Management Plan Water Surface Use Map associated with the
presence of sensitive natural resources.
SEASONAL — The period from April 1 to December 1 of each calendar year.
SHORELINE — The mean high water line (247.3 feet above the 1985
International Great Lakes Datum) for Irondequoit Bay at a given location
that distinguishes between predominantly aquatic habitat and
predominantly terrestrial habitat.
SPECIAL ANCHORAGE AREAS — The water areas designated on the
Irondequoit Bay Harbor Management Plan Water Surface Use Map that are
reserved specifically for the mooring of vessels.
TRANSIENT MOORING — Any public mooring utilized for short-term
purposes.
VESSEL — All waterborne craft or other contrivance capable of being used
as a means of transportation in the water, including seaplanes and personal
watercraft.
VESSEL OWNER — The person or entity under whose name the vessel
was last registered in accordance with the State Vehicle and Traffic Law or
documented in accordance with the provisions of 46 U.S.C. Chapters 121
through 125, and in any other case the last known owner or the person who
claims lawful possession of such vessel by virtue of legal title or equitable
interest therein which entitles him/her to such possession.
WATER-DEPENDENT USES — Any activity that can be conducted on, in,
over or adjacent to a water body, because such activity requires access to
water, and involves the use of water as an integral part of the activity.
WATER SURFACE USE MAP — An official map of the Irondequoit Bay water
surface use as incorporated in the Irondequoit Bay Harbor Management
Plan.
WAVE ATTENUATION DEVICE — A floating mechanism designed solely
to diffuse wave energy to protect the shoreline and/or water-dependent
improvements.
§ 232-12. Administration.
A. Harbor Management Committee.
(1) The Town Board shall appoint a member and an alternate member
to the Committee who shall represent a range of harbor interests,
including but not limited to navigation and boating safety,
commercial operations, recreational marinas, marine
infrastructure, special events and maritime history. The Committee
shall be composed of six voting members consisting of one
representative from each of the Towns of Irondequoit, Penfield and
Webster, appointed by their respective Town Boards; a
representative of the County of Monroe appointed by the County
Executive; a representative of the New York State Department of
§ 232-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 232-12
1:339
Environmental Conservation, appointed by the Regional Director;
and a representative of the New York State Department of State
appointed by the Secretary of State. The Harbormaster shall be
a nonvoting, ex-officio member of the Committee. The Committee
shall meet at least four times per year. Additional meetings may be
scheduled to address issues of importance as deemed necessary.
(2) Committee members shall serve until they are replaced by the
appointing authority. Vacancies shall be filled as necessary and in
accordance with the initial appointment.
(3) The Chairperson shall be elected for the following year by the
members of the Committee at the last meeting of each year.
(4) The Committee shall receive and review reports from the
Harbormaster pertaining to recreational boating and marinas;
navigation and safety; navigational aids; depth of water and
dredging needs; moorings; marine structure conditions and the
need for repair; the use of local docks and facilities; regattas;
special events and enforcement activities and violations.
(5) The Committee shall make recommendations regarding the use of
the Harbor waters as requested by the Town Board and as the
Committee may otherwise deem appropriate.
(6) The Committee shall review the Irondequoit Bay Harbor
Management Plan and this Part 2 and recommend revisions to the
Town Boards, as necessary. The Harbor Management Plan shall be
reviewed and updated at least once every 10 years, if necessary.
(7) When requested by the Town Board, or when there is a
Harbormaster permit issuance dispute, the Committee shall act as
a mediator.
(8) The Committee shall seek to resolve disputes to the satisfaction of
the parties at hand while meeting goals and objectives of the
Harbor Management Plan.
(9) To commence its review, the Committee shall be formally notified
by the Town Board of a particular conflict, with a description of the
issue at hand. In handling such cases, the Committee shall examine
the sites of the proposed activities and affected areas, current
zoning, compliance with the Irondequoit Bay Harbor Management
Plan, this Part 2 and other applicable sections of the Town Code.
(10) A Committee member may be removed for cause or in the event of
absence from three consecutive meetings.
B. Harbormaster. The Harbormaster appointment shall be recommended
by the Committee and approved by the Town Boards. The duties of the
Harbormaster shall be to enforce this Part 2 and provide other
§ 232-12 PENFIELD CODE § 232-12
1:340
assistance as needed to implement the Irondequoit Bay Harbor
Management Plan.
§ 232-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 232-12
1:341

ARTICLE III
Water Surface Uses
§ 232-13. Water Surface Use Map.11
The Water Surface Use Map defines the designated water surface use
of Irondequoit Bay as incorporated in the Irondequoit Bay Harbor
Management Plan. Said Map is hereby adopted by the Town Board, is
incorporated herein as Exhibit A of this Part 2 and declared to be a part
hereof.
§ 232-14. Operation of vessels.
All vessels operating in the waters of Irondequoit Bay are to observe the
Federal Inland Navigation Rules and comply with Article 4 of the New York
State Navigation Law.
§ 232-15. Speed limits; no wake zones.
A. No vessel shall be operated on Irondequoit Bay at a speed exceeding 25
miles per hour unless such vessel is being operated for the purpose of
enabling a person engaged in water skiing or other water sport to be
towed, in which case no such vessel shall be operated at a speed
exceeding 35 miles per hour. The Town Board may, by local law, limit
the speed of vessels in Irondequoit Bay waters and post notice of such
speed limits as stated in this Part 2 at appropriate locations serving
boaters, such as marinas, boat launches and parks. Any person who
operates a vessel at a speed faster than specified shall be deemed to
have violated this Part 2 and be subject to its penalties.
B. No person shall operate a vessel at a speed greater than is reasonable
or prudent, so as not to:
(1) Endanger the life or limb of another person using the Harbor under
all conditions and having regard to the actual and potential hazards
then existing.
(2) Disturb the reasonable comfort or endanger persons on or
operating another vessel or cause damage to another vessel,
structure, shoreline property, the environment, or interfere with
the free and proper use of the waters of any channel.
C. All vessels operating on Irondequoit Bay shall be subject to "No Wake
Zone" requirements. The no-wake/maximum five-mile-per-hour zone is
located within 300 feet of the shore, the channel, a dock, pier, raft or
float or an anchored or moored vessel. Wave-attenuating devices shall
not be subject to the three-hundred-foot no-wake/maximum five-mileper-
hour zone.
11.Editor's Note: The Water Surface Use Map is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 232-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 232-15
1:343
§ 232-16. Dredging.
§ 232-17. Hazards to navigation; abandoned vessels.
D. No vessel shall be operated in the channel between Irondequoit Bay
and Lake Ontario or within 300 feet of the shore, the channel, a dock,
pier, raft or float or an anchored or moored vessel in a manner or at a
speed that causes a wake that unreasonably interferes with or
endangers such dock, pier, raft or float or an anchored or moored
vessel, but in no event at a speed exceeding five miles per hour.
E. Notwithstanding the provisions of Subsection D above, a vessel
engaged in water skiing or other towed water sport activities shall be
permitted to exceed five miles per hour within 300 feet of shore, the
channel, a dock, bridge, pier, raft or float or an anchored or moored
vessel to enable a towed participant to take off or land.
F. The provisions of this section shall not apply to any vessel competing in
or practicing for a regatta or boat race over a specified course held by a
bona fide club or racing association, provided that a permit has been
issued for the same by the authorized Town official, and all provisions of
this Part 2 have been complied with.
A. Dredging within the limits of Irondequoit Bay shall be regulated by the
New York State Department of Environmental Conservation and the
U.S. Army Corps of Engineers. No dredging hereinafter shall be
permitted in any resource protection areas as identified on the
Irondequoit Bay Water Surface Use Map except for maintenance
dredging which has been previously approved.
B. The only area deemed appropriate for additional dredging is the North
Harbor Area. Dredging in the North Harbor Area should only be
considered with further biological and chemical analysis and approval
by the New York State Department of Environmental Conservation and
the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers. No permits for dredging to
accommodate new and/or expanded facilities should be issued outside
of the North Harbor Area.
A. Any vessel which becomes a menace to navigation shall be immediately
removed by the owner. Failure on the owner's part to remove such
vessel shall result in its removal by the Town or its designee. The cost of
such removal shall be borne by the owner.
B. Any vessel which sinks, grounds or otherwise becomes disabled or
incapable of navigation which does not pose an immediate threat to
navigation on the Bay shall be removed or restored to navigable
condition by the owner upon written notice from the Town, which notice
shall be sent by registered mail to the vessel's owner. Failure on the
owner's part to remove such vessel shall result in its removal by the
Town or its designee. The cost of such removal shall be borne by the
owner.
§ 232-15 PENFIELD CODE § 232-17
1:344
§ 232-18. Marine maintenance and environmental protection.
C. In cases where the Town Board or its designated agent may direct the
removal or disposal of a vessel, the cost of removal, including storage
charges, shall attach to and shall become a lien upon the vessel and be
chargeable against the owner of the vessel. The vessel may be sold
upon direction of the court at a public auction to defray expenses, and
any surplus shall be returned to the owner of record. The Town shall not
be liable for any damage done to the vessel during its removal, storage
and sale.
D. Unattended vessels shall not be moored or anchored overnight in
Irondequoit Bay without registering the vessel with the Town. Vessels
moored or anchored overnight without registration may be impounded
by the Town. The owner shall be liable for payment of overnight fees, if
applicable, along with expenses for its removal and storage. The Town
shall not be liable for damage done to impounded vessels during their
removal and storage.
E. Waterfront and shore protection structures shall be maintained and
repaired as necessary and must not pose a threat to shoreline erosion,
boating and public safety.
F. The water ski raft and water ski course customarily located seasonally
in the southeast corner of the Bay shall not be considered an abandoned
or unattached vessel nor a hazard to navigation, and thus shall not be
subject to the same fees or permits of an abandoned vessel.
A. Sanitary equipment aboard a vessel must meet the applicable standards
established by the appropriate federal, state and local agencies.
B. Marina operators shall not discharge any pollutant, such as from boat
washing, power washing, painting and other maintenance activities, to
surface water or groundwaters of the state without a State Pollutant
Discharge Elimination System (SPDES) permit.
C. Best management practices shall be followed by in-water and
waterfront activities, including but not limited to use of contained work
areas to reduce residuals (e.g., sanding residue, solvents, oils); source
controls (e.g., sander vacuums); use of swales around parking areas to
contain runoff and facilitate percolation and filtering; use of pervious
materials in the upland areas; adequate receptacles for disposal and
recycling of solid waste; holding tanks or dry wells to capture first-flush
runoff; disposal of fish waste; proper on-site storage and disposal
techniques for waste fuel and used oil, spent solvents and antifreeze
and signage directing users to the disposal areas; petroleum control
techniques, including the installation of fuel/air separators on all
vessels and the use of oil-absorbent bilge pads; minimizing the use of
cleaners (teak cleaners, fiberglass polish, detergents) and bottom
paints, cleaning outside the water, and use of phosphate-free and
biodegradable cleaning compounds.
§ 232-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 232-18
1:345
§ 232-19. Water skiing.
§ 232-20. Personal watercraft.
§ 232-21. Skin diving.
D. Fueling stations shall be located where spills can be contained in a
limited area; spill contingency plans are in place for storage and fueling
dispensation areas; and spill containment equipment is readily
accessible in a nearby locker.
A. No person shall ride on water skis or similar devices, or use or operate
a vessel to tow a person thereon within the designated harbor areas or
the navigation channel.
B. Water skiers in other areas of the Bay shall comply with the provisions
of the NYS Navigation Law.
C. The seasonal water ski raft and course shall be permitted in the
southeast corner of the Bay without additional restrictions, regulations,
permits or fees as this facility is considered preexisting nonconforming
to this Part 2.
A. All operators of personal watercraft shall obtain the necessary training
and certification prior to operating any personal watercraft.
B. All operators and riders of personal watercraft shall wear a United
States Coast Guard approved personal flotation device.
C. No operators of personal watercraft shall:
(1) Operate said apparatus in such a manner so as to become airborne
or completely leave the water while crossing the wake of another
vessel (wake-jumping).
(2) Operate in any manner or at any speed which is reckless, unsafe or
hazardous to public safety, giving due regard to visibility, traffic
density, state of wind, water and current, proximity of other craft,
operators and water users, and proximity of navigational hazards.
(3) Tow any water-skier, raft or other nonmotorized vehicle, unless the
personal watercraft accommodates three people and has an
observer/spotter on board who is at least 10 years of age.
A. No person shall skin dive or use self-contained underwater breathing
apparatus (SCUBA) in Irondequoit Bay unless a regulation red diving
flag is displayed in accordance with the Navigation Law. No person
shall allow or permit such diving flag to remain in any area unless a
person is skin diving in said area while such flag is displayed.
B. No person shall operate a vessel within 100 feet of any area marked for
skin diving by the placement of a regulation red diving flag.
§ 232-18 PENFIELD CODE § 232-22
1:346
§ 232-22. Commercial activities.
Any commercial use or activity operating on the waters of Irondequoit Bay
shall first receive a permit from the Town in which the docking facilities
accommodating such use are located. No such use or activity shall be
situated or conducted in a manner which may interfere with the full use
of channels and open water, nor shall any vessel engaged in such use or
activity be moored or anchored within a minimum of 50 feet of any dock or
other vessel docking or launching facilities.
§ 232-23. Organized events.
All organized events such as winter festivals, competitions, regattas, races
or derbies shall be permitted subject to approval by the Town to minimize
conflicts.
§ 232-24. Vehicle use.
No automobiles or trucks shall be permitted on the surface of Irondequoit
Bay at any time.
§ 232-25. Use of bubbler/aeration systems.
§ 232-26. Operation of aircraft.
Operation of aircraft within the Irondequoit Bay area shall comply with all
applicable federal aviation regulations and Town regulations pertaining to
the construction of landside support facilities.
A. No bubbler/aeration system shall be installed, modified, enlarged or
repaired in Irondequoit Bay without first obtaining a permit for such
activity from the Town. Application for the permit shall be accompanied
by a location plan and specifications of the proposed installation,
modification, enlargement or repair. The Town shall review said
application with the Harbor Management Committee for the
determination of its potential impacts. Upon a finding that the proposed
system will not create an adverse impact on the Bay or surrounding
property owners and other users in the area, the Town may issue a
permit, subject to conditions and recommendations set forth in the
Irondequoit Bay Harbor Management Plan.
B. Bubblers involving construction of any type of base shall be subject to
approval by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers (USACE) and the
NYSDEC.
C. All bubblers installed in Irondequoit Bay shall be accompanied by signs
reading "CAUTION: THIN ICE" during the winter season. Said signs
shall be visible at a distance of at least 100 feet from the affected area.
§ 232-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 232-27
1:347
§ 232-27. Marine sanitation devices.
Any vessel with an approved marine sanitation device or waste holding tank
shall comply with all applicable sanitary codes.
§ 232-28. Decorative and recreational structures and devices.
It shall be hereby deemed unlawful to install anchored fountains, water
slides, ski jumps, trampolines, driving ranges or other decorative/
recreational structural devices within the waters of Irondequoit Bay.
§ 232-29. Aquatic vegetation control.
The installation of any bottom barriers, use of weed harvesters or use of
aquatic pesticides within the waters of Irondequoit Bay shall be subject to
review by the NYSDEC and may require a permit.
§ 232-27 PENFIELD CODE § 232-29
1:348
ARTICLE IV
Ancillary Uses
§ 232-30. Dry boat storage.
Dry boat storage or "ramped boat storage" shall only be permitted in
cases where the site is able to accommodate proposed storage structures,
adequate parking facilities and launching areas. Dry boat storage can take
the place of or be combined with wet storage but the total shall not exceed
the number of permitted slips on any given site established by this Part 2.
§ 232-31. Tree topping or removal.
§ 232-32. Marine pump-out facilities.
Pump-out facilities shall be subject to permit requirements of the Monroe
County Department of Health and the Town of Penfield. Said facilities
shall be sited only at marina facilities. All such facilities must adequately
demonstrate access to a sanitary sewer or storage tank and have adequate
landside accommodations to maintain the pump-out. Temporary storage
tanks must be emptied by a NYSDEC-permitted waste hauler and
maintained by the property owner/operator.
§ 232-33. Hunting.
Hunting activities shall comply with the regulations identified in the New
York State Department of Environmental Conservation Hunting and
Trapping Regulations Guide, which shall apply on Irondequoit Bay within
the limits of the Town of Penfield.
A. Removal or topping of trees within the Irondequoit Bay Harbor
Management Plan boundary area shall be prohibited unless it is
demonstrated that such activity is to be undertaken to protect the
safety of the property owner or structures on said property.
B. Upon a finding by the authorized Town official that said activity is
necessary, the property owner shall apply for and obtain an
Environmental Protection Overlay District (EPOD) permit and
demonstrate compliance with the conditions of said permit prior to
commencement of the activity.
§ 232-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 232-33
1:349

ARTICLE V
Docking, Boat Storage and Moorings
§ 232-34. Boat storage facilities.
§ 232-35. Standards for boat storage facilities.
A. For the purposes of this article, docks, moorings and dry storage are all
considered the same in establishing the amount of permitted boat
storage on a parcel.
B. Boat storage shall be permitted only as an accessory use to the
principal permitted use of a property. Rail systems and boat hoists shall
be considered accessory uses to docks and moorings. No dock in any
residential zoning district shall be utilized for commercial purposes.
C. No vessel or float shall be so docked, moored or anchored so that it at
any time rests within any channel or fairway, interferes with the full use
of such channel or fairway or obstructs navigational aids and signage.
D. No vessel or float shall be moored or anchored so that it interferes with
access to an adjoining or nearby property.
E. No boat shall be docked, hoisted or moored within 10 feet of an
adjoining property line, as extended at a ninety-degree angle to the
shoreline. No accessory structure supporting water-dependent uses
shall be permitted within 10 feet of any adjoining property line.
F. No person shall moor or secure a vessel or float at a public dock or
mooring located in Irondequoit Bay without first obtaining a permit
from the authorized Town official and/or any other appropriate agency
having jurisdiction.
G. No dredging shall be permitted within any area of the Bay, with the
exception of the North Harbor Area, to accommodate the installation of
new docks, moorings or dry storage facilities.
H. No person shall place a mooring or float in the territorial waters of the
Town without the consent of the authorized Town official and obtaining
a permit from the Town Clerk.
I. Rafting at a public dock or mooring is prohibited unless expressly
allowed by the authorized Town official.
J. The Planning Board shall have authority over site plan review to
approve placement of multiple berths (wet and dry) in or adjacent to
Irondequoit Bay.
A. Resource protection areas. Boat storage is incompatible with resource
protection areas and shall be restricted in such areas. If permitted,
dock and mooring development in resource protection areas shall be
limited based on its proximity to significant habitat areas and its
potential impact on such environmental features. Each parcel within
§ 232-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 232-35
1:351
resource protection areas, regardless of parcel use, may be permitted
to have a maximum of one dock or one mooring.
(1) Standards for docks.
(a) Prior to the issuance of a dock permit in these areas, the
applicant shall be responsible for identifying other reasonable
alternatives such as mooring off shore with minimal shoreline
development, or access to nearby off-site docking facilities.
(b) In no case shall any dock in such areas extend offshore more
than 50 feet, and exceed a maximum of 200 square feet in area.
(c) No commercial docking or marina activity shall be permitted in
resource protection areas.
(2) Standards for moorings.
(a) No mooring shall be placed so that the swing of the boat
attached to the mooring drifts within 10 feet of the property
line, as extended at a ninety-degree angle to the shoreline.
(b) A mooring shall only be placed in water that is at least eight
feet deep but no more than 30 feet deep throughout the
boating season.
(c) A mooring buoy shall be white with a blue stripe large enough
to display the permit number issued by the Town but no more
than 32 inches in diameter.
(d) A mooring may not be placed further than 100 feet from the
shoreline unless it is located in a special anchorage area as
designated on the Water Surface Use Map and approved by the
authorized Town official.
(e) A mooring shall not be placed any closer than 50 feet to a dock
or float.
(f) A mooring shall be anchored with an appropriate, retrievable,
device, as approved by the authorized Town official.
(3) Dry storage facilities. Dry storage structures shall not be permitted
in resource protection areas.
B. Near-shore areas. Near-shore areas are designated on the Water
Surface Use Map and extend 300 feet from the shore.
(1) Standards for docks.
(a) In cases where environmental constraints exist or landside
support is inadequate, alternative options for riparian access
should be explored. This may include shared docking facilities,
mooring off shore with minimal shoreline development, or
access to nearby off-site dock facilities.
§ 232-35 PENFIELD CODE § 232-35
1:352
(b) Each single-family residentially zoned parcel within near-shore
areas may be permitted to have a maximum of one dock or one
mooring. Docks shall not extend offshore more than 50 feet nor
exceed a maximum of 200 square feet in area.
(c) Multifamily sites.
[1] The number of docks serving multifamily residential sites
shall be limited based on the linear feet of shoreline
contained within the parcel. The calculations to determine
the maximum number of boats stored on a multifamily
parcel shall be based on the length of shoreline as follows:
Length of Shoreline
(linear feet) Permitted Uses
0 to 100 1 dock or 2 boats
101 to 250 2 docks or 4 boats
251 to 500 3 docks or 6 boats
Greater than 500 1 dock or 2 boats per 150
linear feet
[2] The dock structure associated with multifamily parcels
shall not extend off-shore more than 200 feet and not
exceed 200 square feet for the first dock plus 50 square
feet for each additional dock. If adequate water depth is
not found within 200 feet of the shoreline, alternative
docking/boat storage options shall be explored.
(d) No new commercial boat storage (including dry storage) shall
be allowed in near-shore areas.
(2) Standards for moorings.
(a) No mooring shall be placed so that the swing of the boat
attached to the mooring drifts within 10 feet of the extension of
the property line.
(b) A mooring shall be placed in water that is at least eight feet
deep and no more than 30 feet deep throughout the boating
season.
(c) A mooring buoy shall be white with a blue stripe large enough
to display the permit number issued by the Town but no more
than 32 inches in diameter.
(d) A mooring may not be placed further than 100 feet from the
shoreline unless it is located in a special anchorage area
designated on the Water Surface Use Map and approved by the
authorized Town official.
§ 232-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 232-35
1:353
(e) A mooring shall not be placed any closer than 50 feet to a dock
or float.
(f) A mooring shall be anchored with an appropriate device as
approved by the authorized Town official.
(3) Dry storage facilities. Dry storage structures shall not be permitted
in near-shore areas.
C. Harbor areas. Harbor areas are established within the Irondequoit Bay
to provide public access, safe refuge, transient berthing and
commercial marina activities. Harbor areas meet three primary
locational criteria, including water depth, waterfront development
district zoning and landside support (at least 0.8 parking space per wet
or dry berth).
(1) Standards for public and private docks.
(a) In cases where environmental constraints exist or landside
support is inadequate, alternative options for riparian access
should be explored. This may include shared docking facilities,
dry storage facilities or mooring off shore with minimal
shoreline development.
(b) Docking in harbor areas shall be limited as set forth in this
Subsection C.
(2) Standards for moorings.
(a) No mooring shall be placed so that the swing of the boat
attached to the mooring drifts within 10 feet of the property
line, as extended at a ninety-degree angle to the shoreline.
(b) A mooring shall be placed in water that is at least eight feet
deep and no more than 30 feet deep throughout the boating
season.
(c) A mooring buoy shall be white with a blue stripe large enough
to display the permit number issued by the Town but no more
than 32 inches in diameter.
(d) A mooring may not be placed further than 100 feet from the
shoreline unless it is located in a special anchorage area as
designated on the Water Surface Use Map and approved by the
authorized Town official.
(e) A mooring shall not be placed any closer than 50 feet to a dock
or float.
(f) A mooring shall be anchored with an appropriate, retrievable
device, as approved by the authorized Town official.
(3) Standards for dry storage facilities.
§ 232-35 PENFIELD CODE § 232-35
1:354
§ 232-36. Rules, regulations and permit procedures.
(a) Dry storage structures may be permitted in the harbor areas
where wet storage facilities are inappropriate or where such
facilities would cause significant impact upon natural
resources.
(b) Dry storage structures may be combined with wet storage
facilities; however, the total number of slips for a specific
harbor area shall not exceed the maximum number set forth in
this Subsection C.
(c) Dry storage structures must be designed to be compatible with
and not a visual nuisance to the surroundings or adversely
affect access to property or views from adjoining parcels.
Location and design of all dry storage structures shall be
subject to site plan approval by the Planning Board.
A. Public docks and moorings.
(1) The Town Board may establish by resolution rules and regulations
for the operation of the docks, moorings and marine facilities under
its jurisdiction. Such rules shall be posted at the Town Hall and at
the Town docks.
(2) The Town Board may, from time to time, establish by resolution
administrative fees for the transient and seasonal use of Town
facilities.
(3) Applicants utilizing Town facilities shall hold the Town harmless
from any and all liability, including counsel fees, costs and
disbursements, resulting from operation or dockage of the vessel or
the use of the Town facilities by the vessel, owner or crew.
(4) All fastenings to any docks and moorings of the Town shall be done
in a seamanlike manner as determined by and subject to periodic
inspection by the Town.
(5) No commercial, ancillary activities or services shall be allowed on
public docks without issuance of a special use permit by the Town
of Penfield.
B. Public docks.
(1) The authorized Town official shall designate and assign available
transient berthing space for vessels at the public docks upon
payment of the required fee. Space shall not be occupied without
paying the required fee.
(2) The authorized Town official may also assign seasonal, temporary
or interim accommodations for the docking of visiting commercial
vessels at these docks upon payment of the required fee.
§ 232-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 232-36
1:355
Applications for such accommodation shall be made in writing to
the authorized Town official.
(3) The authorized Town official shall post all docking regulations and
safety procedures and other appropriate information to assure safe
use of the Bay.
(4) All vessels shall be berthed under the supervision and direction of
the authorized Town official. Failure by a captain to act in response
to directives of the authorized Town official shall result in the loss
of privileges without reimbursement of fees and other penalties as
may apply.
(5) Except in the case of emergency or as otherwise approved by the
Town, the maximum stay at the docks shall be limited to 72 hours
for recreational pleasure craft. In cases where vessels must
overstay this limit because of unsafe or disabling conditions, the
vessel owner must promptly notify the authorized Town official. The
authorized Town official may then waive the limit and impose
additional fees as may be reasonable given the circumstances.
(6) All vessels must be operated and secured in a safe and protective
manner. The Town assumes no liability for damage to craft or injury
that may result from dockage public docks.
(7) No rafting is permitted at public docks unless expressly allowed by
the authorized Town official.
C. Public moorings.
(1) Use and assignment of moorings shall be supervised by the
authorized Town official. Seasonal moorings shall be occupied only
upon the submission and approval of an application and the
issuance of a permit.
(2) Mooring application forms shall be available through the office of
the Town Clerk. Annual applications may be submitted no earlier
than January 1 of each year with the appropriate fee, established by
the Town Board.
(3) When an applicant has been approved for a mooring, the
authorized Town official shall assign a mooring and mooring
registration number. A seasonal mooring permit shall be valid for
only the stated vessel at a designated mooring, from the date of
issuance to December 31 of that year.
(4) The mooring float shall be marked by the Town with the mooring
registration numbers in black lettering a minimum of four inches
high.
(5) Relocating moorings shall be prohibited without prior approval of
the authorized Town official.
§ 232-36 PENFIELD CODE § 232-36
1:356
(6) A permit holder shall be deemed to have forfeited the registered
mooring by refusing the grant of a mooring permit when offered, or
not occupying the mooring by the permitted vessel for a period of
one month from the grant date unless approval has otherwise been
granted by the authorized Town official.
(7) Only one mooring per person shall be permitted and the permit for
said mooring shall be nontransferable.
(8) If a permit holder is temporarily without a vessel, the permit holder
may apply to the authorized Town official to retain that mooring
permit for a designated period of time.
(9) If mooring space is not available, the applicant's name will be
added to a waiting list upon request. The list shall be maintained in
the office of the Town Clerk and made available upon request. It
shall contain the names of persons who applied for a mooring, the
date of application, the area in which such space is desired, and the
size of the vessel. The waiting list shall be maintained in the order
of the date of application (month, day, year). To maintain a place on
the waiting list, applicants must reapply on an annual basis.
(10) All moorings in the mooring field shall be available to transient
vessels. Transient mooring floats will be distinctly marked. No
transient mooring shall be occupied for a period longer than 48
hours, unless expressly allowed by the authorized Town official.
(11) Overnight transient moorings, beginning at 12:00 noon each day,
shall be available from the authorized Town official after payment
of the appropriate fee.
D. Private docks.
(1) All docks are considered accessory structures and uses and there
must be a principal use on the site to accommodate them.
(2) No building permit for a private dock shall be issued unless a NYS
DEC Article 15 and/or 24 permit and an Article 404 permit from
USACE has been issued.
(3) Review of permit applications for all docks shall take into account
the specific areas, as identified on the Water Surface Use Map, in
which they are being installed, proximity to adjacent property lines,
impact on unique environmental features, depth of water and
landside support.
(4) Dredging for dock installation and subsequent maintenance
dredging is discouraged in all cases; however, dredging may be
permitted in the harbor areas or where a preexisting,
nonconforming condition occurs, as identified in the Harbor
Management Plan.
§ 232-36 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 232-36
1:357
(5) The authorized Town official will inspect the dock upon its
completion to ensure safety standards and compliance with all
permit conditions.
(6) No dock shall be used for commercial purposes unless approved by
the Town as a marina activity. Leasing or rental of private
residential docks is prohibited.
(7) The authorized Town official shall keep an updated inventory of all
docks.
E. Private moorings.
(1) All private moorings outside of the harbor area shall be accessory
to the principal land use.
(2) A private mooring shall not be installed into the waters of
Irondequoit Bay unless a Town permit and applicable NYSDEC and
USACE permits have been issued.
(3) Issuance of permits for all moorings shall take into account safety,
day and night navigation, water depth, bottom conditions, tackle,
access and compliance and consistency with the Irondequoit Bay
Harbor Management Plan. No moored vessel shall be situated in a
manner which may interfere with the full use of channels and open
water, nor shall any vessel be moored or anchored within a
minimum of 50 feet of any dock, pier or other vessel docking or
launching facilities.
(4) All moorings must have the tackle and anchor inspected by the
authorized Town official prior to their setting.
(5) Every permittee shall be required to maintain the mooring in a safe
condition. Any chain, shackle, swivel or other tackle which has
become warped or worn by one-third of its normal diameter shall
be replaced. Failure to maintain a safe mooring shall be cause for
revocation of the mooring permit and shall be deemed a violation of
this Part 2. The authorized Town official may inspect moorings at
any time to determine compliance with this section.
(6) All moorings shall be inspected every three years by a qualified
third-party inspector. Said inspector shall certify that the mooring
is properly installed subject to the requirements of the U.S. Coast
Guard.
(7) All costs of any mooring inspection required under the provisions of
this Part 2 shall be borne by the mooring owner.
(8) The authorized Town official shall keep a detailed record of all
private moorings. This record shall include the mooring location
and number, information from the mooring permit application, date
the mooring was set, and any other information deemed necessary
by the Harbor Management Committee, and the location of docks,
§ 232-36 PENFIELD CODE § 232-36
1:358
floats and moorings plotted on a map showing the location of all
moorings within the Bay.
(9) Leasing or rental of private moorings shall be prohibited.
(10) The authorized Town official shall have authority, for reasons of
safety, to direct and order that the location, position or tackle of
moorings be changed or use suspended during periods of storm
conditions. The authorized Town official shall give notice to the
owner or operator of the vessel using such mooring, and
compliance shall be required immediately in such circumstances.
Failure to comply with such direction or order of the authorized
Town official by any person shall be a violation of this Part 2,
subject to the appropriate penalty.
(11) The owner of a mooring shall be responsible for winterizing the
mooring to ensure that it is not damaged or moved by ice or other
weather-related events.
F. Floats and rafts. No new floats or rafts shall be allowed on the waters of
Irondequoit Bay. Preexisting nonconforming floats and rafts that were
compliant at the time of installation may be replaced as needed.
§ 232-36 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 232-36
1:359

ARTICLE VI
Enforcement; Violations and Penalties
§ 232-37. Enforcing authority.
§ 232-38. Violations.
A. The U.S. Coast Guard, New York State Police, New York State
Environmental Conservation Police, New York State Park Police, the
Monroe County Sheriff's Office and local police shall be empowered to
enforce the provisions of this Part 2. Every person in charge of a vessel
must at all times obey the lawful orders of the enforcement officer.
B. The Town Board shall issue application forms, permit forms, mooring
tackle standards and otherwise promulgate such forms, fee schedules
and information as may be necessary for the administration of this Part
2.
A. It shall be a violation of this Part 2 for any person to refuse to move or
stop on oral command or order of the authorized Town official and
enforcement officers exercising the duties lawfully assigned to them.
B. No person shall tie to or berth a vessel at a Town-operated dock or
bulkhead unless the determined user fee has been paid to the Town and
a permit obtained for use and occupancy of such space by such vessel.
C. Any person who fails to move such vessel when ordered by the
authorized Town official, or any other lawful enforcing authority, shall
be in violation of this Part 2 and subject to its penalties. Each day that
such violation continues shall constitute a separate and additional
violation.
D. Any vessel or float moored or anchored in violation of any part of this
Part 2 shall be removed by the owner or person in charge thereof upon
written notice from the authorized Town official. If a vessel or float is
not removed after the authorized Town official provides written notice
to its owner, that vessel or float may be removed by the Town. Such
notice shall be served by mail upon the owner of the vessel or float at
the last known address of the owner.
E. All expenses incurred by the Town in removing a vessel, mooring or
float, including any reasonable attorney fees, shall be borne by the
owner of the vessel or float and the Town may enforce that obligation by
a civil action. Any such expenses shall be in addition to, and not in lieu
of, any penalties as may be prescribed by and imposed under this Part 2
or under any other applicable law, ordinance, rule or regulation of the
Town.
F. Violations shall subject the violator to the penalties imposed by
§ 232-41 of this Part 2. Said penalties shall include but are not limited to
immediate revocation of a permit, fine or imprisonment or any
combination thereof.
§ 232-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 232-39
1:361
§ 232-39. Preexisting nonconformance.
Any preexisting, nonconforming use of land or structure shall comply with
§ 232-40 of this Part 2 pertaining to such use of land or structure.
§ 232-40. Appeals.
§ 232-41. Penalties for offenses.
In addition to or as may be limited by the laws of the State of New York,
a violation of any provision of this Part 2 shall be punishable by not more
than 15 days' incarceration or a fine of $250 for each violation. Each day of
violation shall be deemed a new violation and shall be treated accordingly.
A. Where practical difficulties, unnecessary hardships and results
inconsistent with the general purposes of this Part 2 may be the result
of the application of the provisions hereof, variances may be granted as
provided in this section. Any variance granted shall be authorized by
the Zoning Board of Appeals. In granting a variance, the Zoning Board
of Appeals may impose conditions to protect the best interest of the
surrounding property, the neighborhood, or the Town as a whole.
B. The criteria for granting variances shall be consistent with Chapter
250, Zoning and Land Use, Article XIV.
C. An individual may appeal the decision of the authorized Town official to
deny or revoke a permit to the Zoning Board of Appeals within 30
calendar days of receipt of notice of denial/revocation. Such an appeal
shall be made by filing with the authorized Town official a written form
obtained from the Town Clerk stating the appellant's arguments and
setting forth specifically the questions of procedure, fact, law or policy
to which exceptions are taken or identifying that part of the authorized
Town official's decision and order to which objection is made. The
Zoning Board of Appeals may, upon receipt of an appeal of revocation,
at its discretion, stay the effective date of the authorized Town official's
decision.
D. The Zoning Board of Appeals, in making its findings for determination,
shall maintain consistency with the goals of the Harbor Management
Plan and the regulations of the Harbor Management Law.
§ 232-39 PENFIELD CODE § 232-41
1:362
Part 3
[AdopteLdan1d2 -U1s6e- 2A0n1d5 DBeyvLel.oLp. mNoe.n 3t -2015]
ARTICLE VII
Waterfront Properties
§ 232-42. Applicability.
This article refers to all properties with at least 15 feet of frontage on a
navigable waterway as defined by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers.
§ 232-43. Minimum setback from water's edge.
Any principal building, parking area or accessory structure, excluding such
facilities as docks, piers, wharves and boat ramps, that is to be developed on
property that contains at least 15 feet of frontage on navigable waterways
as defined by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineer shall be required to maintain
a minimum setback of 25 feet inland from the high water's edge in order
to maintain adequate access to the shore zone. The Planning Board or
Town Board, as the case may be, during site plan review, may establish a
minimum setback of greater than 25 feet based on due consideration by
the Board of the preservation and protection of sensitive environmental
features, and the maintenance of the wooded character of the shore zone
area, as well as scenic views and vistas.
§ 232-44. Accessory uses.
Fishing piers, docks, wharves, and similar waterfront structures and
facilities, when such uses are clearly accessory or incidental to the primary,
principal use on any property which contains at least 15 feet of frontage on
a navigable waterway as defined by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, shall
be permitted, subject to all applicable state and federal regulations and
approvals. All such structures shall be subject to a building permit. All such
structures, except those which are accessory to a single-family detached
dwelling, shall additionally be subject to site plan review in accordance
with Chapter 250, Zoning and Land Use, Article XII. Similar waterfront
structures and facilities for commercially zoned properties may include, but
are not limited to, facilities for the pumping out of marine holding tanks;
facilities for waste oil collection; facilities for the sale and dispensing of fuel
and lubricants for boats and boatyard equipment; facilities for the storage
of fuel; and boat launching ramps. The following additional requirements
shall apply to all such structures and facilities, including those subject to
site plan review and those that are not subject to such review:
A. The construction of such structures and facilities shall be undertaken in
such a way so as not to impact water quality, cause harm to fish
spawning grounds, destroy the natural beauty of the shoreline, reduce
the stability of steep slope areas, cause erosion or sedimentation
problems along the shoreline, create hazards for navigation, interfere
with the public use and enjoyment of the water surface or shoreline,
§ 232-42 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 232-44
1:363
infringe on the riparian rights of other littoral parcels, or otherwise
threaten the public health and safety.
B. Design standards for piers, docks and wharves shall be determined
based on the information contained in Table 1 at the end of this article.
C. Such structures and facilities shall only be constructed of materials
which are stable, chemically inert, and insoluble and which will have no
adverse effects on water quality. Such materials shall also be U.S. Coast
Guard approved.
D. The amount of grading, dredging, earth moving and disturbance of land
above and below water during the construction of such structures and
facilities shall be minimized as much as possible and shall be consistent
with the permit requirements of the New York State Department of
Environmental Conservation and U.S. Army Corps of Engineers
regulating such activities.
E. To permit the free circulation of water, reduce the effects of fluctuating
water levels, and prevent adverse modifications of the shoreline, piers,
docks and wharves shall be of floating construction wherever feasible
and shall not be of rock-filled cribbing, sheet piling, closely spaced
piling, or such other construction technique or materials which would
significantly impair water circulation.
F. There shall be no superstructure boathouse, gazebos, changing room,
etc. permitted above the decks of piers, docks or wharves.
G. No pier, dock or wharf shall be constructed in a configuration other
than straight, T, L, U or F shape.
H. The width of any pier, dock or wharf shall be a minimum of three feet
and shall not exceed eight feet.
I. The length of any pier, dock or wharf shall extend offshore from the
mean low water line to a distance no greater than 50 feet for each lot
used for single-family residential purposes. Longer dock lengths may be
approved by the Planning Board or Town Board, as the case may be, in
accordance with Chapter 250, Zoning and Land Use, Article XII, when
necessary to reach adequate water depths for proposed boat docking,
while complying with all other standards contained in this article.
J. The maximum surface area of any pier, dock or wharf permitted per
each waterfront lot used for single-family residential purposes shall not
exceed 800 square feet.
K. The number of private piers, docks or wharves permitted per each
waterfront lot used for single-family residential purposes shall not
exceed one such structure.
L. The number of piers, docks or wharves permitted per each waterfront
lot used for multifamily or townhouse purposes shall not exceed those
necessary to provide one boat slip per residential unit. However, the
§ 232-44 PENFIELD CODE § 232-44
1:364
ultimate number of slips allowed is to be determined by the Planning
Board or Town Board, as the case may be, during the site plan review
process. Such docks shall not exceed a length or be developed or
configured on the site in a manner that adversely affects existing
environmental conditions or natural features, or negatively impacts
navigation or riparian rights of adjacent littoral parcels.
M. The number of piers, docks or wharves permitted per each waterfront
lot used for and zoned for commercial purposes shall not exceed three
such structures per lot. Such docks shall not exceed a length or be
developed or configured on the site in a manner that adversely affects
existing environmental conditions or natural features, or negatively
impacts navigation or riparian rights of adjacent littoral parcels. The
construction of more than three such structures per commercially used
lot shall be subject to a determination by the Planning Board or Town
Board, as the case may be, in accordance with Chapter 250, Zoning and
Land Use, Article XII, that such additional structures are needed to
accommodate anticipated boat traffic and can be developed on the site
without adversely affecting existing environmental conditions or
natural features, or negatively impact navigation or riparian rights of
adjacent littoral parcels while meeting the parking requirements of one
parking space for each boat slip, in addition to parking requirements
for all land-based uses on the property. In the event that charter boat
docking is allowed, two parking spaces per charter boat slip must be
provided.
N. Every pier, dock or wharf that is constructed shall have a minimum
clearance or setback of 10 feet plus beam width of boat from adjacent
property lines, as extended from the shoreline, to allow adequate vessel
access to neighboring waterfront parcels. In the case of littoral parcels
bounding a substantially straight shoreline, docks and piers shall be
located in the area fixed by projection of parcel lines bayward at right
angles from the shoreline (as graphically illustrated at the end of this
article). In the case of littoral parcels bounding a concave or convex
shoreline, docks and piers shall be located in the area fixed by
projection of the parcel lines bayward along the line bisecting the angle
formed by the shoreline at its intersection with the parcel lines. Where
such projections do not allow access to the line of navigability (that line
marking the minimum depth for navigation), the converging lines shall
instead run to the line of navigability. The line of navigability shall be
divided among the littoral parcels in proportion to their respective
shares of the shoreline and permit all littoral parcels practicable access
to navigable water.
O. Piers, docks or wharves that are 100 feet or longer, during the hours of
darkness, must be lighted in such manner so as to not constitute a
hazard to navigation.
P. Lighting of the surface of any pier, dock or wharf shall be provided in
such a manner so as not to produce any offensive glare when viewed
from the water or the land. The use of low-mast lighting fixtures and
§ 232-44 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 232-44
1:365
§ 232-45. Mooring buoys or facilities.
Mooring buoys or facilities are subject to the following restrictions:
deflector shields to direct the light downward shall be required to
reduce or eliminate glare.
Q. Commercial operation, renting or leasing of fishing piers, docks,
wharves, boat launching ramps or similar waterfront structures and
facilities shall be expressly prohibited in any residential zoning district
within the Town of Penfield.
R. The owner or operator of a marina or harbor may be required to furnish
information concerning water quality, current patterns and intensities
of boat activity, shoreline alterations, and any other conditions which
may be altered by the construction of the marina or boat basin for a
period of one year after completion of the facility.
S. The installation of aeration systems or bubbling systems shall be
subject to the approval of the New York State Department of
Environmental Conservation. In the event that such systems are
permitted to be installed, the property owner shall be responsible for
installing warning signage, of a size and location to be determined by
the authorized Town official, on the water surface during the winter
months.
T. Commercial marinas shall be responsible for mounting at least one tenpound
ABC fire extinguisher on each dock or pier, every 75 feet, with a
minimum of two such extinguishers on each dock or pier, in locations to
be approved by the Fire Marshal.
A. Mooring buoys shall only be placed in connection with littoral parcels.
Such buoys shall be placed only within an area parallel to and 20 feet
inward of the parcel lines extended bayward at right angles from the
shoreline, and to a depth necessary for safe mooring of a boat, not to
exceed 100 feet from the shoreline.
B. Moorings shall be placed so that objects moored to them, at full swing
of their mooring or anchor line, will be no closer than 10 feet to the
projection of the adjacent property lines from the shoreline, and no
more than 100 feet from the shoreline itself.
C. The number of private moorings permitted per each waterfront lot used
for single-family residential purposes shall not exceed the following:
Amount of Water Frontage
(feet) Number of Moorings Permitted
100 or less 1
101 to 250 2
251 to 500 3
§ 232-44 PENFIELD CODE § 232-45
1:366
Amount of Water Frontage
(feet) Number of Moorings Permitted
More than 500 1 additional for each 150 feet of
water frontage in excess of 500 feet
D. A maximum of four moorings shall be permitted per commercially used
lot, provided such lot has less than 500 feet of shoreline frontage. A
maximum of one mooring per 100 feet of shoreline frontage shall be
permitted per commercially used lot if such lot has more than 500 feet
of shoreline frontage.
§ 232-45 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 232-45
1:367
Dimension Diagram for Slips and Docks
§ 232-45 PENFIELD CODE § 232-45
1:368
Chapter 250
ZONING AND LAND USE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 94.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 120.
Sewers — See Ch. 180.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 198.
Waterways — See Ch. 232.
Incentive zoning — See Ch. 255.
§ 232-45 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 232-45
1:369

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 250-1.1. Title.
This chapter shall be known, cited and referred to as the "Town of Penfield
Zoning Ordinance."
§ 250-1.2. Authority.
Enactment of this chapter by the Town of Penfield is pursuant to Article 16
of the Town Law of the State of New York.
§ 250-1.3. Purpose and objectives.
§ 250-1.4. Interpretation.
Where the conditions imposed by any provision of this chapter are less
restrictive than comparable conditions imposed by any other provision
of this chapter or of any other ordinance, resolution or regulation, the
provisions which are more restrictive shall govern.
§ 250-1.5. Severability.
If any word, phrase, sentence, part, section, subsection, or other portion
of this chapter, or the application thereof to any person or to any
circumstance, is adjudged or declared invalid or unenforceable by a court
or other tribunal of competent jurisdiction, then, and in such event, such
judgment or declaration shall be confined in its interpretation and operation
only to the provision of this chapter that is directly involved in the
controversy in which such judgment or declaration is rendered, and such
judgment or declaration of invalidity or unenforceability shall not affect or
impair the validity or enforceability of the remainder of this chapter or the
application thereof to any other persons or circumstances. If necessary as to
such person or circumstances, such invalid or unenforceable provision shall
be and be deemed severed herefrom, and the Town Board hereby declares
that it would have enacted this chapter, or the remainder thereof, even if,
A. The purpose of this chapter is to encourage appropriate and orderly
physical development; promote in all possible ways public health,
safety, convenience and general welfare; classify, designate and
regulate the location and use of buildings, structures and land for
agricultural, residential, commercial, industrial or other uses in
appropriate places and for said purpose to divide the Town of Penfield
into districts of such number, shape and area as may be deemed best
suited to carry out these regulations and provide for their enforcement.
B. The regulations contained in this chapter are in accordance with a wellconsidered
Comprehensive Plan for the Town of Penfield and have been
made with reasonable consideration, among other things, as to the
character of each district and its peculiar suitability for particular uses.
§ 250-1.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 250-1.5
1:371
as to particular provisions and persons or circumstances, a portion hereof
is severed or declared invalid or unenforceable.
§ 250-1.5 PENFIELD CODE § 250-1.5
1:372
ARTICLE II
Definitions
§ 250-2.1. Word usage.
Except where specifically defined herein, all words used in this chapter shall
carry their customary meanings. Words used in the present tense include
the future, and the plural includes the singular; the word "lot" includes the
word "plat" or "parcel"; the word "building" includes the word "structure";
the word "shall" is intended to be mandatory; "occupied" or "used" shall
be considered as though followed by the words "or intended, arranged or
designed to be used or occupied."
§ 250-2.2. Terms defined.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ACCESSORY FACILITY OR STRUCTURE (COMMUNICATION TOWER) —
An accessory facility or structure serving or being used in conjunction with
a communication tower and located on the same lot as the communication
tower, including utility or transmission equipment storage sheds or
cabinets.
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE — A structure customarily incidental and
subordinate to the principal building on the same lot where the principal
building is lawful and where there is unity of ownership between the
principal building and accessory structure. A structure which dominates the
principal building in area is not eligible to qualify as an accessory structure.
ACCESSORY USE — A use customarily incidental and subordinate to the
principal use, where the principal use is lawful, where there is unity of
ownership between the principal and accessory use, and where the
principal and accessory uses are located on the same lot. A use which
dominates the principal use in area, extent or purpose is not eligible to
qualify as an accessory use. Under no circumstances shall any explicitly
prohibited use qualify as an accessory use.
ACTIVE ORCHARDS — A group of fruit-bearing plants or trees under
cultivation for either commercial purposes or private consumption.
ADDITION — Any structure which is built or placed so as to be attached to
a building and have a common wall with the building to which it is attached.
ADULT USE AND ADULT ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENTS — A
public or private establishment, or any part thereof, which presents any
of the following entertainments, exhibitions or services: topless and/or
bottomless dancers; strippers, topless waitressing, busing or service;
topless hair care or massages; service or entertainment where the servers
or entertainers wear pasties or G-strings or both; adult arcades; adult
bookstores or adult video stores; adult cabarets; adult motels; adult motionpicture
theaters; adult theaters; escort agencies; nude model studios and
§ 250-2.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 250-2.2
1:373
sexual encounter centers. Adult use and adult entertainment
establishments customarily exclude minors by reason of age.
ADULT ARCADE — Any place to which the public is permitted or invited
wherein coin-operated or slug-operated or electronically, electrically, or
mechanically controlled still or motion-picture machines, projectors or
other image-producing devices are maintained to show images to five
or fewer persons per machine at any one time, and where the images
so displayed are distinguished or characterized by the depicting or
describing of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
A.
ADULT BOOKSTORE or ADULT VIDEO STORE — A commercial
establishment which, as one of its principal business purposes, offers
for sale or rental for any form of consideration any one or more of the
following:
Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or
photographs, films, motion pictures, videocassettes or video
reproduction, slides, or other visual representations which depict
or describe specified sexual activities or specified anatomical
areas; or
(1)
Instruments, devices, or paraphernalia, which is designed for use
in connection with specified sexual activities. A commercial
establishment may have other principal business purposes that do
not involve the offering for sale or rental of material depicting or
describing specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas
and still be categorized as an adult bookstore or adult video store
so long as one of its principal business purposes is the offering
for sale or rental for consideration of the specified materials which
depict or describe specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas. For purposes of this definition, "principal
business purpose" shall mean 25% or more of any of the following:
(a) The number of different titles or kinds of such merchandise;
(b) The number of copies or pieces of such merchandise;
The amount of floor space devoted to the sale and/or display of
such merchandise; or
(c)
The amount of advertising which is devoted to such
merchandise, either printed or broadcast media.
(d)
(2)
B.
ADULT CABARET — A nightclub, bar, restaurant, or similar commercial
establishment which regularly features:
(1) Persons who appear in a state of nudity; or
Live performances which are characterized by the exposure of
specified anatomical areas or by specified sexual activities; or
(2)
C.
§ 250-2.2 PENFIELD CODE § 250-2.2
1:374
Films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides, or other
photographic reproductions which are characterized by the
depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas.
(3)
ADULT MOTEL — A hotel, motel or similar commercial establishment
which:
Offers accommodations to the public for any form of consideration;
provides patrons with closed-circuit television transmissions, films,
motion pictures, videocassettes, slides or other photographic
reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or
description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical
areas and/or currently rated X movies; and/or
(1)
Offers a sleeping room for rent for a period of time that is less than
10 hours; and/or
(2)
Allows a tenant or occupant of a sleeping room to subrent the room
for a period of time that is less than 10 hours.
(3)
D.
ADULT MOTION-PICTURE THEATER — A commercial establishment
where, for any form of consideration, films, motion pictures,
videocassettes, slides, or similar photographic reproductions are
regularly shown which are characterized by the depiction or
description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
E.
ADULT THEATER — A theater, concert hall, auditorium or similar
commercial establishment which regularly features persons who
appear in a state of nudity or live performances which are
characterized by the exposure of specified anatomical areas or by
specified sexual activities.
F.
NUDITY or A STATE OF NUDITY — The appearance of a human bare
buttocks, male genitals, female genitals, or full male or female breasts.
G.
SEXUAL ENCOUNTER CENTER — A business or commercial
enterprise that as one of its primary business purposes offers for any
form of consideration:
Physical contact in the form of wrestling or tumbling between
persons or the opposite sex; or
(1)
Activities between male and female persons and/or persons of the
same sex when one or more of the persons is in a state of nudity or
seminude (a state of undress in which clothing covers no more than
the genitals, pubic region, and areola of the female breast, as well
as portions of the body covered by supporting straps or devices).
(2)
H.
I. SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS —
§ 250-2.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 250-2.2
1:375
ANTENNA — A system of electrical conductors that transmit or receive
radio frequency signals. Such signals shall include but not be limited to
radio, television, cellular, paging, personal communications services (PCS),
and microwave communications.
APARTMENT HOUSE — A building arranged, intended or designated to be
occupied by three or more resident households living independently of each
other.
AUTHORIZED OFFICIAL — A person or persons employed by the Town of
Penfield so designated to perform those duties of enforcing the provisions of
this chapter. This term includes without limitation the Building and Zoning
Administrator and/or any employee designated by him/her.
BASAL AREA — The cross-sectional area of a tree, measured at breast
height (ABH), generally considered to be 4.5 feet above existing ground
level. Basal area is measured in square feet.
BED-AND-BREAKFAST FACILITY — A bed-and-breakfast facility is not a
hotel or motel, but rather is a dwelling in which overnight accommodations
for a maximum stay of one week and breakfast only are provided or offered
for transient guests for compensation. Such use is secondary to the
occupancy of the dwelling by a family.
BILLBOARD — Any freestanding sign that directs attention to a business,
commodity, service or entertainment, other than for charitable or civic
events or issues, conducted, sold or offered at a location other than the
premises or site on which the sign is located.
BUILDING — Any structure having a roof supported by columns or by walls
and intended for the shelter, housing or enclosure of persons or animals.
BUILDING LINES — The lines which delineate the area on which a
structure may be legally erected.
Unless completely and opaquely covered, human genitals, pubic
region, buttocks, or female breasts below a point immediately
above the top of areola.
(1)
Even if completely and opaquely covered, male genitals in a
discernibly turgid state.
(2)
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES — Includes any of the following:
The fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic
region, buttocks, anus or female breasts;
(1)
Sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including
intercourse, oral copulation or sodomy;
(2)
(3) Masturbation, actual or simulated; or
Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the
activities set forth in Subsection (1) through (3) above.
(4)
J.
§ 250-2.2 PENFIELD CODE § 250-2.2
1:376
CABANA — A room enclosure erected or constructed adjacent to a mobile/
manufactured home for residential use by the occupant of the mobile/
manufactured home.
CAMPING TRAILER or FOLDING TENT TRAILER — A portable vehicular
structure mounted on wheels and constructed with or without collapsible
partial side walls of fabric, plastic or other material which are adapted
for folding for towing by another vehicle and unfolding at the campsite to
provide temporary living quarters for recreational, camping or travel use.
CHARITABLE EVENT — A sale, event or other activity, lasting 30 days or
less, conducted by a charitable organization for the purpose of generating
financial profits or donations of monies, materials or services to benefit
charitable causes.
CIVIC EVENT — A public event, lasting 30 days or less, occurring within the
Town of Penfield, including but not limited to parades, carnivals, festivals,
displays and shows conducted by or in conjunction with the Town of
Penfield.
COMMERCIAL; COMMERCIAL USES — Notwithstanding any provision
hereof to the contrary, for purposes of this chapter in no event shall the
terms "commercial," "commercial uses," or any variation thereof, be
construed to mean, be, include, or authorize within the Town any explicitly
prohibited use.
COMMUNICATION TOWER — A structure designed to support
communication antennas. It includes, without limit, freestanding towers,
guyed towers, monopoles, and similar structures. It is a structure intended
for transmitting and/or receiving radio, television, telephone, or microwave
communications.
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN — Any document, styled comprehensive or master
plan or otherwise, adopted by the Town Board for the protection,
enhancement, growth, and development of the Town, immediate as well
as long-range, specifically pursuant to Town Law § 272-a, together with
all other materials, written and/or graphic, including but not limited to
maps, charts, studies, resolutions, reports and other descriptive material,
adopted by the Town Board, that identify the goals, objectives, principles,
guidelines, policies, standards, devices and instruments for the protection,
enhancement, growth and development of the Town.
CUSTOMARY AGRICULTURAL OPERATIONS — The use of a parcel of
land of five acres or more for gain in the raising of agricultural products,
livestock, poultry, and dairy products. It includes necessary farm structures
and roadside stands within the prescribed limitations and the storage of
necessary equipment. It includes also the use of a parcel of land of less than
five acres, except that on such parcels, the raising of fur-bearing animals,
livery or boarding stables, dog kennels and the raising of livestock and
poultry for sale and slaughter is excluded and therefore prohibited. No
housing of poultry or stabling of livestock or storage of manure or other
odor- or dust-producing material shall be allowed within 100 feet of any
lot line. When, in conjunction with the customary agricultural operation,
§ 250-2.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 250-2.2
1:377
the lodging for hire of more than four persons is prohibited, in no event
shall customary agricultural operations be construed to mean, be, include,
or authorize within the Town natural gas and/or petroleum exploration
activities, natural gas and/or petroleum extraction activities, a land
application facility, a natural gas and/or petroleum exploration, extraction
or production wastes disposal/storage facility, a natural gas and/or
petroleum extraction, exploration or production wastes dump, or any other
explicitly prohibited use.
CUSTOMARY HOME OCCUPATION — A business conducted by a resident
wholly within the dwelling unit subject to the limitations found in
§ 250-5.1D(3)
DISH ANTENNA — See "antenna."
EPA — The Environmental Protection Agency.
EXCAVATED MATERIALS; EXCAVATION; EXCAVATING — Notwithstanding
any provision hereof to the contrary, for purposes of this chapter, in no
event shall the term "excavated materials," "excavation," "excavating" or
any variation thereof be construed to mean, be, or include natural gas, or to
authorize within the Town natural gas and/or petroleum extraction activities
or any other explicitly prohibited use.
EXPLICITLY PROHIBITED USE(S) — The explicitly prohibited uses defined
and described in Article IV of this chapter.
EXTERIOR PROPERTY LINE — Property lines which encompass a total
multiple dwelling development, townhouse development and mobile home
park development.
FAA — The Federal Aviation Administration.
FACTORY-MANUFACTURED HOME — A structure that incorporates
structures or components designed for residential occupancy, constructed
by a method or system of construction whereby the structure or component
is wholly or in substantial part manufactured in a manufacturing facility and
is intended for permanent installation on a building site.
FAMILY — Any number of individuals living together as a single
housekeeping unit and preparing their food as one unit.
FCC — The Federal Communications Commission.
FILLING — The depositing of natural or artificial material that raises the
existing grade of land or modifies the surface of water bodies. In no event
shall "filling" be construed to mean, be, include, or authorize within the
Town a land application facility, a natural gas and/or petroleum exploration,
extraction or production wastes disposal/storage facility, a natural gas and/
or petroleum extraction, exploration or production wastes dump, or any
other explicitly prohibited use.
GASOLINE SERVICE STATION — A building or lot having pumps and
storage tanks where fuels, oils, or accessories for motor vehicles are
dispensed, sold, or offered for sale at retail only and where there is no auto
repair service.
§ 250-2.2 PENFIELD CODE § 250-2.2
1:378
GOLF COURSE — Any privately, semi-privately or publicly owned course
consisting of at least nine golf holes of conventional design and distance.
GROSS ACREAGE — The acreage computed within the perimeter of all
legally recognized property lines of any given parcel of land.
HEIGHT, BUILDING — The vertical distance measured from grade level to
the highest point on the roof.
INDUSTRIAL; INDUSTRIAL USE — Notwithstanding any provision hereof
to the contrary, for purposes of this chapter, in no event shall the terms
"industrial," "industrial uses," "industry," or any variation thereof contained
in this chapter be construed to mean, be, include, or authorize within the
Town any explicitly prohibited use.
INJECTION WELL — A bored, drilled or driven shaft whose depth is greater
than the largest surface dimension, or a dug hole whose depth is greater
than the largest surface dimension of the hole, through which fluids (which
may or may not include semi-solids) are injected into the subsurface and
less than 90% of such fluids return to the surface within a period of 90 days.
IN-LAW — A son, daughter, brother, sister, brother-in-law, sister-in-law,
mother, father, mother-in-law, father-in-law, grandfather, grandmother,
grandchild, aunt, uncle, niece, nephew, cousin or step relatives of the
foregoing degrees.
IN-LAW APARTMENT — A separate living space consisting of an area that
is subordinate and incidental to the primary dwelling unit within a singlefamily
dwelling unit which may consist of separate sleeping, cooking, living,
dining and bathroom facilities and which is intended to be occupied by an
in-law or in-laws of a member or members of the family unit occupying the
main part of the dwelling
IRREVOCABLE LETTER OF CREDIT — Notwithstanding any provision
hereof to the contrary, a letter of credit in form and content (including
without limitation the conditions to draw), and from an issuer, acceptable to
the Attorney for the Town of Penfield in his/her reasonable discretion.
JUNK — Any manufactured good, appliance, fixture, furniture, machinery,
motor vehicle, recreational vehicle, trailer or similar object which is
abandoned, demolished, discarded, dismantled or so worn, deteriorated
or in such a condition as to be generally unusable in its existing state.
This definition shall include but shall not be limited to scrap metal, scrap
material, waste bottles, cans, paper, rubble, boxes, crates, rags, used
construction materials, used motor vehicle parts and used tires.
JUNKYARD — A place where waste, discarded or salvaged materials are
bought, sold, exchanged, stored, baled, cleaned, packed, disassembled or
handled, or where automobile wrecking takes place. In no event shall
"junkyard" be construed to mean, be, include, or authorize within the
Town a land application facility, a natural gas and/or petroleum exploration,
extraction or production wastes disposal/storage facility, a natural gas and/
or petroleum extraction, exploration or production wastes dump, or any
other explicitly prohibited use.
§ 250-2.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 250-2.2
1:379
KENNEL — A place for the keeping of more than three (of any type) animals
that are more than six months old for commercial purposes and not related
to agriculture.
LAND APPLICATION FACILITY — A site where any natural gas and/or
petroleum extraction, exploration or production wastes are applied to the
soil surface or injected into the upper layer of the soil.
LANDMARK SITE — The site on which a Penfield landmark is situated. The
extent of the landmark site shall be prescribed by the Historic Preservation
Board when the landmark is designated. The site need not include the whole
property on which the Penfield landmark is situated, but in no event shall
it be smaller than the lot size prescribed by the ordinance for the zoning
district in which said site is located.
LEASE LINE — The line, whether actually marked or unmarked,
establishing the leased area or boundaries of a mobile/manufactured home
lot.
LOT — A contiguous parcel of land in identical ownership throughout,
bounded by other parcels or rights-of-way.
LOT DEPTH — The distance between the midpoints of straight lines
connecting the foremost points of the side lot lines in front and the rearmost
points of the side lot line in the rear.
LOT WIDTH — The distance between straight lines connecting front and
rear lot lines at each side of the lot, measured at the building line.
MICROWAVE — A band of frequencies or a range of radiowaves.
MINE; MINING — Notwithstanding any provision hereof to the contrary,
for purposes of this chapter in no event shall the term "mine," "mining"
or any variation thereof contained in this chapter be construed to mean,
be, include, or authorize within the Town any natural gas and/or petroleum
extraction activities, or any other explicitly prohibited use.
MOBILE/MANUFACTURED HOME — A transportable structure not drawn
by its own power, transportable in one or more sections, which, in the
traveling mode, is eight feet or more in width or 40 feet or more in length,
or, when erected on site, is 320 square feet or more, and which is built
on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or
without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities,
and includes the plumbing, heating, air-conditioning and electrical systems
contained therein.
MOBILE/MANUFACTURED HOME LOT — A parcel of land for the
placement of a single mobile/manufactured home, its accessory building or
structures, and accessory equipment for the exclusive use of the occupants
of said mobile/manufactured home.
MOBILE/MANUFACTURED HOME PARK — Any premises on which are
parked two or more occupied mobile/manufactured homes. This definition
shall exclude sales lots on which automobiles or unoccupied mobile homes,
whether new or used, are parked for purposes of inspection or sale.
§ 250-2.2 PENFIELD CODE § 250-2.2
1:380
MOBILE/MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OPERATOR — The person or
persons responsible for on-site management and operation of a mobile
home park.
MOBILE/MANUFACTURED HOME SITE PLAN, OFFICIAL — A drawing
submitted to the authorized official as part of an application for a permit
for a mobile home park, containing all the information required by the
ordinance in sufficient detail to enable the required review.
MOTOR HOME; MOTORIZED HOME; R.V. — A vehicular structure built
on a self-propelled motor vehicle chassis primarily designed to provide
temporary living quarters for recreational, camping or travel use.
NATURAL GAS — Methane and any gaseous substance, either combustible
or noncombustible, which is produced in a natural state from the earth and
which maintains a gaseous or rarefied state at standard temperature and
pressure conditions, and/or gaseous components or vapors occurring in or
derived from petroleum or other hydrocarbons.
NATURAL GAS AND/OR PETROLEUM EXPLORATION ACTIVITIES —
Geologic or geophysical activities related to the search for natural gas,
petroleum or other subsurface hydrocarbons, including prospecting,
geophysical and geologic seismic surveying and sampling techniques, but
only to the extent that such activities involve or employ core, rotary, or any
other type of drilling or otherwise making any penetration or excavation of
any land or water surface in the search for and evaluation of natural gas,
petroleum, or other subsurface hydrocarbon deposits.
NATURAL GAS AND/OR PETROLEUM EXTRACTION ACTIVITIES — The
digging or drilling of a well for the purposes of exploring for, developing
or producing natural gas, petroleum or other subsurface hydrocarbons,
including without limitation any and all forms of shale fracturing.
NATURAL GAS AND/OR PETROLEUM EXPLORATION, EXTRACTION OR
PRODUCTION WASTES —
Any of the following in any form, and whether or not such items have
been excepted or exempted from the coverage of any federal or state
environmental protection laws, or have been excepted from statutory or
regulatory definitions of "industrial waste," "hazardous," or "toxic," and
whether or not such substances are generally characterized as waste:
(1) Natural gas or petroleum drilling fluids;
Natural gas or petroleum exploration, drilling, production or
processing wastes;
(2)
Natural gas or petroleum drilling treatment wastes (such as oils,
frac fluids, produced water, brine, flowback, sediment and/or any
other liquid or semi-liquid material);
(3)
Any chemical, waste oil, waste emulsified oil, mud, or sediment that
was used or produced in the drilling, development, transportation,
processing or refining of natural gas or petroleum;
(4)
A.
§ 250-2.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 250-2.2
1:381
NATURAL GAS AND/OR PETROLEUM EXPLORATION, EXTRACTION OR
PRODUCTION WASTES DISPOSAL/STORAGE FACILITY — Any of the
following:
NATURAL GAS AND/OR PETROLEUM EXPLORATION, EXTRACTION OR
PRODUCTION WASTES DUMP — Land upon which natural gas and/or
petroleum extraction, exploration or production wastes, or their residue or
constituents before or after treatment, are deposited, disposed, discharged,
injected, placed, buried or discarded, without any intention of further use.
NATURAL GAS COMPRESSION FACILITY — A facility constructed or
operated to compress natural gas that originates from a gas well or
collection of such wells, operating as a midstream facility for delivery of
gas from a gas field for entry into the transmission pipeline system; the
term shall not include the transmission pipeline itself; the term shall include
equipment for liquids separation, natural gas dehydration, and tanks for the
storage of waste liquids and hydrocarbon liquids.
Soil contaminated in the drilling, transportation, processing or
refining of natural gas or petroleum;
(5)
(6) Drill cuttings from natural gas or petroleum wells; or
Any other wastes associated with the exploration, drilling,
production or treatment of natural gas or petroleum.
(7)
This definition specifically intends to include some wastes that may
otherwise be classified as "solid wastes which are not hazardous
wastes" under 40 CFR 261.4(b). The definition of natural gas and/
or petroleum extraction, exploration or production wastes does not
include:
(1) Recognizable and nonrecognizable food wastes; or
(2) Waste generated by customary agricultural operations.
B.
A. Tanks of any construction (metal, fiberglass, concrete, etc.);
B. Impoundments;
C. Pits;
D. Evaporation ponds; or
Other facilities in any case used for the storage or treatment of natural
gas and/or petroleum extraction, exploration or production wastes that:
(1) Are being held for initial use;
Have been used and are being held for subsequent reuse or
recycling;
(2)
(3) Are being held for treatment; or
(4) Are being held for storage.
E.
§ 250-2.2 PENFIELD CODE § 250-2.2
1:382
NATURAL GAS PROCESSING FACILITY — Those facilities that separate
and recover natural gas liquids (NGLs) and/or other non-methane gases and
liquids from a stream of produced natural gas, using equipment for any of
the following: cleaning or stripping gas, cooking and dehydration, residual
refinement, treating or removing oil or condensate, removing water,
separating NGLs, removing sulfur or carbon dioxide, fractionation of NGLs,
or the capture of CO2 separated from natural gas streams.
NATURALLY OCCURRING MATERIAL — Notwithstanding any provision
hereof to the contrary, in no event shall the term "naturally occurring
material" or any variation thereof be construed to mean, be or to include
natural gas, or to authorize within the Town any explicitly prohibited use.
NEW CONSTRUCTION — Structures for which the start of construction
commenced on or after the effective date of this chapter.
NONCONFORMING USE — Any use of land or structure, which use was
lawful at the time of the effective date of this chapter subject to the
requirements of § 250-7.13.
NOXIOUS COMMODITY — Any noisome substance which, by reason of its
nature, will produce an olfactory response in a human being.
OPEN SPACE — The area unoccupied by any building, structure or parking
area, whether paved or unpaved.
PENFIELD LANDMARK — Any improvement or area which has
architectural or historical significance and is designated thus by the
Historic Preservation Board in accordance with the requirements of this
chapter.
PERMITTED STRUCTURE OR USE — That use of land by occupancy,
activity, building or other structure which is specifically enumerated as
permissible by the regulations of the zoning district in which land is located.
PERSON — Any individual, public or private corporation, for profit or not for
profit, association, partnership, limited-liability company, limited-liability
partnership, firm, trust, or estate, and any other legal entity whatsoever
which is recognized by law as the subject of rights and duties.
PREMISES — A lot, together with all the buildings and structures thereon.
PRESERVATION DISTRICT — A district comprising two or more properties
and adjacent public areas, which includes structures and/or improvements
of architectural or historical significance and is designated as such by the
Town Board in accordance with the requirements of this chapter.
PRESERVATION SITE — The site on which a preservation structure is
situated.
PRESERVATION STRUCTURE — Any structure or improvement situated in
a preservation district other than those designated as Penfield landmarks.
A preservation structure may or may not have architectural or historical
significance.
§ 250-2.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 250-2.2
1:383
PRINCIPAL STRUCTURE OR USE — A use authorized or allowed alone in
a specified use district for the preservation or promotion of which the use
district is established and subject to the requirements of the regulations and
standards of such use district, and to which all other uses are accessory,
special, conditional or nonconforming.
PROFESSIONAL RESIDENTIAL OFFICE — An office used solely by a
professional person(s) when part of the personal residence, which does not
change the essential character of the residence.
PUBLIC UTILITY; PUBLIC UTILITY BUILDING; PUBLIC UTILITY FACILITY;
UTILITY — An entity which operates as a monopoly, and whose rates
charged to customers are established by a utility commission. A public
utility or utility facility, structure, or use is a facility, structure, or use which
is operated by a public utility, and which provides electric, gas, steam, CATV,
telephone or other communication service, water or sewerage directly to
the general public. In no event shall "public utility," "public utility building,"
"public utility facility," or "utility" be construed to mean, be, include, or
authorize within the Town a natural gas compression facility, natural gas
processing facility, or any other explicitly prohibited use.
PWF — Personal wireless facility.
RADIATION — The spontaneous emission of particles (alpha, beta,
neutrons) or photons (gamma) from the nucleus of unstable atoms as a
result of radioactive decay.
RADIOACTIVE MATERIAL — Material in any form that emits radiation.
This definition specifically includes NORM (naturally occurring radioactive
material), but only if such naturally occurring material has been moved from
its naturally occurring location through a mechanical or other man-made
process. All such material is "radioactive material" for purposes hereof,
whether or not it is otherwise exempt from licensing and regulatory control
pursuant to the New York State Department of Labor, the United States
Nuclear Regulatory Commission, Environmental Protection Agency,
Department of Energy, Department of Transportation, or any other
regulatory agency.
RAMADA — Any freestanding roof or shade structure installed or erected
above a mobile/manufactured home or any portion thereof.
RECREATIONAL RAMP — Any structure or improvement which is used for
the purpose of riding or propelling wheeled vehicles, including, but not
limited to, skateboards, bicycles, motorcycles, motorized bicycles, roller
skates, in-line skates, roller blades or such other similar vehicles or devices.
RESTAURANT, SIT-DOWN — A permanent building used for the serving of
meals where customers are seated principally at a table and are waited on
when seated, where a full line of meals is offered, where the main portions
of the meals are not precooked, prepackaged or prepared in any manner
such as this, in anticipation of customers, and further where, under proper
authority, alcoholic beverages may be served and where the meal is not
customarily or occasionally eaten in vehicles.
§ 250-2.2 PENFIELD CODE § 250-2.2
1:384
RIGHT-OF-WAY, HIGHWAY LINE or FRONT PROPERTY LINE — The line
which is the common boundary line between a lot and a street or highway
boundary.
ROOF — A horizontal or inclined structural element of a building, which
serves as the top closure.
ROOF LINE — An imaginary line running in a horizontal direction around a
building; said line is created at the vertical break of a wall and roof.
SETBACK —
SHOPPING CENTER AND/OR PLAZA — A group of at least three or more
nonresidential establishments managed as a unit and where there are
usually common walls between the various uses, with off-street parking
provided on the center's site.
SIGN — Any advertising medium, structure, or device which advertises,
directs, or calls attention to any business, article, substance, or service.
A sign may be painted, printed, pasted, posted or affixed to any building,
billboard, wall, fence, railing, vehicle, natural object or structure of any
kind on real property or upon the ground itself. This definition encompasses
flags, banners, neon tubes, fluorescent tubes, or other artificial lights or
strings of lights outlining or hung on any part of a structure, building or
lot for the purposes mentioned heretofore, but does not include the flag
or insignia of any governmental, civic, professional, religious or similar
organization.
SIGN, FREESTANDING — Any sign supported by a pylon, pole, upright, or
brace placed in the ground and which stands free of a building and/or other
structure.
SIGN, IDEOLOGICAL — A temporary sign expressing the opinion of the
owner or occupant of the appurtenant property regarding political,
The minimum allowable horizontal distance from a given point or line of
reference, such as a street right-of-way or property line, to the nearest
vertical wall of a building or accessory structure as defined herein.
A.
All front, side and rear setback measurements shall be the minimum
horizontal distance measured from the principal structure or any
projections, whichever is greater, to the closest point of the front, side,
and rear property lines.
The depth of required front yards shall be the distance between the
front property line and the closest point of the front of a structure
or any projection thereof.
(1)
The depth of required rear yard shall be the distance between the
rear property line and the closest point of the rear of the principal
structure or any projection thereof.
(2)
In the case of corner lots, yards remaining after front yards have
been established shall be considered rear yards and side yards for
dimensional purposes.
(3)
B.
§ 250-2.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 250-2.2
1:385
governmental, charitable, religious, social or economic topics of public
interest.
SIGN, OFF-SITE — A portable sign which in its subject matter directs
attention to a use, facility, service, product or event at a location other than
on the premises or site on which the sign is located, with the consent of the
property owner on which such sign is located.
SIGN, ON-SITE — A sign relating in its subject matter to the premises on
which it is located.
SIGN, POLITICAL — A temporary sign announcing or supporting political
candidates, announced or supported by the owner or occupant of the
appurtenant property.
SIGN, PORTABLE TEMPORARY — A sign not exceeding six square feet
in area per face or four feet in height, located on private property, a
minimum distance of 10 feet from any side or rear property line and
designed or intended to be easily moved by a single person of average
physical strength without the need of additional equipment and that is not
permanent embedded in the ground or affixed to any building or other
structure and that is intended or designed to be displayed for a limited time
period.
SIGN, PROJECTING — Any sign which is attached to a building or other
structure and extends beyond the line of said building or structure, or
beyond the surface of that portion of the building or structure to which the
sign is attached, and not parallel to the face of the building.
SITE — A parcel of land, a lot or group of contiguous lots under single
ownership that is in the process of being developed or proposed for
development.
SITE PLAN — A drawing prepared to specifications and containing
necessary elements, as set forth in submission requirements of the
department facilitating review, which shows the arrangement, layout and
design of the proposed use of a single parcel, or parcels as the case may
be, of land as shown on said plan. Site plan approval is subject to the
requirements identified within Article XII.
SKETCH PLAN — A sketch of a proposed subdivision showing the
information specified in Article XV, Miscellaneous Provisions, of this
chapter to enable the subdivider to save time and expense in reaching
general agreement with the Planning Board or Town Board, as the case may
be, as to the form of the layout and objectives of these regulations.
SPECIAL USE — A use which is deemed allowable within a given zoning
district, but which is potentially incompatible with other uses and,
therefore, is subject to special standards and conditions of such use, subject
to the approval of the Town Board, Planning Board, or Zoning Board, as the
case may be, and complying with the requirements of Town Law § 274-b.
STABLE ANGLE OF REPOSE — The limiting steepness beyond which soils
will slip downhill or become unstable.
§ 250-2.2 PENFIELD CODE § 250-2.2
1:386
STANDS OF TREES — A grouping of three or more trees of six inches or
more in diameter at any point 4.5 feet above existing ground level.
STEEP SLOPE — All areas in the Town of Penfield within 50 feet of the top
or toe of a fifteen-percent slope or greater, as identified on the Steep Slope
EPOD Map and as further defined in § 250-6.1G.
STORIES, NUMBER OF —
STORY — The portion of a building which is between one floor level and the
next higher floor level or the roof. If a mezzanine floor area exceeds 1/3 of
the area of the floor immediately below, it shall be deemed to be a story. A
basement shall be deemed to be a story when its ceiling is six feet or more
above the finished grade.
STRUCTURALLY ALTERED — In addition to its other ordinary applications,
any alteration whereby a building or other structure is adapted to another
or a different use, and to any alteration or repair.
STRUCTURE — An assembly of materials forming a construction made
of component structural parts for occupancy or use, excluding fences,
retaining walls, or decorative gardening materials.
SUBDIVISION — The division of one parcel into two or more parcels. The
term "subdivision" may include any alteration of lot lines or dimensions of
any lots shown on a plat previously approved and filed in the office of the
County Clerk which is also referred to as "resubdivision." Subdivisions are
subject to the requirements identified within Article XI.
SUBDIVISION PLAT — A drawing, in final form, showing a proposed
subdivision and containing all information or detail required by law and by
this chapter to be presented to the Planning Board or Town Board, as the
case may be, for approval, and which, if approved, shall be duly filed and
recorded by the applicant in the office of the County Clerk.
SUBSURFACE — Below the surface of the earth, or of a body of water, as
the context may require.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS — The transmission and reception of audio,
video, data and other information by wire, radio, light, and other electronic
or electromagnetic systems.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS TOWER — A structure on which one or more
transmitting and/or receiving antennas are located.
One-story building: may consist of a basement and one floor, provided
the basement ceiling is less than six feet above grade.
A.
Two-story building: may consist of a basement, first floor and second
floor, provided the basement is less than six feet above grade.
B.
One-and-one-half story building: may consist of a basement, first floor
and second floor, provided the distance from the second floor to the
mean of the roof does not exceed seven feet and the basement ceiling
is less than six feet above grade.
C.
§ 250-2.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 250-2.2
1:387
TEMPORARY OUTSIDE STORAGE AND DISPLAY PERMIT — A permit
granted by the authorized official and issued by the Town Clerk for
commercial properties to allow the storage and display of merchandise to
be sold by the business. The business is permitted a maximum of three
permits per year of a duration of one week or less. The applicant shall be
required to pay any and all fees established for this permit.
TEMPORARY RECREATIONAL PERMIT — A permit granted by the
authorized official and issued by the Town Clerk for recreational activities
of a duration of one week or less. Examples of temporary recreational
uses shall include, but are not limited to, carnivals, concerts, promotional
baseball events, and athletic tournaments.
TOWER — Any tower, pole, windmill or other structure, whether attached
to a building, guyed, or freestanding, designed or to be used for and/
or for the support of any device for the transmission and/or reception of
radio frequency signals, including but not limited to broadcast, short-wave,
citizen's band, FM or television, microwave and any wind-driven devices,
whether used for energy conservation or not.
TOWNHOUSE — A dwelling unit which is one of a series of units, having a
common party wall between each adjacent unit, each with private outside
entrance.
TRAILER; TRAVEL TRAILER —
TREE PRESERVATION ZONE — All areas in the Town of Penfield of less
than five acres with stands of trees measuring six inches or more in
diameter at any point 4.5 feet above existing ground level.
TRUCK CAMPER — A portable structure designed to be loaded onto, or
affixed to the bed or chassis of, a truck and constructed to provide
temporary living quarters for recreation, camping or travel use.
UNDERGROUND INJECTION — Subsurface emplacement of natural gas
and/or petroleum extraction, exploration or production wastes by or into an
injection well.
A portable vehicular structure, mounted on wheels, of such size or
weight as not to require special highway movement permits when
drawn by a motor vehicle, primarily designed and constructed to
provide temporary living quarters for recreational, camping or travel
use;
A.
Any vehicle or structure designed and used for human living quarters
which meets all of the following qualifications:
(1) Is not used as the permanent residence of the owner or occupant.
Is used for temporary living quarters by the owner or occupant
while engaged in recreational or vacation activities.
(2)
Is towed or otherwise transported by its own or by other motor
power on the public streets or highways incidental to such
recreational or vacation activities.
(3)
B.
§ 250-2.2 PENFIELD CODE § 250-2.2
1:388
UNDERGROUND NATURAL GAS STORAGE — Subsurface storage,
including in depleted gas or oil reservoirs and salt caverns, of natural gas
that has been transferred from its original location, whether for the purpose
of load balancing the production of natural gas or for any other reason,
including without limitation short-term, long-term, or intermittent storage
for product quality, processing, or transportation purposes, or because of
market conditions. Without limitation, this term includes compression and
dehydration facilities.
UNDEVELOPED LOT — A lot on which the construction of any structure has
not occurred.
U-PICK OPERATION — Farms, farm markets, orchards or similar
agricultural operations where the customers of such operation harvest the
fruits or products directly from the plants themselves in exchange for
compensation to the owner or operator of such operation.
USABLE SATELLITE SIGNAL — A satellite signal which, when viewed on
a conventional television set, is at least equal in picture quality to that
received from local commercial television stations using typical residential
antennas or by way of cable television.
USE, EXPLICITLY PROHIBITED — The explicitly prohibited uses defined
and described in Article IV of this chapter.
USE, NONCONFORMING — See "nonconforming use."
USE, PERMITTED — See "permitted structure or use."
USE, PRINCIPAL — See "principal structure or use."
VARIANCE — An area variance or a use variance as the context may
require.
WATERCOURSE — Any identifiable natural or man-made channel which has
measurable detectable flow on a continual basis throughout most of the
year and as further defined in § 250-6.1J.
WATER-ORIENTED USES —
AREA VARIANCE — The authorization by the Zoning Board of Appeals
for the use of land in a manner that is not otherwise allowed by
the dimensional or physical requirements of the applicable zoning
regulations.
A.
USE VARIANCE — The authorization by the Zoning Board of Appeals
for the use of land for a purpose that is not otherwise allowed or is
prohibited by the applicable zoning regulations.
B.
Those uses which require direct access to the waterfront in order to
function (water-dependent); or
A.
Those uses which have no critical dependence on a waterfront location
but the profitability of those uses and/or the enjoyment levels of the
users would be significantly enhanced if the uses were adjacent to or
had visual access to the waterfront (water-enhanced).
B.
§ 250-2.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 250-2.2
1:389
WOODLAND PROTECTION DISTRICT — All areas in the Town of Penfield
of five or more contiguous acres of woods and unique or sensitive areas of
less than five acres, as identified on the woodland EPOD Map and further
defined in § 250-6.1H. Areas of active orchards are not included.
§ 250-2.2 PENFIELD CODE § 250-2.2
1:390
ARTICLE III
Zoning Districts
Any use not specifically permitted is prohibited.
§ 250-3.1. Applicability of district regulations.
Any use not specifically set forth as a permitted use (as of right, accessory,
or upon special use permit or conditional use permit, as the context may
admit) in any zoning district shall be expressly prohibited in that district.
A use specifically set forth as a permitted use in one district shall not
be permitted in another district unless it is specifically set forth as a
permitted use in said other district. No structure shall hereafter be erected
or altered to exceed the height, to accommodate or house a greater number
of families, to occupy a greater percentage of lot area or to have narrower
or smaller rear yards, front yards, or side yards than are specified within
this chapter for the district in which such building is located; and what
is specified within this chapter as to dimensional and similar area
requirements is further limited and qualified by any restrictions imposed
by any applicable additional requirements, standards, and/or regulations
contained in amendments to this chapter.
§ 250-3.2. Classification of districts.
The districts established by this chapter shall be as follows:
EPOD Environmental Protection Overlay District
CR-2 Conservation Residential District
RA-2 Rural Agricultural District
RR-1 Rural Residential District
R-1-12 Residential 1-12
R-1-15 Residential 1-15
R-1-20 Residential 1-20
MR Multiple Residence District
TH Townhouse Dwelling District
PD Planned Development District
MHP Mobile Home Park District
BN-R Business Non-Retail District
LB Limited Business
GB General Business District
LI Limited Industrial District
HPOD Historic Preservation Overlay District
LLD LaSalle's Landing Development District
§ 250-3.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 250-3.2
1:391
FC Four Corners District
TFOD Routes 250/441 Overlay District
§ 250-3.3. District locations.
The boundaries for each district listed as part of this chapter are indicated
on the map entitled "The Official Zoning Map of the Town of Penfield,"
dated with the effective date of this chapter, which is hereby adopted by
reference and declared to be part of this chapter, and hereinafter known as
the "Official Zoning Map."
§ 250-3.4. Official Zoning Map.
There shall exist only one Official Zoning Map, which shall be kept in the
office of the Town Clerk and it shall bear the Seal of the Town of Penfield,
a certification that it is "The Official Zoning Map of the Town of Penfield"
and its date of adoption by the Town Board. Said Zoning Map shall be
on material suitable for reproduction. Copies of this map, which may from
time to time be published and distributed, would be accurate only as of the
date of their printing and shall bear words to that effect. Changes made
in district boundaries or other matters portrayed on the Zoning Map under
the provisions of this chapter shall be permanently affixed to the Zoning
Map promptly after the amendment has been approved by the Town Board
and shall convey information as to the date and nature of the change. No
amendment to this chapter which involves changes to the Zoning Map shall
become effective until such change and entry have been made on said
map and have been certified by the Town Clerk. The Town Board may, by
resolution, adopt a new Zoning Map to supersede any former map. The new
Zoning Map shall bear a statement which explains that it supersedes the
prior map and gives the dates of adoption of both the prior map and the new
Zoning Map.
§ 250-3.5. Interpretation of district boundaries.
In making a determination where uncertainty exists as to boundaries of any
of the aforesaid districts as shown on said zoning map, the location of such
boundary, unless the same is indicated by dimension on the map, shall be
determined by the Town Board.
§ 250-3.2 PENFIELD CODE § 250-3.5
1:392
ARTICLE IV
Explicitly Prohibited Uses; Natural Gas and/or Petroleum
Extractions, Exploration or Production Wastes
§ 250-4.1. Explicitly prohibited uses.
§ 250-4.2. Prohibition against natural gas and/or petroleum
extraction, exploration or production wastes.
The Town of Penfield hereby exercises its authority and right under
Environmental Conservation Law § 27-0711 to adopt provisions that are
consistent with Environmental Conservation Law Article 27, such
consistency demonstrated by the fact that this article complies "with at
least the minimum applicable requirements" set forth in such statute and
the rules and regulations promulgated pursuant to said Article 27. It shall
be unlawful for any person to produce, store, inject, discard, discharge,
dispose, release, or maintain, or to suffer, cause or permit to be produced,
stored, injected, discarded, discharged, disposed, released, or maintained,
A. The following uses and activities are hereby expressly and explicitly
prohibited in each and every zoning district within the Town, and no
building or structure shall be created, altered or erected, and no body
of water, land or building thereon shall be used, for any of such uses or
activities:
(1) Land application facility;
(2) Natural gas and/or petroleum exploration activities;
(3) Natural gas and/or petroleum extraction activities;
(4) Natural gas and/or petroleum extraction, exploration or production
wastes disposal/storage facility;
(5) Natural gas and/or petroleum extraction, exploration or production
wastes dump;
(6) Natural gas compression facility;
(7) Natural gas processing facility;
(8) Underground injection; and
(9) Underground natural gas storage.
B. Any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of this § 250-4.1
is a threat to public health, safety and welfare, and is hereby declared
and deemed to be a nuisance. Collectively, the above expressly
prohibited uses may be referred to in this chapter as "explicitly
prohibited uses," any one of the above expressly prohibited uses may be
referred to in this chapter as an "explicitly prohibited use," and any
combination of more than one such use may also be referred to as
"explicitly prohibited uses."
§ 250-4.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 250-4.2
1:393
anywhere within the Town, any natural gas and/or petroleum extraction,
exploration or production wastes.
§ 250-4.3. Exceptions.
No application to customary local distribution lines, etc. The prohibitions
set forth above in this Article IV are not intended and shall not be construed
to:
A. Prevent or prohibit the right to use roadways in commerce or otherwise
for travel;
B. Prevent or prohibit the transmission of natural gas through utility
pipes, lines, or similar appurtenances for the limited purpose of
supplying natural gas to residents of or buildings located in the Town;
or
C. Prevent or prohibit the incidental or normal sale, storage, or use of
lubricating oil, heating oil, gasoline, diesel fuel, kerosene, or propane in
connection with legal agriculture, residential, business, commercial,
and other uses within the Town.
§ 250-4.2 PENFIELD CODE § 250-4.3
1:394
ARTICLE V
District Regulations
§ 250-5.1. Single-family residential districts.
A. Districts. The following use districts, which are delineated on the
Official Zoning Map of the Town of Penfield, are hereby established:
(1) Rural Agricultural District RA-2.
(2) Conservation Residential District CR-2.
(3) Rural Residential District RR-1.
(4) Residential District R-1-20.
(5) Residential District R-1-15.
(6) Residential District R-1-12.
B. Purposes. The above districts are established to meet the following
purposes:
(1) Rural Agricultural District RA-2. The purpose of the Rural
Agricultural District is to assure a proper economic and physical
environment for continued agricultural use of land; to maintain an
open rural character to viable agricultural areas; to assure
compatible types and densities of development on lands within and
adjacent to the Northeastern Monroe County Agricultural Use
District; and to assure low densities of development in areas
without sanitary sewers.
(2) Conservation Residential District CR-2. The purpose of the
Conservation Residential District is to limit development so as to
preserve and protect the unique and sensitive features that
characterize the areas of the Town adjacent to Irondequoit Bay. In
order to achieve this purpose, residential uses will only be
permitted at very low densities.
(3) Rural Residential District RR-1. The purpose of the Rural
Residential District is to provide a transition or buffer area between
agricultural and suburban areas of Penfield.
(4) Residential Districts R-1-12, R-1-15 and R-1-20. The purpose of
these Residential Districts is to maintain the residential character
of the district. The districts are to provide for residential uses at
suburban standards.
C. Permitted uses. The following uses and their accessory uses shall be
permitted in all single-family residential use districts:
(1) One single-family dwelling unit per lot.
(2) Customary agricultural operations.
§ 250-5.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 250-5.1
1:395
D. Accessory uses. The following accessory uses are permitted in all
single-family residential districts when located on the same lot as a
permitted use, subject to the conditions of this section:
(1) One in-law apartment.
(a) Prior to the use of such apartment as an in-law apartment, the
owner must obtain a building permit. In-law apartments may
be occupied only by members of the family unit occupying the
main part of the dwelling or by in-laws of a member of said
family unit. The applicant must satisfactorily demonstrate that
said apartment would be utilized only in this fashion in affidavit
form prior to the issuance of a building permit.
(b) The area of an in-law apartment shall not exceed 30% of the
total area of the residence.
(c) Occupancy of the apartment shall be nontransferable to
subsequent owners. The authorized official shall verify
pursuant to a notarized affidavit that any occupant of the inlaw
apartment is an in-law, as defined in Article II, on a threeyear
basis; upon verification, said apartment shall be permitted
to be occupied. Any change in the ownership of the property
shall invalidate any permission to use the apartment as an inlaw
apartment.
(d) No construction or remodeling activity of a residence to
provide in-law apartment use shall be permitted without the
issuance of a building permit. In-law apartments shall be
permitted to have an alternate and/or separate means of
ingress/egress to/from the apartment other than that of the
primary residence, but must have an internal access point that
connects the in-law apartment to the primary residential unit.
In no case shall an in-law apartment be permitted to have a
separate driveway or garage to accommodate its occupant(s).
Additional bays to an existing garage and expansion of the
existing driveway shall be permitted to accommodate the inlaw
apartment use, subject to obtaining all necessary permits.
(e) If an in-law apartment shall become vacant, the family
occupying the main part of the dwelling shall have full use and
occupancy of the in-law apartment as if it were an integral part
of the dwelling, without further permitting by the Town.
(f) Any residence containing an in-law apartment shall be
considered a single-family residence. The occupancy or rental
of an in-law apartment by persons other than in-laws, as
defined in this chapter, is expressly prohibited.
(2) One private garage, either attached or unattached to the principal
structure.
§ 250-5.1 PENFIELD CODE § 250-5.1
1:396
(3) Customary home occupations.
(a) The business shall be conducted only within the dwelling unit.
Wholesale and retail sales in which merchandise is stored on,
sold or shipped from the premises; manufacturing of any type,
repair and services of a mechanical nature, as for example but
not by way of limitation, equipment and vehicle repair services
and lawn services, are specifically prohibited. Examples of
permitted uses include, but are not limited to, insurance
agencies, accountants, haircutting, businesses conducted
primarily by mail, telephone or computer and the office
component only of business which would otherwise be
prohibited.
(b) The business shall be owned and operated by the resident(s)
only.
(c) The business shall have no employee who is not a resident of
the dwelling unit.
(d) The business shall not be conducted in any garage or other
accessory structure on the premises; nor shall it create a traffic
flow or other visual appearance inappropriate to the
residential character of the neighborhood.
(e) Exterior alterations to the residence which change the
essential residential appearance thereof shall be prohibited.
(f) The business shall at all times be incidental and secondary to
the primary use of the building as a dwelling.
(4) One tool, garden or utility shed or storage building.
(5) One private swimming pool.
(6) Tennis, basketball and/or volleyball courts, subject to the
provisions of § 250-12.2 of this chapter, and recreational ramps,
subject to the provisions of § 250-7.22 of this chapter, and approved
by the authorized official.
E. Conditional uses.
(1) The following uses and their accessory uses shall be permitted
when authorized in accordance with Article XIII, Conditional Use
Permits:
(a) Churches and similar religious institutions.
(b) Hospitals and proprietary health care facilities.
(c) Public schools, parks and playgrounds.
(d) Public libraries.
§ 250-5.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 250-5.1
1:397
(e) Nursery schools and day-care centers.
(f) Municipal buildings and structures.
(g) Cemeteries.
(h) Horse stables.
(i) Private playground, athletic field and group swimming pools.
(j) Bed-and-breakfast facilities.
(k) Other legal uses determined (following a public hearing) by the
applicable board having jurisdiction to issue conditional use
permits to be similar in nature to those uses described in
Subsection E(1)(a) through (j), to be compatible with the
purposes of the district for which such use is proposed, and to
be consistent with the Town's Comprehensive Plan; provided,
however, that in any event no conditional use permit shall or
may be issued with respect to any explicitly prohibited use.
(2) Upon a determination by the authorized official that any business
or conditional use originally permitted within the single-family
districts is to be changed so that it involves a separate, different
and distinct use, process product or service, or involves a new
operator, an application for a conditional use permit must be made
to the Town Board. Prior to authorizing the Town Clerk to issue the
conditional use permit, the Town Board shall ensure that the
applicant satisfies the Town's standards and requirements of this
section. As part of this process, the Town Board may require the
modification of any and all phases of the operation that have
become, or are liable to become, detrimental to the neighborhood.
The Town Board, in its absolute discretion, in cases it deems to be
appropriate, may delegate authority to the authorized official to
grant or deny a conditional use permit consistent with the
standards and requirements of this section.
F. Dimensional requirements. The following dimensional requirements
shall be observed within the applicable single-family residential use
district, subject to the conditions of this section:
(1) Minimum lot area, width and setbacks.
District
Lot Area
(square
feet)
Lot
Width
(feet)
Front
Setback
(feet)
Side
Setback
(feet)
Rear
Setback*
(feet)
RA-2 87,120 200 50 10 30
CR-2 87,120 200 50 10 30
RR-1 43,560 150 50 10 30
R-1-20 20,000 100 50 10 30
§ 250-5.1 PENFIELD CODE § 250-5.1
1:398
District
Lot Area
(square
feet)
Lot
Width
(feet)
Front
Setback
(feet)
Side
Setback
(feet)
Rear
Setback*
(feet)
R-1-15 15,000 100 50 10 30
R-1-12 12,000 80 50 10 30
NOTES:
* Decks, excluding covered or enclosed porches, shall have a
minimum rear setback of 25 feet. All other structures to be
attached to or abutting the principal structure shall comply
with the permitted setbacks for all required setbacks set forth
in this section.
(2) In the case of corner lots, a forty-foot front setback shall be
provided along the frontage where the authorized official has
determined the location of the front of the residence. A fifty-foot
front setback shall be provided on the alternate frontage. In cases
where a residence is constructed on a lot at a forty-five-degree
angle, both frontages shall have a minimum forty-foot front setback
(as graphically illustrated below).
(3) All corner lots or "flag" lots within the R-1-12, R-1-15 and R-1-20
Districts shall have a minimum lot area 25% greater than the
minimum requirement for those districts.
Corner and Interior Lot Setback Requirements
(4) In cases within the R-1-12, R-1-15 and R-1-20 Districts, or in other
zoning districts where the use of Town Law § 278 is proposed
where lots are to be subdivided and developed with rear yards
fronting along state and/or county roads, the minimum lot depth
(and width in the case of corner lots) shall be increased by 50 feet.
Said area shall be utilized as a landscaped buffer from the right(s)-
of-way. The type and amount of landscaping required to adequately
accomplish a visually effective buffer shall be determined by the
Planning Board or Town Board, as the case may be, and
development shall be prohibited within the buffer area. In these
cases, no buffer area shall be closer than 45 feet to the center line
§ 250-5.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 250-5.1
1:399
of a state right-of-way nor any closer than to the edge of the
reservation area proposed for a county right-of-way.
(a) All proposed dwellings shall have a rear setback of no less than
30 feet or a side setback of no less than 10 feet from the back
edge of the fifty-foot buffer area.
(b) All proposed dwellings shall have a minimum fifty-foot setback
from the front property line and the proposed internal
subdivision right-of-way.
(5) In cases within the R-1-12, R-1-15 and R-1-20 Districts or in other
zoning districts where the use of Town Law § 278 is proposed
where lots are to be developed with front yards fronting along a
state and/or county road, the minimum lot depth (and width in the
case of corner lots) shall be increased in area by 25 feet. Said area
shall be utilized as a landscaped buffer from the right(s)-of-way. The
type and amount of landscaping required to adequately accomplish
a visually effective buffer shall be determined by the Planning
Board or Town Board, as the case may be, and development shall be
prohibited within the buffer area. Said buffer area shall be no
closer than 45 feet to the center line of a state right-of-way nor any
closer than to the edge of the reservation area proposed for a
county right-of-way.
(a) All proposed structures shall have a minimum seventy-five-foot
setback from the front property line, and in the case of a corner
lot fronting on a state or county road, a side setback of 10 feet
from the back side of the twenty-five-foot buffer.
(b) Developments having more than three lots fronting along a
state or county road shall be serviced by a twenty-foot-wide
private drive, which shall be set back a minimum of 25 feet
from the right(s)-of-way.
(6) Maximum building height restrictions.
District Maximum Height Limitations
RA-2 2 stories or 35 feet, whichever is less
CR-2 2 stories or 35 feet, whichever is less
RR-1 2 stories or 35 feet, whichever is less
R-1-12 2 stories or 35 feet, whichever is less
R-1-15 2 stories or 35 feet, whichever is less
R-1-20 2 stories or 35 feet, whichever is less
(7) Any building housing livestock or any noxious commodity shall be
no nearer than 100 feet to any lot line.
§ 250-5.1 PENFIELD CODE § 250-5.1
1:400
§ 250-5.2. Multiple Residence District (MR).
(8) No barn, silo, water tower or tank or other farm building or
structure on a farm shall be greater than 100 feet in height, or be
located less than 100 feet from any property line.
(9) Any lot housing livestock shall be at least five acres in size.
(10)No church, school, or other structure designed for public assembly
or open to the public, and approved as a conditional use, hereafter
erected, structurally altered, reconstructed or moved in any singlefamily
residential district shall be located within 100 feet of any
property line.
(11) Any other structure approved as a conditional use shall comply
with setback requirements as established by the board having
jurisdiction. In no case shall said setbacks be less than those
required under this section.
(12) A permitted accessory tool, garden or utility shed or storage
building shall be sized according to the amount of acreage on
which it is placed.
(a) Sheds shall have a maximum size of 192 square feet or 1% of
gross land area, whichever is greater.
(b) The minimum rear setback shall be 10 feet. Any accessory
storage building greater than 300 square feet shall be placed
50 feet or more from any property line.
(c) Sheds shall have a maximum height of 20 feet.
(13) A swimming pool and appurtenances, such as aprons or decks,
shall be located not closer than a minimum of 10 feet to the rear
property line in any residential district, provided that such
structures comply with the required side setbacks and all other
requirements of this code.
(14) Tennis, basketball and/or volleyball courts, subject to the
provisions of § 250-13.2 of this chapter, and recreational ramps,
subject to the provisions of § 250-7.22 of this chapter, and approved
by the authorized official, shall be located not closer than a
minimum of 10 feet to the rear property line in any residential
district, provided that such structures comply with the required
side setbacks and all other requirements of this code.
A. Purpose. The purpose of the Multiple Residence District (MR) is to
permit, where appropriate, the construction and development of
multifamily residences in the Town. Areas proposed to be rezoned to
MR shall be serviced by sanitary sewers, storm sewers and public
water.
B. Permitted uses. The following uses are permitted in the MR District:
§ 250-5.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 250-5.2
1:401
§ 250-5.3. Townhouse Dwelling District (TH).
(1) Apartment houses, multiple dwellings, and other similar
developments.
(2) Two-family structures.
(3) Proprietary health care facilities.
(4) Accessory uses which are designed as an integral part of and for
the exclusive use of the development and deemed appropriate by
the authorized official.
C. Conditional uses. Conditional uses and their accessory uses shall be
governed by and comply with the regulations set forth within
§ 250-5.1E of this chapter.
D. Dimensional requirements.
(1) Lot area and density. The minimum lot area for any multifamily
developments shall be 3,500 square feet for each apartment living
unit. Structures shall not occupy more than 25% of the gross
acreage of the development.
(2) Setbacks. No structure within the Multiple Residence District shall
be located closer than 80 feet to any exterior property line, 50 feet
to any public road right-of-way within the multiple residential
development, or within 30 feet of any other structure.
(3) Maximum building height restrictions: two stories or 35 feet,
whichever is less.
A. Purpose. It is the purpose of the Townhouse Dwelling District (TH) to
permit, where appropriate, the construction and development of
townhouse units, which are single-family dwellings separated by a
party wall. Areas proposed to be rezoned TH shall be served by sanitary
sewers, storm sewers and public water.
B. Permitted uses. The following uses are permitted in the TH District:
(1) Townhouses as defined in this chapter.
(2) Accessory uses which are designed as an integral part of land used
exclusively by the development and deemed appropriate by the
authorized official, such as maintenance buildings and clubhouses.
C. Conditional uses. Conditional uses and their accessory uses shall be
governed by and comply with the regulations set forth within
§ 250-5.1E of this chapter.
D. Dimensional requirements.
(1) Lot area/density. The development parcel density for this district
shall not exceed one living unit per each 5,000 square feet of usable
§ 250-5.2 PENFIELD CODE § 250-5.3
1:402
§ 250-5.4. Planned Development District (PD).
land area. Structures shall not occupy more than 25% of the gross
acreage of the development.
(2) Lot width: 18 feet.
(3) Setbacks. No structure within the Townhouse Dwelling District
shall be located closer than 80 feet to any exterior property line, 50
feet to any public road right-of-way within the townhouse
development or within 30 feet of any other structure. In no case
shall any internal front or rear setback be less than 30 feet.
(4) There shall be no more than eight individual townhouse units
within each building or dwelling group.
(5) Maximum building height restrictions: two stories or 35 feet,
whichever is less.
A. Purpose. It is the purpose of the Planned Development District (PD) to
provide flexible land use and design regulations through the use of
performance criteria so that small- to large-scale neighborhoods or
portions thereof can be developed within the Town that incorporate a
variety of residential types and nonresidential uses, and which may
contain both individual building sites and common property which are
planned and developed as a unit. Where PD is deemed appropriate
through the rezoning of land to a PD District by the Town Board, the use
and dimensional specifications set forth elsewhere in this chapter are
herein replaced by an approval process in which an approved plan
becomes the basis for continuing land use controls.
B. Permitted uses.
(1) The following uses are permitted in the PD District:
(a) All residential types and their accessory uses. The use of a
variety of housing types shall be deemed most in keeping with
this district.
(b) Commercial, service and other nonresidential uses and their
accessory uses. These are to be scaled primarily to serve the
residents of the PD or the immediately surrounding residential
area.
(2) Notwithstanding any provision of this section to the contrary, in no
event shall any explicitly prohibited use be permitted within any
Planned Development District.
C. Dimensional requirements.
(1) Lot area. The minimum usable PD area per project shall be 50
contiguous acres. Where the applicant can demonstrate that his/
§ 250-5.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 250-5.4
1:403
her holdings will meet the objectives of this district, the
appropriate board may consider sites with less acreage.
(2) Lot width and area. Single-family detached residences shall have a
minimum width of 70 feet and shall have a minimum lot area of
8,000 square feet.
(3) Setbacks.
(a) Front setback. Single-family detached residences shall be
addressed pursuant to § 250-5.1F(1) of this chapter.
(b) Side setback: 10% of the lot width.
(c) Rear setback: 30 feet.
(d) Rear setbacks for accessory structures, swimming pools, tool
and garden sheds shall be 10 feet from the rear property line.
(e) Decks or open porches shall be no closer than 20 feet to the
rear property line.
(f) Lot width, area, and setbacks for single-family attached
residences, such as townhomes, duplexes, etc., shall comply
with the requirements for such development as set forth in
§ 250-5.3D of this chapter.
(g) Lot width, area, and setbacks for apartment development shall
comply with the requirements of such development as set forth
in § 250-5.2D of this chapter.
(h) Lot width, area, and setbacks for commercial development
shall comply with the requirements of such development as set
forth in § 250-5.5D of this chapter.
(4) Open space. A minimum of 10% of the usable total land area shall
be devoted to open space for the primary use of residents of the
PD.
(5) Maximum building height restrictions: two stories or 35 feet,
whichever is less.
D. Special provisions applying to the PD District.
(1) In order to carry out the purpose of this district, a PD shall achieve
the following objectives:
(a) A maximum choice in the types of environment, occupancy,
tenure, types of housing, lot sizes and community facilities
available to existing and potential Town residents at all
economic levels.
(b) More convenience in locating accessory commercial and
service areas.
§ 250-5.4 PENFIELD CODE § 250-5.4
1:404
§ 250-5.5. Business Non-Retail District (BN-R).
(c) An efficient use of land resulting in smaller networks of utilities
and streets and thereby lowering housing costs.
(d) A development pattern in harmony with the objectives of the
Town's current Comprehensive Plan.
(e) A more flexible environment than would be possible through
the strict application of other provisions of this chapter.
(2) Before the consideration of any rezoning of property to PD can take
place by the Town Board, the developer or his/her authorized agent
shall apply for and secure preliminary site plan approval of such PD
in accordance with the site plan approval procedures established in
Article XII. Upon receipt of a favorable report from the Planning
Board covering the preliminary site plan, or upon its own
determination subsequent to an appeal from an unfavorable report,
the Town Board shall set a date for and conduct the public hearings
necessary for the purpose of considering PD districting for the
applicant's plan in accordance with the procedures established in
§ 250-15.4, Notice of public hearing, and Town Law §§ 264 and 265.
PD districting shall be conditional upon the applicant's securing of
final site plan approval in accordance with procedures set forth in
Article XII and compliance with all additional conditions and
requirements as may be set forth by the Town Board in its
resolution granting the Planned Development District.
(3) The Town Board shall determine in each case the appropriate land
use intensity and dwelling unit density for individual projects and
shall consider any recommendation on same from the Planning
Board. The determination of land use intensity ratings and/or
dwelling unit densities shall be completely documented.
(4) Site plan and subdivision approval requirements shall be consistent
with the regulations of Articles XI and XII of this chapter.
(5) For the purpose of regulating use of property after initial
construction and occupancy, use changes shall be in the form of an
application for a special use permit. It shall be noted, however, that
property lying in PD Districts is unique and shall be so considered
by the Town Board when evaluating these applications and
maintenance of the intent and function of the planned development
shall be of primary importance. An application shall be filed with
the Town Clerk and such filing fee shall be consistent with
§ 250-15.2. Further, a special use permit granted pursuant to this
section shall be issued by the Town Clerk at a fee as required by
resolution by the Town Board.
(6) The development shall be served by public sanitary sewers, storm
sewers and water.
§ 250-5.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 250-5.5
1:405
A. Purpose. The purpose of the Business Non-Retail District (BN-R) is to
provide suitable areas for various non-retail, service-oriented uses that
are easily accessible to the neighborhoods which they serve. Such
districts are also intended, where possible, to act as a compatible
transition area between residential, and commercial and industrial
areas because of the generally low volumes of traffic associated with
such uses, and their hours of operation and noise characteristics, which
make them compatible as transition uses.
B. Permitted uses.
(1) The following uses are permitted in the BN-R District:
(a) Insurance offices of independent or general agents.
(b) Medical and dental offices and clinics, excluding overnight
occupancy.
(c) Branch banks.
(d) Commercial schools.
(e) Attorney's offices.
(f) Offices for other licensed professionals, such as architects,
designers, engineers, etc., excluding, however, any warehouse
or storage areas.
(g) Office parks/buildings.
(h) Public buildings and grounds, excluding maintenance, storage
or repair facilities.
(i) Uses accessory to the above which are an integral part of and
used solely by the permitted use and are deemed appropriate
by the authorized official.
(2) At any time when the specific use originally permitted within this
district is to be changed so that it involves a separate, different and
distinct use, process or product, the authorized official, consulting
with the Zoning Board of Appeals, may require application to be
made to that Board for a special use permit, at which time the
Board may require that any and all phases of the operation which
have become or are liable to become detrimental to the
neighborhood be corrected prior to the Town Clerk issuing the
special use permit pursuant to § 250-14.5C.
C. Conditional uses.
(1) The following uses and their accessory uses shall be permitted
when authorized in accordance with Article XIII, Conditional Use
Permits:
(a) Drive-in bank auto tellers.
§ 250-5.5 PENFIELD CODE § 250-5.5
1:406
(b) Mortuaries or funeral homes.
(c) Nonprofit institutions for charitable, religious, cultural or
community social purposes.
(d) Public utility substation uses, excluding power plants,
maintenance or storage facilities and uses of similar nature.
(e) Nursery or day-care centers, and nonprofit schools.
(f) Combinations of permitted business non-retail and singlefamily
residential uses.
(g) Other legal uses, determined (following a public hearing) by
the applicable board having jurisdiction to issue conditional
use permits to be similar in nature to those uses described in
Subsection A(1)(a) through (f), to be compatible with the
purposes of the BN-R District, and to be consistent with the
Town’s Comprehensive Plan; provided, however, that in any
event no conditional use permit shall or may be issued with
respect to any explicitly prohibited use.
(2) Upon a determination by the authorized official that any business
or conditional use originally permitted within the BN-R District is
to be changed so that it involves a separate, different and distinct
use, process product or service, or involves a new operator, an
application for a conditional use permit must be made to the Town
Board. Prior to authorizing the Town Clerk to issue the conditional
use permit, the Town Board shall ensure that the applicant satisfies
the Town's standards and requirements of this section. As part of
this process, the Town Board may require the modification of any
and all phases of the operation that have become, or are liable to
become, detrimental to the neighborhood. The Town Board, in its
absolute discretion, in cases it deems to be appropriate, may
delegate authority to the authorized official to grant or deny a
conditional use permit consistent with the standards and
requirements of this section.
D. Dimensional requirements.
(1) Lot area. The minimum lot area shall be that necessary to
accommodate the necessary structures and comply with this
chapter, as well as all other Town requirements.
(2) Lot coverage. Structures, parking areas and roadways shall not
occupy more than a maximum of 65% of the total lot area. The
remainder of the lot shall be devoted to no less than a minimum of
35% open space or landscape area.
(a) Greenspace shall be 35%. "Greenspace" shall be defined as an
area of grass, trees, or other vegetation set apart for
§ 250-5.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 250-5.5
1:407
§ 250-5.6. Limited Business District (LB).
recreational or aesthetic purposes in an otherwise urban
environment.
(b) Incorporation of green infrastructure such as green roofs, rain
gardens, biofilters, and pervious pavement shall be reviewed
and deemed appropriate by the board having jurisdiction.
(3) Setback requirements. All setbacks shall comply with the buffering
requirements of Article VII of this chapter. No structure within the
Business Non-Retail District shall be located closer than 80 feet to
the front property line, 20 feet to a side property line or 30 feet to
the rear property line. In the case of corner lots, the eighty-foot
minimum front setback shall be provided along each road frontage.
(4) Maximum building height restrictions: three stories or 40 feet,
whichever is less.
E. Hours of operation. No business establishment in any BN-R District
shall be open to the public except between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and
9:00 p.m.
A. Purpose. The purpose of the Limited Business District (LB) is to provide
convenience, small-scale retail service, and business uses in strategic
locations to support the Town's residential population base. Limited
Business Districts are intended to act as buffers between the larger and
more intense general business center and residential areas.
B. Permitted uses.
(1) The following uses are permitted in the LB District:
(a) Permitted uses within a Business Non-Retail District.
(b) Grocery stores.
(c) Laundromat or dry-cleaning pick-up establishments.
(d) Bakeries.
(e) Drugstores or pharmacies.
(f) Hardware stores, garden supply stores, and paint and
wallpaper stores.
(g) Barber and beauty shops.
(h) Flower shops.
(i) Liquor stores.
(j) Retail stores.
§ 250-5.5 PENFIELD CODE § 250-5.6
1:408
(k) Auto accessories and parts (excluding repairs), home appliance
stores and furniture stores.
(l) Uses accessory to the above which are an integral part of and
used solely by the permitted uses and which are deemed
appropriate by the authorized official.
(2) Upon a determination by the authorized official that a specific use
originally permitted within the LB District is to be changed so that
it involves a separate, different and distinct use, process, product
or service, or involves a new operator, an application for a special
use permit must be made to the Zoning Board of Appeals. Prior to
authorizing the Town Clerk to issue a special use permit, the
Zoning Board of Appeals may require the correction of any and all
phases of the operation which have become detrimental, or are
liable to become detrimental, to the neighborhood.
C. Conditional uses.
(1) The following uses and their accessory uses shall be permitted
when authorized in accordance with Article XIII, Conditional Use
Permits:
(a) Sit-down restaurants.
(b) Take-out restaurants.
(c) Combinations of permitted single-family residential, business
non-retail and limited business uses.
(d) Gasoline service stations/convenience retail stores.
(e) Other legal uses determined (following a public hearing) by the
applicable board having jurisdiction to issue conditional use
permits to be similar in nature to those uses described in
Subsection C(1)(a) through (d), to be compatible with the
purposes of the LB District, and to be consistent with the
Town’s Comprehensive Plan; provided, however, that in any
event no conditional use permit shall or may be issued with
respect to any explicitly prohibited use.
(2) Upon a determination by the authorized official that any business
or conditional use originally permitted within the LB District is to
be changed so that it involves a separate, different and distinct use,
process product or service, or involves a new operator, an
application for a conditional use permit must be made to the Town
Board. Prior to authorizing the Town Clerk to issue the conditional
use permit, the Town Board shall ensure that the applicant satisfies
the Town's standards and requirements of this section. As part of
this process, the Town Board may require the modification of any
and all phases of the operation that have become, or are liable to
become, detrimental to the neighborhood. The Town Board, in its
§ 250-5.6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 250-5.6
1:409
§ 250-5.7. General Business District (GB).
absolute discretion, in cases it deems to be appropriate, may
delegate authority to the authorized official to grant or deny a
conditional use permit consistent with the standards and
requirements of this section.
D. Dimensional requirements.
(1) Lot area. The minimum lot size shall be that necessary to
accommodate the necessary structure and comply with this
chapter, as well as all other Town requirements.
(2) Lot coverage. Structures, parking areas and roadways shall not
occupy more than a maximum of 65% of the total lot area. The
remainder of the lot shall be devoted to no less than a minimum of
35% open space or landscape area.
(3) Setbacks. All setbacks shall comply with the buffering
requirements of Article VII of this chapter. No structure within the
Limited Business District shall be located closer than 80 feet to the
front property line, 20 feet to a side property line, or 30 feet to a
rear property line. In the case of corner lots, the eighty-foot
minimum front setback shall be provided along each road frontage.
(4) Floor area. Any separate commercial retail business use, owned or
leased, shall not exceed 25,000 square feet in floor area.
(5) Maximum building height restrictions: three stories or 40 feet,
whichever is less.
E. Hours of operation. Business establishments within an LB District shall
be open to the public only between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 12:00
midnight. Based upon the intensity of the proposed use and its potential
impact on the neighboring area, the board having jurisdiction may
modify the hours of operation as part of the process of granting a
conditional use permit.
A. Purpose. The purpose of the General Business District (GB) is to
provide a broader range of general and comparison commercial goods
and services necessary to serve a number of neighborhoods and do so in
an orderly fashion that maintains viability of residential areas and
neighborhood commercial centers.
B. Permitted uses.
(1) The following uses are permitted in the GB District:
(a) Permitted uses within the Business Non-Retail District.
(b) Permitted uses within the Limited Business District.
(c) Retail outlets and department stores.
§ 250-5.6 PENFIELD CODE § 250-5.7
1:410
(d) Theaters (not including drive-in theaters) and bowling alleys.
(e) Uses accessory to the above which are an integral part of and
used solely by the permitted use and deemed appropriate by
the authorized official.
(2) At any time when the specific use originally permitted within this
district is to be changed so that it involves a separate, different and
distinct use, process or product, application must be made to the
Zoning Board of Appeals for a special use permit, at which time the
Board may require that any and all phases of the operation which
have become or are liable to become detrimental to the
neighborhood be corrected prior to the Town Clerk issuing the
special use permit pursuant to § 250-14.5C.
C. Conditional uses.
(1) The following uses and their accessory uses shall be permitted
when authorized in accordance with Article XIII, Conditional Use
Permits:
(a) Bar, tavern, restaurant or other eating place.
(b) Auto sales, new and used, mobile home and recreational
vehicle sales.
(c) Auto repair shops.
(d) Rentals of trucks, trailers, etc., associated with gasoline
service station or other uses.
(e) Drive-in theaters.
(f) Vehicle washes.
(g) Bus passenger stations.
(h) Motels or hotels.
(i) Gasoline service stations.
(j) Combinations of permitted single-family residential, business
non-retail, limited business and general business uses.
(k) Other legal uses determined (following a public hearing) by the
applicable board having jurisdiction to issue conditional use
permits to be similar in nature to those uses described in
Subsection C(1)(a) through (j), to be compatible with the
purposes of the GB District, and to be consistent with the
Town’s Comprehensive Plan; provided, however, that in any
event no conditional use permit shall or may be issued with
respect to any explicitly prohibited use.
§ 250-5.7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 250-5.7
1:411
§ 250-5.8. Limited Industrial District (LI).
(2) Upon a determination by the authorized official that any business
or conditional use originally permitted within the GB District is to
be changed so that it involves a separate, different and distinct use,
process product or service, or involves a new operator, an
application for a conditional use permit must be made to the Town
Board. Prior to authorizing the Town Clerk to issue the conditional
use permit, the Town Board shall ensure that the applicant satisfies
the Town's standards and requirements of this section. As part of
this process, the Town Board may require the modification of any
and all phases of the operation that have become, or are liable to
become, detrimental to the neighborhood. The Town Board, in its
absolute discretion, in cases it deems to be appropriate, may
delegate authority to the authorized official to grant or deny a
conditional use permit consistent with the standards and
requirements of this section.
D. Dimensional requirements.
(1) Lot area. The minimum lot area shall be that necessary to
accommodate the necessary structures and comply with this
chapter as well as all other Town requirements.
(2) Lot coverage. Structures, parking areas and roadways shall not
occupy more than a maximum of 65% of the total lot area. The
remainder of the lot shall be devoted to no less than a minimum of
35% open space or landscape area.
(3) Setbacks. All setbacks shall comply with the buffering
requirements of Article VII of this chapter. No structure within the
General Business District shall be located closer than 80 feet to the
front property line, 20 feet to a side property line, or 30 feet to a
rear property line. In the case of corner lots, the eighty-foot
minimum front setback shall be provided along each road frontage.
(4) Maximum building height restrictions: three stories or 40 feet,
whichever is less.
E. Hours of operation. Business establishments within the GB District may
remain open 24 hours on a daily basis.
A. Purpose. The purpose of the Limited Industrial District (LI) is to permit,
where appropriate, the construction of research and development
oriented industries, high technology and light manufacturing facilities,
offices, hotels and to locate adult uses and entertainment in such a
manner as to preserve the character and quality of life, maintain
property values within Town neighborhoods and retail trade in business
areas, control documented harmful and adverse secondary effects of
adult uses on surrounding areas, restrict minors' access to adult uses
and to protect the health, safety and general welfare of the Town of
§ 250-5.7 PENFIELD CODE § 250-5.8
1:412
Penfield. Areas for such zoning shall be identified by the Town Board
or upon application. These areas shall be zoned as an LI District in
accordance with the normal rezoning procedures. In reaching its
decision, the Town Board shall consider the general criteria set forth
in this chapter, the most current Comprehensive Plan for the Town,
and this statement of purpose. Areas proposed to be zoned LI shall
be served by sanitary sewers, adequate drainage control and/or storm
sewers and public water.
B. Permitted uses.
(1) The following uses are permitted in the LI District:
(a) Scientific research or experimental development of materials,
methods or products, including engineering and laboratory
research.
(b) Light manufacturing, assembling, fabrication.
(c) Offices.
(d) Hotels.
(e) Adult uses and adult entertainment establishments.
(f) Uses accessory to the above which are an integral part of any
uses solely by the permitted use and are deemed appropriate
by the authorized official.
(2) At any time when the specific use originally permitted within this
district is to be changed so that it involves a separate, different and
distinct use, process or product, application must be made to the
Zoning Board of Appeals for a special use permit, at which time the
Board may require that any and all phases of the operation which
have become or are liable to become detrimental to the
neighborhood, be corrected prior to the Town Clerk issuing the
special use permit pursuant to § 250-14.5C.
C. Dimensional requirements.
(1) Lot area. The minimum lot area shall be that necessary to
accommodate the necessary structure and comply with this
chapter, as well as all other Town requirements.
(2) Lot coverage. Structures, parking areas and roadways shall not
occupy more than a maximum of 65% of the total lot area. The
remainder of the lot shall be devoted to no less than a minimum of
35% open space or landscape area.
(3) Setbacks. All setbacks shall comply with the buffering
requirements of Article VII of this chapter.
(a) Structures adjoining nonresidential districts.
§ 250-5.8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 250-5.8
1:413
[1] Structures proposed to be utilized for limited industrial,
hotel or office purposes within the Limited Industrial
District shall be located no closer to a nonresidential
district than:
[a] Front setback: 100 feet.
[b] Side setback: 50 feet.
[c] Rear setback: 50 feet.
[2] In the case of corner lots, the one-hundred-foot minimum
front setback shall be provided along each road frontage.
(b) Structures adjoining residential districts.
[1] Structures proposed to be utilized for limited industrial,
hotel or office purposes within the Limited Industrial
District shall be located no closer to a residential district
than:
[a] Front setback: 150 feet.
[b] Side setback: 150 feet.
[c] Rear setback: 150 feet.
[2] In the case of corner lots, the one-hundred-fifty-foot
minimum front setback shall be provided along each road
frontage.
(c) Other dimensional requirements relating to adult uses and
adult entertainment establishments are not governed by this
Subsection C(3), but rather are governed by Subsection C(5).
(4) Maximum building height restrictions: four stories or 50 feet,
whichever is less.
(5) Adult uses and adult entertainment establishments.
(a) Adult uses and adult entertainment establishments shall
comply with the following setback and dimensional
requirements:
[1] No adult use or adult entertainment establishment shall be
located within 500 feet of the boundary of any residential
zoning district.
[2] No adult use or adult entertainment establishment shall be
allowed within 1,000 feet of another existing adult use or
adult entertainment establishment, and no more than one
of the uses governed by this provision shall be permitted
on any single lot in the Town of Penfield.
§ 250-5.8 PENFIELD CODE § 250-5.8
1:414
§ 250-5.9. LaSalle's Landing Development District (LLD).
[3] No adult use or entertainment establishment shall be
located within 150 feet of any boundary line abutting
another municipality.
[4] No adult use or adult entertainment establishment shall be
located within 1,000 feet of any recreational facility,
school, place of worship, cemetery, park or playground,
children's camp, or other area where large numbers of
children travel or congregate.
[5] No adult use or adult entertainment establishment shall be
located within 100 feet of any existing commercial or
industrial use.
[6] In addition to the requirements set forth hereinabove,
minimum dimensional requirements shall be as set forth in
this chapter.
[7] Parking requirements shall be consistent with those set
forth in § 250-7.7 of this chapter.
[8] In the case of conflict between any such provisions relating
to setbacks and lot coverage requirements, the stricter,
more restrictive provision shall govern and apply.
(b) Prohibition regarding public observation. All adult
entertainment establishments shall be conducted in an
enclosed building at all times. Regardless of location or
distance, no one passing by an enclosed building having a use
governed by these provisions shall be able to discern any
specified anatomical area or any specified sexual activity by
virtue of any material which depicts or describes said area or
activity. This provision shall apply to any display, decoration,
sign, window or other building opening.
A. Purpose.
(1) Pursuant to a joint land use plan adopted by the Towns of
Irondequoit and Penfield, the LaSalle's Landing Development
District (LLD) is designed to provide a suitable character and stable
environment for the establishment and maintenance of wateroriented
and/or water-enhanced uses and activities along the
shoreline of Irondequoit Bay and its adjacent wetlands. The district
is also designed to protect the unique and sensitive environmental
features that exist along the Bay shoreline, and to promote the
public health, safety and general welfare. The district is also
designed to promote and encourage public access to the shore zone
and appropriate water-oriented recreational and other appropriate
development adjacent to the shore zone. The LLD permits
moderate-density residential development, as well as certain
§ 250-5.8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 250-5.9
1:415
commercial, recreational and open space uses that serve the
residents of and visitors to this district, as well as the Town, and
that generally benefits from and enhances the unique aesthetic and
environmental qualities of the Town's waterfront areas.
(2) The purpose of this district includes the following specific goals:
(a) To ensure that development and land use activity along the
shoreline of Irondequoit Bay is consistent with the policies and
objectives of the Town of Penfield's Local Waterfront
Revitalization Program (LWRP).12
(b) To provide sufficient space in appropriate waterfront locations
for moderate-density residential development, recreational
activities, certain commercial activities and other wateroriented
uses, in order to meet the various housing and
recreational needs of the Town of Penfield's present and future
populations.
(c) To recognize the sensitivity of waterfront areas as unique
environmental and recreational resources and to protect these
areas from environmentally destructive uses and activities.
(d) To provide for a desirable mix of water-oriented commercial
uses and active and passive recreational opportunities that
takes advantage of the unique locations and characteristics of
the Town's waterfront areas.
(e) To encourage development that is appropriately designed and
in harmony with its environment and that does not conflict with
the preservation of the natural beauty of the Town's waterfront
areas.
(f) To promote the most desirable and appropriate use of land and
direction of building development based upon land and soil
types and other natural features, environmental constraints,
neighborhood characteristics and overall community needs.
(g) To protect the character of the district and its peculiar
suitability for particular uses; to conserve the value of land and
buildings and to protect and enhance the tax revenue base of
the Town of Penfield.
(h) To permit development in areas which, by virtue of their
locations, topography, accessibility, relationship to
surrounding land uses, zoning patterns and natural features
and availability of public services and utilities, are best suited
for a particular purpose; and to preserve areas that are
naturally unsuited for development or that have unique
historical, aesthetic or environmental significance.
12.Editor's Note: See Ch. 232, Waterways.
§ 250-5.9 PENFIELD CODE § 250-5.9
1:416
(i) To encourage flexibility of design and preservation of unique
environmental features through, for example, the use of Town
Law § 278 (cluster development) and/or incentive zoning
where applicable,13 and maintenance of the aesthetic quality of
waterfront areas by permitting the Town of Penfield to
establish consistent minimum dimensional requirements with
the Town of Irondequoit for permitted principal uses, and to
review other pertinent design aspects of such proposed
projects.
(j) To preserve, wherever feasible, the existing vegetation and
natural features of waterfront areas and to prevent, as much as
possible, significant erosion, sedimentation and drainage
problems, both during and after construction.
(k) To encourage and facilitate water-oriented recreational
development within the shore zone, as permitted principal uses
or as accessory uses, where compatible with the primary
purpose of the proposed development.
(l) To protect the LaSalle's Landing Development District (LLD)
and its waterfront areas, as much as possible, against
excessive volumes of vehicular traffic flow, and to deal with
safety problems related to such vehicular traffic flow.
(m) To protect waterfront areas against congestion, as much as
possible, by regulating the density of population and intensity
of land use, and by requiring the provision of open areas for
rest and recreation, wherever practical.
(n) To promote the maintenance and/or extension of public access
to the shore zone, where practical and feasible, where such
access relates to and is compatible with the primary purpose of
the proposed development or activity.
(o) To minimize impacts upon Irondequoit Bay water quality, such
as disturbance of sediment and pollutants, through regulation,
reasonable limitations and prohibition of new marinas and
regulation of expansion of existing marinas.
(p) To encourage greater public access to the shore zone of
Irondequoit Bay through the use of sidewalks, boardwalks and
other appropriate forms of intermodal access through the
special use permit and site plan review process.
B. Permitted uses. No structure shall be erected, structurally altered,
reconstructed or moved, and no structure, land or premises shall be
used in the district designated on the official zoning maps of the Towns
of Irondequoit and Penfield as "LaSalle's Landing Development District"
(LLD) except for the following principal and "customarily incidental"
13.Editor's Note: See Ch. 255, Zoning, Incentive.
§ 250-5.9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 250-5.9
1:417
accessory uses, all of which shall be subject to a special use permit
and site plan approval issued by the Town Board in accordance with
§ 250-13.2 of this chapter:
(1) Principal uses:
(a) Public parks, playgrounds or similar public recreational uses
owned or operated by a public agency.
(b) Multifamily dwellings and apartment buildings.
(c) Townhouses and single-family attached dwellings.
(d) Commercial parks, playgrounds, beaches, parks, golf courses,
tennis/racquetball clubs or other similar recreation uses
operated for profit.
(e) Sit-down and take-out restaurants.
(f) Motels and hotels.
(g) Stores, shops and boutiques.
(h) Offices.
(i) Car-top boat, canoe sales, display and/or launch areas.
Floating piers or piers on pilings shall be used to provide
access to canoes, kayaks and other nonmotorized boats.
(j) Public utility buildings or structures, including but not limited
to electrical substations, but excluding communications towers
and their accessory structures.
(k) Combinations of permitted principal uses, based on a
determination by the Town Board that such combinations are
appropriate for the LLD and are compatible with the purpose
and intent of this district, as well as the goals and policies of
the Local Waterfront Revitalization Program (LWRP), subject to
approval issued by the Town Board in accordance with the
provisions of Subsection E of this section.
(2) Principal use restrictions and/or additional requirements. All
principal uses permitted within the LaSalle's Landing Development
District (LLD) shall be subject to the following restrictions and/or
additional requirements:
(a) Any of the uses permitted in this section that require the use of
an area other than within an enclosed building may be
conducted in whole or part outside of such building or upon
vacant land, and shall be subject to approval issued by the
Town Board in accordance with the provisions of Subsection E
of this section.
§ 250-5.9 PENFIELD CODE § 250-5.9
1:418
(3) Accessory uses located on the same lot with a permitted principal
use, subject to those dimensional and setback requirements as
noted in Subsection C of this section:
(a) Gazebos, boardwalks, community and/or educational
interpretative centers.
(b) Private garages and carports.
(c) Swimming pools.
(d) Sheds, cabanas or similar accessory structures.
(e) Communication antennas subject to the provisions of
§ 250-13.11C of this chapter are exempt from the requirements
of securing a special use permit.
(f) Signage shall be subject to the requirements of Article X of this
chapter.
(g) Parking of vehicles shall be subject to the provisions of
§ 250-7.9 of this chapter.
(h) Storage (both indoor and outdoor) of mobile homes, motor
homes, house trailers, campers, camping trailers, truck
campers, utility campers, boats and boat trailers, subject to
special use permit approval issued by the Town Board in
accordance with the provisions of Subsection E of this section.
(i) Tennis courts, recreational ramps and other similar outdoor
recreational facilities, provided that such uses are clearly
incidental to the primary residential or principal use on the
property and provided that such uses are located a minimum of
10 feet from any property line, subject to site plan review by
the Town Board.
(j) Dumpsters enclosed and located no closer than 10 feet to any
lot line and subject to site plan review and approval by the
Town Board in accordance with the provisions of § 250-14.2 of
this chapter.
(k) Fishing piers, wharfs and boat launching ramps are structures
subject to all applicable state and local regulations and
approvals and subject to approval by the Town Board in
accordance with the provisions of Subsection E of this section.
(4) The following additional requirements shall also apply to all such
structures and facilities:
(a) The construction of such structures and facilities shall be
undertaken in such a way so as not to impair water quality,
cause harm to fish spawning grounds, destroy the natural
beauty of the shoreline, impede views/vistas of the Bay, reduce
§ 250-5.9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 250-5.9
1:419
the stability of steep slope areas, cause erosion or
sedimentation problems along the shoreline, create hazards
for navigation, interfere with the public use and enjoyment
of the water surface or shoreline, or otherwise threaten the
public health and safety.
(b) Dredging, earth moving and disturbance of land above and
below water shall be minimized as much as possible, shall only
be permitted in conjunction with maintenance of existing docks
and shall be consistent with the permit requirements of the
New York State Department of Environmental Conservation
and the United States Army Corps of Engineers.
(c) To permit the free circulation of water, reduce the effects of
fluctuating water levels, and prevent adverse modification of
the shoreline, piers and wharves shall be of floating
construction wherever feasible and shall not be of rock-filled
cribbing, sheet piling, closely spaced piling, or such other
construction which would significantly impair water
circulation.
(d) The maximum surface area of any pier or wharf shall not
exceed 700 square feet.
(e) The number of piers or wharves permitted per waterfront lot or
per waterfront development shall not exceed one such
structure and shall be subject to a special use permit issued by
the Town Board subject to the requirements of Subsection E of
this section and approval by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers
and the New York State Department of Environmental
Conservation.
(f) Every pier or wharf that is constructed shall have a minimum
clearance or setback of 10 feet from adjacent property lines, as
extended at a ninety-degree angle from the shoreline, to allow
adequate vessel access to neighboring waterfront parcels.
(g) Piers or wharves that are 100 feet or longer shall, during the
hours of darkness, be required to be lighted in such a manner
so as to not constitute a hazard to navigation.
(h) Lighting of the surface of any pier or wharf shall be provided in
such a manner so as not to produce any offensive glare when
viewed from the water or the land. The use of low mast lighting
fixtures and deflector shields to direct the light downward shall
be required to reduce or eliminate glare.
C. Dimensional requirements.
(1) Required minimum lot size.
§ 250-5.9 PENFIELD CODE § 250-5.9
1:420
(a) No new principal building or structure to be used as a
multifamily dwelling, apartment building, or other similar use
shall hereafter be erected on any lot unless such lot shall have
a minimum area of 3,000 square feet per dwelling unit.
(b) No new principal building or structure to be used as a
townhouse dwelling, or other similar use shall hereafter be
erected on any lot unless such lot shall have a minimum area of
4,000 square feet per dwelling unit.
(c) The required minimum lot sizes for all other principal uses
permitted in the LaSalle's Landing Development District (LLD)
shall be established by the Town Board. The required minimum
lot size shall be based on the relative intensity of the proposed
land use and the need to protect or buffer the use from
sensitive environmental areas, significant historic or
archeological areas, or scenic views or vistas.
(2) Required minimum building setbacks.
(a) The Town Board, in accordance with the provisions of Town
Law § 278, shall be empowered to modify the setback
requirements and other applicable provisions of this chapter
with respect to the approval of a plat or plats. The purpose of
this authorization is to enable and encourage a flexibility of
design and development of land in such a manner so as to
promote the most appropriate use of land, to facilitate the
adequate and economical provisions of streets and utilities, to
encourage and maintain adequate public access to the
shoreline, and to preserve and protect the natural and scenic
qualities of the Town's open lands and shore zone.
(b) Setbacks of buildings and structures from all other buildings
and structures on the lot and from property lines, for all other
permitted principal and accessory uses not already identified
in this section, shall be determined by the Town Board during
the site plan review and approval process and shall be based
on the following guidelines:
[1] Principal buildings, parking areas and accessory
structures, excluding such facilities as piers, wharves and
boat ramps, shall be set back a minimum of 25 feet inland
from the high water's edge, in order to maintain adequate
access to the shore zone.
[2] Principal buildings, parking areas, and accessory
structures shall be set back a minimum of 60 feet from any
road right-of-way, a minimum of 20 feet from any side
property line and 30 feet from any rear property line or, in
the case of properties fronting Irondequoit Bay, 25 feet
from any pedestrian access easement existing or proposed
along the water's edge.
§ 250-5.9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 250-5.9
1:421
[3] Principal building and accessory structure setbacks shall
be established with due consideration to provisions for fire
protection services and adequate access for fire and
emergency equipment within and around the site.
[4] Principal building and accessory structure setbacks shall
be established with due consideration to the protection
and preservation of unique and sensitive environmental
features, scenic views and vistas, the specific goals
established for this district and the use of clustering as a
site design technique.
(3) Maximum building heights.
(a) Maximum building heights for all permitted principal uses
specified in this section shall not exceed two stories or 35 feet,
whichever is less, except where it has been determined by the
Town Board during the special use permit process that, based
on a visual analysis of the site prepared and submitted by the
applicant and reviewed by the Board, greater building heights
would not interfere with identified scenic views or vistas or
impair the aesthetic quality and integrity of the waterfront
area. In such cases, the Town Board shall establish maximum
principal building heights in order to protect the scenic views
and vistas and the aesthetic character of waterfront areas in
general.
[1] Commercial and multifamily: 40 feet.
[2] Townhomes: two stories or 35 feet, whichever is less.
(b) Accessory structures shall not exceed a maximum height of 15
feet unless otherwise specified or regulated in this chapter.
(4) Maximum density; maximum percentage of lot occupancy. The total
overall ground coverage of all principal and accessory buildings,
parking areas and other impervious surfaces on any lot shall not
exceed 70% of the total lot area. The remainder of the lot shall be
utilized for pedestrian access, open space and/or landscaped areas.
(5) Hours of operation. Business establishments may be open to the
public 24 hours on a daily basis.
D. Additional requirements.
(1) Off-street parking and loading requirements. Off-street parking
spaces and loading facilities shall be provided for all uses specified
in this section, in accordance with the provisions of §§ 250-7.7 and
250-7.8 of this chapter and the following additional requirements:
(a) All parking spaces shall be set back a minimum of 10 feet from
any street line or property line to provide for proper
landscaping and buffering, except in cases where shared
§ 250-5.9 PENFIELD CODE § 250-5.9
1:422
parking is proposed and approved by the Town Board during
the special use permit and site plan review process.
(b) Parking shall be provided according to the following minimum
standards:
[1] Commercial uses:
[a] Five spaces per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area.
[b] Dimensions for single parking space: nine feet by 18
feet.
[c] Fire lane width: 25 feet minimum.
[2] Residential uses:
[a] Townhouse or attached single-family dwellings: two
spaces per dwelling unit.
[b] Apartments, condominiums and multifamily: two
spaces per dwelling unit.
[3] Hotels: one space per room or suite; plus one space per
three employees on minimum shift, plus one space per
three persons based on the maximum capacity of public
meeting rooms, plus 50% of the spaces otherwise required
for restaurants, accessory uses, etc.
[4] Restaurants, sit-down: one space per three patron seats,
including any bar stools, or one space per 100 square feet
of floor area, whichever is greater, plus one space per
employee on maximum shift.
[5] Office: one space per each 100 square feet of office area.
[6] Other uses not specifically listed above shall furnish
parking as required by the board having jurisdiction and/
or the authorized official.
[7] The Town Board may modify parking requirements to
reflect the needs of a particular use to be developed,
provided that the Board is satisfied that the site may be
able to accommodate future uses with more intensive
parking requirements. Said area shall be identified and set
aside on an approved site plan.
(2) Landscaping and buffering requirements.
(a) Parking areas shall be landscaped and buffered as much as
possible. A reasonable reduction in the size and number of
parking spaces required for a project shall be permitted by the
Town Board where it can be demonstrated by the applicant
that such a reduction will not create overflow parking
§ 250-5.9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 250-5.9
1:423
problems and that the additional space will be used for
landscaping or open space within the site.
(b) Where practical, trees with a diameter or caliper of six inches
or greater shall be retained on the site.
(3) The Town Board, as part of the site plan and/or special use permit
review and approval process, may require public access in the form
of walkways, pedestrian trails, paths, or bikeways to the shoreline
for those development projects or proposed uses adjacent to the
shoreline where such access is appropriate and desirable and does
not conflict with existing natural features or the public health,
safety or general welfare. In requiring such public access, the Town
Board shall consider the nature of the access to and from
surrounding properties and uses, as well as the relationship of the
access and proposed use of the water.
E. Town Board special use permit application requirements. An
application for special use permit review and approval for all principal
uses within the LaSalle's Landing Development District (LLD) shall be
accompanied by:
(1) A natural resource inventory for the proposed development site
that identifies all of the environmentally sensitive or unique areas
within the site, including but not limited to steep slopes, wetlands,
woodlands, floodplains, scenic views and vistas and wildlife
habitats. The natural resource inventory shall also indicate how the
proposed development will impact these areas and mitigating
measures to minimize any adverse impacts.
(2) A visual analysis, which assesses the site's visual impacts. Said
analysis shall be based, in part, upon the visual EAF addendum
(SEQR 617.21) and any additional information required by the
Town Board.
(3) A coastal assessment form (CAF) completed by the applicant and
processed in accordance with Chapter 232, Part 1, Waterfront
Consistency Review.
F. Granting of special use permit.
(1) Approval by the Town Board of any special use permit shall be
contingent upon a finding by the Board, based on the information
submitted and testimony made at the public hearing, written
project reviews by the appropriate agencies and a recommendation
from the Monroe County Planning Department, that the proposed
project will, as applicable:
(a) Provide adequate and safe access;
(b) Provide adequate site utility service, including water supply,
sewage and refuse disposal;
§ 250-5.9 PENFIELD CODE § 250-5.9
1:424
§ 250-5.10. Four Corners District (FC).
(c) Be compatible with and enhance, to the extent possible, the
existing natural features of the site and the surrounding area;
(d) Provide adequate year-round site fire protection services;
(e) Relate in an adequate and appropriate manner to the depth of
bay water adjacent to the site;
(f) Relate in an adequate and appropriate manner to, and in
general be compatible with the permitted existing land use and
zoning pattern in the immediate area;
(g) Comply with the applicable site design criteria and other
zoning district requirements outlined in this chapter; and
(h) Provide public access to the shore zone, to the extent possible
and desirable given the nature of the site and proposed use.
(2) Approval by the Town Board of any special use permit shall be
contingent upon a finding by the Board, based on the information
submitted and testimony made at the public hearing, written
project reviews by the appropriate agencies and a recommendation
from the Monroe County Planning Department, that the proposed
project or development will not, as applicable:
(a) Adversely affect the orderly development and character of the
surrounding neighborhood, nor be detrimental to the health,
safety or to the general welfare of the Town;
(b) Be a nuisance to neighboring land uses; create hazards or
dangers to the general public or to persons in the vicinity of the
project; cause undue harm to or impair existing sensitive
natural features on the site or in the surrounding area; be
incompatible with the type, extent and direction of building
development for the site and surrounding area, as proposed in
the Town of Penfield Comprehensive Plan, LWRP, LaSalle's
Landing Development Plan or official policies, or a portion
thereof as adopted by the Town.
(c) Impair or adversely impact significant historic, archeological
and/or cultural resource sites.
(d) Require an unnecessary or destructive amount of dredging,
filling or other disturbance of the water of Irondequoit Bay or
Irondequoit Creek.
(e) Adversely affect any sensitive environmental features which
may exist on or in close proximity to the site.
A. Purpose. The purpose of the Four Corners District (FC) is to recognize
the unique nature of this historic area of the Town and to help preserve
§ 250-5.9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 250-5.10
1:425
and enhance the long-established community or "Village Center"
character of Penfield and to further the goals and recommendations
of the Four Corners Plan. The FC District regulations include special
design features and controls that provide incentives to achieve a
compatible mixture of residential and business uses, to provide buffer
screening and landscaping to separate uses of different intensities, to
encourage the shared use of access and parking areas, to improve
traffic flow and safety, and to make more compatible use of available
land areas.
B. Special provisions.
(1) In order to achieve the purposes specified herein, the Town shall
employ additional standards and controls designed to:
(a) Encourage a compatible mix of residential, retail, business,
service and public uses.
(b) Provide adequate buffers and landscaping to visually separate
residential uses from adjacent business and service uses.
(c) Preserve and protect the integrity of the historic and other
resources that help create the character of the Four Corners.
(d) Encourage shared access to enhance traffic flow and safety.
(e) Encourage shared use and controlled linkages of off-street
parking areas.
(f) Create alternative shared access points to off-street parking
areas from Penfield Road and Five Mile Line Road.
(2) Notwithstanding any language to the contrary expressed in this
section, no building permit shall be issued for development within
the FC District without the applicant first securing a conditional
use permit from the Town Board pursuant to the standards of
§ 250-13.4, as amended and final site plan approval in accordance
with procedures set forth in Article XII and compliance with all
conditions and requirements as may be set forth by the Town Board
as well as any other board or authorized official having jurisdiction.
(3) Subdivision approval requirements shall be consistent with the
regulations of Article XI of this chapter, except as otherwise
provided in this section.
(4) Upon a determination by the authorized official that any business
or conditional use originally permitted within the FC District is to
be changed so that it involves a separate, different and distinct use,
process product or service, or involves a new operator, an
application for a conditional use permit must be made to the Town
Board. Prior to authorizing the Town Clerk to issue the conditional
use permit, the Town Board shall ensure that the applicant satisfies
the Town's standards and requirements of this section. As part of
§ 250-5.10 PENFIELD CODE § 250-5.10
1:426
this process, the Town Board may require the modification of any
and all phases of the operation that have become, or are liable
to become, detrimental to the neighborhood. The Town Board,
in its absolute discretion, in cases it deems to be appropriate,
may delegate authority to the authorized official to grant or deny
a conditional use permit consistent with the standards and
requirements of this section.
C. Permitted uses. The Four Corners District shall have no permitted uses
as of right. Those uses existing at the time of the effective date of this
chapter shall be permitted to continue to operate at their current level
of activity. Any increase in the level of activity of said uses shall be
subject to review and approval by the Town Board.
D. Conditional uses. The following uses are conditionally permitted:
(1) Retail shops.
(2) Sit-down/take-out restaurants.
(3) Convenience stores.
(4) Barber shops and hair salons.
(5) Offices for licensed professions, such as attorneys, architects,
designers, dental and medical, engineers, insurance agents, etc.
(6) Banks.
(7) Gasoline service without vehicle repair.
(8) Churches and similar religious facilities.
(9) Schools having a curriculum approved by the Board of Regents of
the State of New York.
(10) Commercial schools providing instruction in such areas as art,
music, dance and business.
(11) Photographic studios and art galleries.
(12) Senior living facilities.
(13) Proprietary health care facilities.
(14) Residential structures containing no more than four dwelling units.
(15) Combinations of conditionally permitted business and residential
uses.
(16) Commercial off-street parking lots and garages.
(17) Other legal uses determined (following a public hearing) by the
applicable board having jurisdiction to issue conditional use
permits to be similar in nature to those uses described in
§ 250-5.10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 250-5.10
1:427
Subsection D(1) through (16) to be compatible with the purposes
of the FC District and to be consistent with the Town’s
Comprehensive Plan; provided, however, that in any event no
conditional use permit shall or may be issued with respect to any
explicitly prohibited use.
E. Accessory uses: uses accessory to the above that are an integral part of
and used solely by the conditionally permitted use and deemed
appropriate by the Town Board or authorized official, as the case may
be.
F. Minimum dimensional requirements.
(1) Lot area. The minimum lot size shall be that needed to
accommodate the necessary structure and comply with this
chapter, as well as all other Town requirements.
(2) Lot coverage. There shall be no specific lot coverage requirements
for this district. The intent of the district is to encourage flexibility
of design and development of land in such a manner as to promote
the most appropriate use of land and to facilitate the adequate and
economic use of streets, utilities and parking areas. The Town
Board shall determine the lot coverage on a case-by-case basis. In
cases where shared or parking available to the general public is
proposed, greater lot coverage will be encouraged and less green
space or landscaped areas required. In cases where shared or
parking available to the general public is not proposed, less lot
coverage and additional landscaping may be required.
(3) Setbacks. All setbacks shall comply with the buffering
requirements of Article VII of this chapter. No structure within the
Four Corners District shall be located closer than 30 feet to the
front property line, 20 feet to a side property line or 30 feet to a
rear property line. In the case of corner lots, the thirty-foot
minimum front setback shall be provided along each road frontage.
Notwithstanding any provisions contained in this chapter to the
contrary, the Town Board shall have the power to modify applicable
provisions of this Subsection F(3) with regard to setbacks for the
purpose of enabling and encouraging flexibility of design and
development of land in such a manner as to promote the most
appropriate use of land and to facilitate the adequate and economic
use of streets and utilities. A buffer area of at least 50 feet shall be
provided along the boundary line between the Four Corners
District and any residential zoning district.
(4) Floor area. As a guideline, structures should be erected having no
more than 5,000 square feet of floor area. Notwithstanding, the
foregoing language, this guideline shall be flexible and the Town
Board, in its discretion, shall have the power to modify the square
footage to ensure that it is properly scaled to the site, the adjacent
properties and to the properties within the Four Corners District.
§ 250-5.10 PENFIELD CODE § 250-5.10
1:428
No structure shall exceed two stories or 35 feet in height,
whichever is less.
G. Hours of operation. Business establishments within the Four Corners
District shall be open to the public only between the hours of 6:00 a.m.
and 12:00 midnight; however, based upon the intensity of the proposed
use and its potential impact on neighboring areas, the Town Board may
modify the hours of operation as part of the process of granting a
conditional use permit.
H. Parking facilities. The applicant shall be responsible for ensuring that
adequate parking facilities (either on- or off-site) to accommodate the
needs of the proposed business are available as set forth in §§ 250-7.7
and 250-7.8 of this chapter. No conditional use permit shall be granted
by the Town Board until it is satisfied that the proposed parking
arrangements will adequately support the proposed use.
I. Design regulations.
(1) The Four Corners Plan has identified the sharing of access and offstreet
parking areas, including the elimination or consolidation of
curb cuts and controlled linkages between existing and proposed
off-street parking areas, as priority objectives. The FC District
Design Regulations are intended to achieve these objectives and
shall supersede regulations where conflicts occur, but replace the
site design regulations specified elsewhere in this chapter. The
joint use or sharing of ancillary site features, including, but not
limited to, off-street parking, loading, access, lighting, landscaping
and signage, is encouraged within the FC District. The Town Board
shall evaluate the potential for joint or shared use of such facilities
in all development actions within the FC District. Any written
agreement, including amendments or modifications, granting or
providing shared or joint use of facilities or access thereto by two
or more owners shall be approved by the Town Board as a condition
of development authorization.
(2) Off-street parking and access.
(a) Shared off-street parking for employees may be located off-site,
provided that such parking spaces shall not be located more
than 1,500 feet from the nearest entranceway to the
building(s) where the employees work.
(b) Shared access shall be encouraged for all sites within the FC
District.
[1] Such access may be provided either by:
[a] One common driveway serving two or more sites
having sufficient width for two vehicles to safely pass;
or
§ 250-5.10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 250-5.10
1:429
§ 250-5.11. Mobile/Manufactured Home Parks (MHP).
[b] Two common driveways with alternate one-way traffic
flows to and from a public street.
[2] Shared access shall also be reviewed on an individual basis
to determine the feasibility of that proposed hereinabove.
J. Signage. Signs shall comply with § 250-10.26, Four Corners signage, of
this chapter.
K. Review. No Town Board determinations with respect to varying setback
requirements or granting or denying conditional use permits shall be
subject to administrative review under this chapter; but rather, shall be
subject to judicial review as provided by law.
A. Purpose. It is the intent and purpose of this section to regulate the
placement and maintenance of mobile/manufactured homes. It is also
the intent and purpose of this section to regulate mobile/manufactured
home parks to assure quality development and maintenance equal to
that found in other types of residential areas throughout the Town of
Penfield. Providing diversity in housing choice as well as greater
opportunities for obtaining moderate-cost housing is also the desired
objective. It is not the intent of this section to repeal or abrogate any
part of the New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code,
New York State Sanitary Code § 17, New York State Real Property Law
§ 233 or any other applicable rule, regulation or ordinance. The
provisions of this section shall be enforced in addition to and in
conjunction with the above-referenced provisions.
B. Standards for mobile/manufactured homes.
(1) No mobile/manufactured home manufactured after January 15,
1974, shall be used as a permanent place of abode or as a
permanent or temporary dwelling, regardless of location, unless it
bears the seal issued by the State of New York and required by the
State Code for Construction and Installation of Mobile Homes. No
such home manufactured after June 15, 1976, shall be used as a
permanent place of abode or as a permanent or temporary
dwelling, regardless of location, unless a seal is issued by the U.S.
Department of Housing and Urban Development certifying that the
mobile/manufactured home unit complies with the standards of the
National Mobile Home Construction and Safety Standards Act of
1974, as amended.
(2) Mobile/Manufactured homes shall not be located or permitted to
remain in this municipality unless they:
(a) Conform to all applicable federal construction and safety
standards in force at the time of manufacture;
(b) Are in sanitary condition; and
§ 250-5.10 PENFIELD CODE § 250-5.11
1:430
(c) Are structurally sound, particularly with respect to the safety
and welfare of their occupants.
C. Installation requirements.
(1) All mobile/manufactured homes, whether installed temporarily or
permanently, shall require a building permit prior to installation.
(2) Such homes shall be installed to the manufacturer's specifications,
or, if not available, shall be installed in conformity with NCSBCS/
ANSI, Manufactured Home Installations, and A225.1-1987, with
revisions.
(3) A mobile/manufactured home shall not be used as a permanent
place of abode or as a permanent or temporary dwelling unless it is
properly connected to a public water supply system approved by
the Monroe County Water Authority and a municipal sanitary sewer
system or a sewage disposal system approved by the Monroe
County Health Department. All water and sewer systems shall be
constructed in accordance with the Town of Penfield development
regulations and specifications.
(4) The area beneath all such homes shall be enclosed with a generally
accepted exterior material. Such enclosure must be so constructed
that it is subject to reasonable inspection.
(5) Soils shall have sufficient bearing and stability properties to
provide adequate support for such home installations and shall be
of sufficient depth to sustain lawns, trees and other vegetation.
(6) Entrance steps. Entrance steps shall be installed at all doors
leading to the inside of the home. Such steps shall be constructed
of materials intended for permanence, weather resistance, and
attractiveness and shall be equipped with handrails, which will
provide adequate support for users. Such stairs and steps shall also
be required to comply with all other applicable code requirements.
(7) All such homes shall be equipped with a U.L.-approved smoke
detection device.
(8) The home and lot on which the home is placed shall be maintained
as required by § 250-7.11, Exterior property maintenance.
(9) Such homes shall be located only in approved mobile/manufactured
home parks, except that the Zoning Board of Appeals may issue a
temporary permit for such home not located in a mobile/
manufactured home park upon proof to such Board of special
necessity. "Special necessity" shall consist of circumstances where
such home will serve as an interim dwelling in the event that a
permanent residence has been damaged or destroyed beyond
conditions of habitability.
§ 250-5.11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 250-5.11
1:431
(a) No such temporary permit shall be issued unless the following
conditions have been met:
[1] The home complies with all other applicable requirements.
[2] The home complies with all the required setbacks for
principal structures of the applicable zoning district.
[3] The permit applicant agrees to remove the home within six
months from the date of issuance of the temporary permit.
(b) A temporary permit approved pursuant to this section shall be
issued by the Town Clerk at a fee as required by resolution by
the Town Board.
(c) Extensions of three months each may be granted by the Zoning
Board of Appeals, it being the intent of the Board that
extensions should be granted only in unusual or emergency
situations that require a brief extension only.
(d) An application for a temporary permit shall be filed with the
Town Clerk, and such filing fee shall be consistent with
§ 250-15.2 of this chapter.
(e) The following are prohibited with respect to the temporary
placement of such home:
[1] Construction of a permanent foundation or enclosure
thereunder.
[2] Construction of any additions to provide extra floor space
unless:
[a] The Zoning Board of Appeals approves such addition;
and
[b] The additions are provided by or approved by the
manufacturer and specifically designed for use with
the mobile home; and
[c] The addition complies with other provisions of this
chapter and other applicable ordinances with respect
to setback and similar matters; and
[d] A building permit is issued for such addition.
D. Existing mobile/manufactured home park requirements.
(1) Applicability. This section shall apply only to mobile/manufactured
home parks to which a license has been issued prior to the date of
the adoption of this chapter and provided said license is in effect on
said date.
§ 250-5.11 PENFIELD CODE § 250-5.11
1:432
(2) All structures, including the installation of a mobile/manufactured
home, shall require a building permit prior to installation.
(3) Roadways.
(a) Road construction. All newly constructed park roads shall be
hard-surfaced roads not less than 16 feet in width. The park
roads shall be paved with a concrete or bituminous material
complying with the Town of Penfield development
specifications for private roads.
(b) All park roadways shall be graded, leveled and surfaced so as
to permit the safe passage of emergency and other vehicles.
(c) Maintenance of roadways. All private roadways within mobile/
manufactured home parks, and all entrances and exits within
said parks, shall be kept free of snow, ice and debris and
maintained so as to permit unhampered use of the same by
park residents, visitors and emergency vehicles. Street name
signs shall be installed and maintained at all road
intersections.
(d) Lighting. All roads and facilities shall be furnished with outside
lighting to ensure the safe movement of vehicles and
pedestrians at night. The minimum requirements for such shall
be a streetlight at the end of every street or private roadway,
and at the intersection of each street or roadway, which shall
be lighted from a period 30 minutes after sunset to 30 minutes
before sunrise each day.
(e) Each home lot within a mobile/manufactured home park shall
abut on and have access to a private road used by the
inhabitants of the park and built and maintained by the owner
thereof. No home lot shall have direct access to a public street.
(f) Parking. Two off-street parking spaces shall be provided for
each mobile home site. Such spaces may be located on the
individual lot or grouped in a nearby location to serve several
mobile home sites.
(g) All homes and home lots shall be provided with address
numbers in conformity with the requirements of § 250-7.21,
Property numbering.
(4) Property maintenance.
(a) All land areas shall be adequately drained and properly
maintained free of refuse, garbage, rubbish, junk, unlicensed
or junk vehicles, or debris.
(b) The storage, collection, and disposal of refuse in the mobile
home park shall be managed so as to create no health hazards,
rodent harborage, insect breeding areas, accident hazards, or
§ 250-5.11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 250-5.11
1:433
air pollution. All refuse shall be stored in fly-tight, water-tight,
rodent-proof containers, provided in sufficient number and
capacity to prevent refuse from overflowing or blowing away.
Refuse shall be collected at regular intervals, but no less often
than once per week.
(c) All areas shall be maintained as required by § 250-7.11,
Exterior property maintenance.
(d) Except for the areas used for the home, patio, sidewalk and offstreet
parking space, the entire remaining area of the home
lots shall be landscaped and properly maintained.
(e) Outside storage of vehicles and materials shall comply with
§ 250-7.20, Outside storage and display, Subsection D,
Residential zoning districts. Additionally, the parking of any
vehicles on any park road shall be prohibited except for
emergency and municipal vehicles.
(5) Fire protection.
(a) The park operator shall keep common areas of the parks free of
litter, rubbish and other flammable materials.
(b) It shall be the responsibility of the licensee of any mobile/
manufactured home park to provide fire protection consisting
of a hydrant or hydrants, and fire extinguishers in common
buildings so located that the same shall be immediately
available. Hydrants shall be flush tested annually, and such test
shall be witnessed by the Fire Marshal. If the Fire Marshal is
unavailable at the time of testing, he/she may allow the test to
be completed in his/her absence. The results of such test shall
be submitted to the Fire Marshal's office.
(c) All fuel heating systems shall be installed and maintained in
accordance with the applicable codes and regulations
governing such systems.
(6) Utilities. All homes used as a permanent place of abode or as a
temporary or permanent dwelling shall be required to be properly
connected to the existing public water supply and sanitary sewer
system.
E. Additions to existing mobile/manufactured home parks.
(1) Additions to mobile/manufactured home parks, or extensions of
parks in districts zoned Mobile/Manufactured Home Park, shall
require site plan approval from the Planning Board.
(2) No structure within the addition to any mobile/manufactured home
park shall be located closer than 80 feet to any exterior property
line. All setbacks shall comply with the buffering requirements of
§ 250-7.2, Buffers, berms and screen plantings.
§ 250-5.11 PENFIELD CODE § 250-5.11
1:434
(3) Minimum lot size. No lot added to an existing park shall be less
than 5,000 square feet. All new lots therein shall have a minimum
width of not less than 50 feet.
F. Lot requirements for homes within existing parks.
(1) Home placement.
(a) Minimum setback requirements for homes shall be as follows:
[1] Front yard setback: five feet (Front yard setback shall be
measured from the road surface edge to the nearest
vertical wall of the mobile home.).
[2] Side yard setback: 10 feet from adjacent homes (five feet
from accessory structures or buildings located on adjacent
lots).
[3] Rear yard setback: five feet from adjacent homes (five feet
from accessory structures or buildings located on adjacent
lots).
(b) No new or used homes shall be moved onto any lot in any park
after the adoption of this section, unless it shall comply with
the aforesaid setback requirements. In order to ensure
compliance with the setback requirements, a site inspection
shall be completed by the Building Inspector prior to the
issuance of a building permit for the installation of the home.
Permits for such installations are to be issued to the owner of
the mobile/manufactured home park, and only with his/her
written approval. Said requirements shall not, however, impair
or affect present and existing setbacks on homes presently on
any lot in any park as of the date of the adoption hereof,
provided the home was installed in conformance with the
existing requirements at the time of installation.
(c) Each home lot shall be provided with a stand that will give a
firm base and adequate support for the home. Such stand shall
have a dimension approximating the width and length of the
home and any extensions or expansions thereto.
(d) The park operator shall obtain a building permit prior to the
placement or relocation of any existing or new home in the
park.
(2) Accessory structures.
(a) Minimum setback requirements for accessory structures,
including but not limited to awnings, cabanas, ramadas,
carports, decks or porches, shall be as follows:
§ 250-5.11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 250-5.11
1:435
[1] Front yard setback: five feet (Front yard setback shall be
measured from the road surface edge to the nearest
vertical wall of the structure.).
[2] Side yard setback: five feet from homes or accessory
structures or buildings located on adjacent lots.
[3] Rear yard setback: five feet from homes or accessory
structures or buildings located on adjacent lots.
(b) As with the installation of a home, a site inspection shall be
completed by the Building Inspector prior to the issuance of a
building permit for the installation of the accessory structure.
Permits for such construction are to be issued to the owner of
the mobile/manufactured home park, and only with his/her
written approval. Said requirements shall not, however, impair
or affect present and existing setbacks on accessory structures
presently on any lot in any park as of the date of the adoption
hereof, provided the structure was installed in conformance
with the existing requirements at the time of installation.
(3) Accessory buildings.
(a) Minimum setback requirements for accessory buildings
(storage sheds) shall be as follows:
[1] Front yard setback: 20 feet from the road surface edge.
[2] Side yard setback: five feet from homes located on
adjacent lots and five feet from accessory structures or
buildings located on adjacent lots.
[3] Rear yard setback: five feet from homes or accessory
structures or buildings located on adjacent lots.
(b) No new or used accessory building shall be moved onto any lot
in any park after the adoption of this section unless it shall
comply with the aforesaid setback requirements. In order to
ensure compliance with the setback requirements, a site
inspection shall be completed by the Building Inspector prior
to the issuance of a building permit for the installation of the
accessory building. Permits for such construction or
installations are to be issued to the owner of the mobile/
manufactured home park, and only with his/her written
approval. No more than one accessory building shall be
allowed on any one lot, and such building shall not exceed a
total of 100 square feet of ground area. Said maximum size
requirement is not intended to supersede park rules if they are
more restrictive.
(c) Said requirements shall not, however, impair or affect present
and existing setbacks on accessory structures presently on any
§ 250-5.11 PENFIELD CODE § 250-5.11
1:436
lot in any park as of the date of the adoption hereof, provided
the structure was installed in conformance with the existing
requirements at the time of installation.
G. Requirements for new parks.
(1) Applicability. This section shall apply only to mobile/manufactured
home parks to which a license has been issued after the date of the
adoption of this section.
(2) General requirements.
(a) All structures, including the installation of a home, shall
require a building permit prior to installation.
(b) Density. Average density in a park shall not exceed 7.5 units
per acre. The park shall contain area sufficient to
accommodate at least 150 home lots, plus recreational areas
and streets as required by this chapter.
(c) The corners of each lot shall be marked with surveyor's irons,
and each vacant lot shall have address numbers installed.
Numbers shall be installed on a post not to exceed five feet in
height and no less than 20 feet and no more than 25 feet from
the road surface edge. Numbers shall be Arabic in design and a
minimum of five inches in height.
(d) All land areas shall be adequately drained and properly
maintained in conformance with the requirements of
§ 250-7.11, Exterior property maintenance.
[1] The Town Engineer shall approve plans for the disposal of
surface stormwater.
[2] The Planning Board must approve the proposed method of
garbage, waste and trash disposal.
[a] The storage, collection, and disposal of refuse in the
mobile home park shall be managed so as to create no
health hazards, rodent harborage, insect breeding
areas, accident hazards, or air pollution. All refuse
shall be stored in fly-tight, water-tight, rodent-proof
containers, provided in sufficient number and capacity
to prevent refuse from overflowing or blowing away.
Refuse shall be collected at regular intervals, but no
less often than twice per week for common storage
areas and no less often than once per week for
individual roadside pickup.
(e) All parks shall have one or more recreational areas, which shall
be easily accessible to all park residents. The type and location
of recreational facilities and open space shall be subject to
approval of the Planning Board during site plan approval.
§ 250-5.11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 250-5.11
1:437
(f) Community buildings.
[1] Each park must have one or more central community
buildings constructed and maintained in conformance with
applicable state and local code requirements.
[2] Each park shall have a building for the use of the operator
distinctly marked "OFFICE." An illuminated map of the
park shall be displayed at the office.
(g) All parks shall have an area or areas set aside for storage
usage by occupants of all the homes within the park. Said
storage shall be ample to store such large items as boats,
trailers, motorcycles and similar items. The storage area or
areas referred to shall be fully screened or otherwise closed so
as to be hidden from view. The size, type and location of
storage areas shall be subject to approval of the Planning
Board during site plan approval.
(3) Roadways.
(a) No home lot shall have direct access to a public street.
(b) Park entrance and exit. There shall be no less than two park
entrances and exits for use in ingress to and egress from the
park. All entrances and exits shall be kept free of snow, ice and
debris at all times and maintained so as to permit unhampered
use of the same by park residents and visitors.
(c) Each home lot within a park shall abut on and have access to a
park road used by the inhabitants of the park and built and
maintained by the owner thereof.
[1] This road shall have a paved surface at least 20 feet in
width from pavement edge to pavement edge and lead to
and furnish ingress to and egress from a public street to
controlled driveways, which shall not be less than 20 feet
in width.
[2] The park roads shall be paved with a concrete or
bituminous material complying with the Town of Penfield
development designs and construction specifications for
private roads.
[3] The operation of motor vehicles on such park roads within
a mobile/manufactured home park shall be subject to the
provisions of the New York State Vehicle and Traffic Law.14
[4] All such park roads shall be adequately lighted for the
purpose of protecting vehicular traffic thereon and
pedestrian use thereof.
14.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 220, Vehicles and Traffic.
§ 250-5.11 PENFIELD CODE § 250-5.11
1:438
(d) In addition to the required off-street parking for each lot, the
park shall provide and maintain paved off-street parking areas
for guests of occupants. The number of additional parking
spaces shall be equal to no less than 20% of the number of
mobile/manufactured home lots. The number, size, type and
location of parking areas shall be subject to approval of the
Planning Board during site plan approval.
(e) A concrete sidewalk conforming to the requirements of Section
7 of the Town of Penfield development design and construction
specifications or a pedestrian traffic lane approved by the
Planning Board shall be constructed and maintained adjacent
to one side of every park road.
(4) Landscaping.
(a) Park plans shall show existing tree masses or trees over six
inches in diameter at a four-foot height, hedgerows and other
notable existing natural features such as streams or rock
formations. Such natural features shall be retained in the site
plan as much as possible.
(b) A buffering area shall be maintained around the perimeter of
each park as required by § 250-7.2, Buffers, berms and screen
plantings.
[1] The area shall not be a part of any home lot, as it shall be
part of the common ground of the park.
[2] Landscaping plans shall be subject to the approval of the
Town landscape consultant. Plantings installed as part of
the approved landscaping plan shall be maintained by the
park manager in such a manner that the landscaping and
planting shall not become unsightly or die.
(5) Utilities. All utilities, such as sewer, water, fuel, electric, telephone
and television antenna lead-ins, shall conform to the current
recommendations of the authority having jurisdiction. Such utilities
shall be buried to a depth specified by the authority having
jurisdiction, and there shall be no overhead wires. Fire hydrants
shall be provided and maintained as required by the Fire Marshal.
(6) Signage. Advertising of the park on the premises shall be limited to
one nameplate sign containing the park name, which plate shall not
exceed 20 square feet, with lighting, heights and location as
approved by the Building Inspector. A sign permit shall be required
for such signage.
H. Application for new park license.
(1) An application for an original license for a mobile/manufactured
home park shall be appropriately filed with the Town Clerk. No
§ 250-5.11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 250-5.11
1:439
license for a mobile/manufactured home park shall be issued by the
Town Clerk unless the Town Board has given written authorization
in accordance with the provisions of this section.
(2) Applications for mobile/manufactured home park licenses shall
include but not be limited to all materials as may be deemed
necessary, such as:
(a) Name and address of each applicant, if an individual, or of each
and every partner, if a partnership, or the name and address of
the principal officers and shareholders, if a corporation.
(b) The name and address of the developer and the description of
the construction schedule and the construction cost.
(c) Name and address of the owner of the land upon which the
mobile/manufactured home park is to be located.
(d) A legal description of the property upon which the mobile/
manufactured home park is to be located.
(e) Site plan drawings of the proposed mobile/manufactured home
park approved by the Planning Board.
(f) A copy of all park rules and regulations; a list of management
and tenant responsibilities; a written statement of any fees to
be used in connection with the use of any lot within the park.
(g) Such further information as the developer may feel is
necessary to describe his/her intent and ability to comply with
the requirements of this chapter.
(3) An application shall be filed with the Town Clerk and such filing fee
shall be consistent with § 250-15.2, Fees.
I. Lot requirements for homes within new parks.
(1) Minimum requirements for lots shall be as follows:
(a) Lot area per dwelling unit: 6,000 square feet.
(b) Front yard setback: 20 feet from pavement edge.
(c) Side yard setback: 10 feet from lease line.
(d) Rear yard setback: 15 feet from lease lines.
(2) Accessory structures, including, but not limited to, awnings,
cabanas, ramadas, carports, decks or porches, shall be considered
to be part of the home for the purposes of all setback requirements.
(3) Structures on site.
(a) The lot may be occupied by one mobile/manufactured home,
including its accessory structures, one accessory building and
§ 250-5.11 PENFIELD CODE § 250-5.11
1:440
one carport. Minimum setback requirements for accessory
buildings (storage sheds) shall be as follows:
[1] Front yard setback: 30 feet from pavement edge.
[2] Side yard setback: five feet from lease line.
[3] Rear yard setback: five feet from lease line.
(b) No accessory building may be erected on any lot unless a
building permit therefor has been obtained from the Building
Inspector. Permits for such construction or structures are to be
issued to the owner of the mobile/manufactured home park,
and only with his/her written approval. Prior to the issuance of
a building permit, a site inspection shall be completed by the
Building Inspector. No more than one accessory building shall
be allowed on any one lot, and such building shall not exceed a
total of 100 square feet of ground area. Said requirements are
not intended to supersede park rules if they are more
restrictive.
(4) Each new home site shall have off-street parking in accordance
with § 250-7.7 of this chapter.
(5) Except for the areas used for the home, patio, sidewalk and offstreet
parking space, the entire remaining area of the lot shall be
landscaped and properly maintained. At least two trees with a
minimum diameter of two inches at the time of planting shall be
planted and maintained on each lot.
(6) A central fuel supply system, such as natural gas or a central LP
system, shall serve each lot. No separate or private fuel containers,
such as fuel oil tanks or LP tanks, used to supply fuel to a home or
building appliances, shall be allowed in the park. This requirement
shall not apply to twenty-pound LP tanks commonly used for
outdoor barbecue grills.
(7) The property owner will grant to the Town of Penfield an open
space easement and permit the Town to have an easement to enter
upon, as the grantee, any open space, street or recreational areas
provided within the park, for the purpose of permitting the Town to
inspect structures, make repairs or maintain as is necessary and
appropriate to adequately maintain said areas in the event that the
owner of said property, his/her successors or assigns fail to comply
with the standards and requirements as set forth within this
chapter.
J. Park operation and maintenance.
(1) Responsibilities of park operator.
(a) The owner/operator to whom a license for a mobile/
manufactured home park is issued shall operate the park in
§ 250-5.11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 250-5.11
1:441
compliance with this section and shall provide adequate
supervision to maintain the park, its common grounds, streets,
facilities, equipment and utilities in good repair and in a clean
and sanitary condition. In the event of a fire or other disaster
that results in damage to any mobile home or homes located
within the mobile/manufactured home park, the park owner/
operator shall be ultimately responsible for the securing or
removal of any and all damaged homes within 60 days of such
event.
(b) The park operator shall post a copy of this chapter in the
manager's office and provide each park occupant with a copy
of the same upon request.
(c) The park operator, in addition to the Building Inspector or
other authorized official, shall inspect the placement of each
home on its stand.
(d) The park operator shall maintain a register in the office of the
park, indicating the name and address of each current resident
of said park and the make, type and serial number of each
mobile/manufactured home, and the date of arrival of each
home on the premises. Such register shall be available to any
person designated under Subsection K(1) of this section.
(e) Each park shall have a building for the use of the operator
distinctly marked "OFFICE." An illuminated map of the park
shall be displayed at the office. The park owner shall designate
a park manager on the premises or other representative in
close proximity to the park to ensure the availability of
emergency response actions in matters affecting the health,
safety, well being and welfare of the park residents. The
designated agent's name, address and telephone number shall
be posted in a conspicuous location in the park, given in
writing to each resident and registered with the Monroe
County Sheriff and Fire Marshal.
(f) The holder of every license pursuant to the provisions of this
section shall file with the Town's Assessor and Building and
Zoning Administrator, as required, a duly verified record of all
homes located within said park on such date as established by
the Assessor for the tentative tax date, together with the date
such home first was permitted to be installed therein, and with
the make, model, year and size of each of said homes.
(2) Responsibilities of park residents.
(a) Each park resident shall be responsible for the maintenance of
his/her home and any appurtenances thereto, and shall keep all
yard space on his/her lot in a neat and sanitary condition, free
of unregistered or inoperable motor vehicles and in conformity
§ 250-5.11 PENFIELD CODE § 250-5.11
1:442
§ 250-5.12. Mixed Use District (MUD). [Added 11-1-2017 by L.L. No.
3-2017]
with the requirements of § 250-7.11, Exterior property
maintenance.
(b) The park resident shall be responsible for the maintenance of
all utility connections (water service, drains, electrical, fuel,
etc.) inside the mobile home to the location at which such
utility enters the mobile home.
(c) Depending on the rules of the individual park, the park
operator may provide all required site maintenance, including
common areas.
K. Enforcement; right of entry.
(1) This section shall be enforced by the authorized official of the Town
of Penfield, as may from time to time be necessary to ensure
conformance with the provisions of this section.
(2) Said official shall be authorized and have the right in the
performance of his/her duties hereunder to enter any park and
make such inspections as are necessary to determine compliance
with this section. Such entrance and inspection shall be
accomplished at reasonable times after prior notice to the park
operator, and in emergencies, whenever necessary to protect the
public health, safety and welfare. Owners, agents or operators of a
park shall be responsible for providing access to all parts of the
premises within their control to the authorized official or to his/her
inspectors, acting in accordance with the provisions of this section.
L. Duties of authorized official. It shall be the duty of any authorized
official to make necessary inspections and to investigate all complaints
made under this section and to request the Town Attorney to take
appropriate legal action of all violations of this section.
M. Preexisting nonconforming uses. Nothing in this section shall impair or
affect the lawful use of property in any park which existed as of the date
of adoption of this section or make illegal such use, provided that such
use was in existence as of the date of the adoption hereof, and further
provided that such use is uninterrupted and continuous hereafter.
A. This section shall be known as Local Law No. 3 of 2017 entitled "Mixed
Use District." This section of the Town of Penfield Zoning Ordinance
applies to all mixed use developments in the Town of Penfield. For the
purposes of the Zoning Ordinance, "mixed use" means a combination of
residential, commercial and civic uses, arranged vertically (in multiple
stories of buildings) or horizontally (adjacent to one another), at a
pedestrian scale that encourages less reliance on the automobile for the
daily lives of residents.
§ 250-5.11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 250-5.12
1:443
B. The Mixed Use District was generated in conjunction with the Town of
Penfield Mixed Use Development Manual. The manual serves as a
guidebook for the development in the district (e.g., definitions, design
criteria, development intensity).
C. Purpose.
(1) The purpose of the Mixed Use District is to permit, where zoned,
the creation and construction of mixed-use developments within
the town. All development must comply with the following 10
principles of mixed use development:
(a) A mixture of complementary land uses to create economic and
social vitality and encourage the linking of pedestrian and
vehicular trips.
(b) Flexible housing alternatives.
(c) Areas that are safe, comfortable and convenient for
pedestrians.
(d) Flexibility in the siting and design to support future changes in
land use.
(e) Walkability within neighborhoods with walkways and trails
that encourage pedestrian and bicycle travel.
(f) Variety of services within walking distance.
(g) Efficient use of land with compact, clustered development.
(h) Development that supports public transit where applicable.
(i) Open space preservation/creation and reduction of impact on
natural resources.
(j) Transportation planning that reduces vehicular demands.
D. Mixture of uses.
(1) Mixed use developments shall provide a variety of compatible uses
located within the same project site in an integrated manner. The
minimum number of uses is based upon the size of the
development. Table 6.1 of the Mixed Use Development Manual sets
forth the minimum number of uses per development size, and the
minimum percentage of each use in square footage.
E. Permitted uses.
(1) The following uses are permitted in the Mixed Use District. No
vehicular drive-through operations are permitted. Commercial uses
shall be scaled as appropriate to be consistent with the size and
location of a specific parcel.
§ 250-5.12 PENFIELD CODE § 250-5.12
1:444
(a) Permitted single-family and multifamily residential uses shall
include the following housing types:
[1] Low-rise housing (four stories or less).
[2] Townhouses.
[3] Duplex.
[4] Multiplex.
[5] Cottage.
[6] Multifamily.
[7] Single-family detached.
[8] Single-family attached.
[9] Vertical mixed use with residential on top.
[10] Universal design.
(b) Permitted commercial uses shall include the following:
[1] Insurance office of independent or general agents.
[2] Medical and dental offices and clinics, excluding overnight
occupancy.
[3] Offices for other licensed professionals, such as architects,
designers, engineers, etc., excluding, however, any
warehouse or storage areas.
[4] Attorney or law offices.
[5] Other applicable office space.
[6] Financial establishments.
[7] Art galleries and studios.
[8] Grocery stores.
[9] Laundromat or dry-cleaning pick-up establishments.
[10] Bakeries.
[11] Drugstores or pharmacies.
[12] Hardware stores, garden supply stores, and paint and
wallpaper stores.
[13] Barber and beauty shops.
[14] Flower shops.
§ 250-5.12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 250-5.12
1:445
[15] Liquor stores.
[16] Retail stores.
[17] Retail outlets and department stores.
[18] Theaters (not including drive-in theaters).
[19] Bowling alleys.
[20] Civic uses, such as, churches, schools, community centers,
and other public-oriented uses.
F. Conditionally permitted uses.
(1) The following uses are conditionally permitted in the Mixed Use
District. Commercial uses shall be scaled as appropriate to be
consistent with the size and location of a specific parcel.
(a) Bar, tavern, restaurant or other eating place.
(b) Hotels and bed-and-breakfast establishments
(c) Nonprofit institutions for charitable, religious, cultural or
community social purposes.
(d) Nursery or day-care centers, and nonprofit schools.
(e) Combinations of permitted single-family residential, business
nonretail, limited business and general business uses.
(f) Entertainment (adult uses and adult entertainment
establishments are not permitted).
(g) Other uses not specifically listed above as permitted uses, but
determined by the board having jurisdiction to be similar in
nature and compatible with the purposes of the Mixed Use
District may also be considered; provided, however, that in any
event, no conditional use permit shall or may be issued with
respect to any explicitly prohibited use. Upon approval from
the board having jurisdiction, applicants are required to obtain
a conditional use permit from the Town Clerk prior to
occupying the space.
G. Accessory uses.
(1) Uses that are accessory to an integral part of and used solely by the
permitted or conditionally permitted use and determined
appropriate by the authorized official or the board having
jurisdiction, as the case may be. Types of accessory uses include,
but are not limited to, parks and recreation facilities, private and
public active and passive recreational uses, and multiuse trail
systems.
H. Change of use.
§ 250-5.12 PENFIELD CODE § 250-5.12
1:446
(1) At any time a specific use originally permitted within this district is
to be changed so that it involves a separate, different and distinct
use, process or product, an authorized official shall make a
determination if an application must be made to the Zoning Board
of Appeals for a change of use permit or conditional use permit.
(2) Upon a determination by the authorized official that any business
or conditional use originally permitted within the Mixed Use
District is to be changed so that it involves a separate, different and
distinct use, process, product or service, or involves a new
operator, an application for a conditional use permit must be made
to the board having jurisdiction. Prior to authorizing the Town
Clerk to issue the conditional use permit, the board having
jurisdiction shall ensure that the applicant satisfies the Town's
standards and requirements of this section. As part of this process,
the board having jurisdiction may require the modification of any
and all phases of the operation that have become, or are liable to
become, detrimental to the neighborhood. The board having
jurisdiction, in its absolute discretion, in cases it deems to be
appropriate, may delegate authority to the authorized official to
grant or deny a conditional use permit consistent with the
standards and requirements of this section.
I. Minimum dimensional requirements.
(1) All mixed use developments shall comply with the minimum
dimensional requirements are set forth in Table 6.1 of the Mixed
Use Development Manual.
(2) The Planning Board or the Zoning Board of Appeals, as the case
may be, shall have the power to establish, determine and modify
applicable provisions of the Mixed Use District with regard to
setbacks for the purpose of enabling and encouraging flexibility of
design and development of land in such a manner as to promote the
most appropriate use of land and to facilitate the adequate use of
streets, utilities and amenities that will benefit the Mixed Use
District and/or development.
(3) No structure shall be greater than two stories or 35 feet in height,
whichever is less, within 100 feet of any adjacent permitted
residential zoning district abutting the Mixed Use District.
(4) Within the mixed use development, a zero setback from the side
property line(s) may be permitted to help create a more compact
development. Minimum setbacks shall be required to comply with
fire and building codes.
J. Parking.
(1) Shared parking for different uses is required within all mixed-use
development. The minimum number of parking spaces for a mixeduse
development shall be determined by a study prepared by the
§ 250-5.12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 250-5.12
1:447
applicant following the procedures of the Urban Land Institute
(ULI) Shared Parking Report or Institute of Transportation
Engineers (ITE) Shared Parking Guidelines. A formal parking study
may be waived by the Planning Board for small developments if it
is demonstrated that sufficient parking is available for the planned
uses.
(2) Shared parking spaces for residential units must be located within
a maximum of 300 feet of dwelling unit entrances that are being
served by those spaces.
(3) There shall be limited visibility of parking lots from the main-streetfacing
sides of buildings. Single row, on-street parking shall be
permitted.
(4) Adjacent properties abutting the Mixed Use District shall be
adequately screened from parking structures and lots.
(5) Parking provided to the general public shall be clearly marked and
separate from private resident parking spaces.
(6) The size and number of ADA compliant parking spaces for each
development must meet the New York State Building Code.
(7) Residential units such as single-family detached or semidetached,
townhouses, or other similar housing shall be provided with private
parking spaces, garages, or other covered parking spaces. Visitor
parking shall be included as shared parking with other adjacent
land uses.
K. Connectivity and pedestrian access.
(1) Connectivity involves providing options for getting from one place
to another, reducing traffic, and creating viable street networks.
(a) Sidewalks shall be installed along all roads both public and
private, and shall connect to front building entrances, parking
areas, central open space, and other pedestrian destinations.
Sidewalks shall also be included to connect common areas,
parking areas, open space, and recreational facilities within
the mixed-use development.
(b) All mixed-use developments shall comply with the dimension
requirements for sidewalks that are set forth in Table 5.4 in the
Mixed Use Development Manual.
(c) All mixed-use developments shall comply with the dimension
requirements for major multiuse walkways and trails intended
to accommodate pedestrians, cyclists, and other users are that
set forth in Table 5.4 in the Mixed Use Development Manual.
(d) Bicycle racks shall be provided close to building entrances,
public plazas, and other public gathering areas.
§ 250-5.12 PENFIELD CODE § 250-5.12
1:448
L. Public open space.
(1) In reference to open space, "public" refers to those areas within a
mixed-use development that shall be available for use by local
residents and the general public. These spaces may be owned,
operated, and maintained by an association, organization, agency
or municipality. Public open space can take the form of active and
passive recreation areas, public courtyards, town square, and other
areas that are be used for public gatherings.
(a) All public open space shall be restricted from future
subdivision and development.
(b) The amount of public open space required is based upon the
size of a mixed-use development. The board having jurisdiction
shall establish the required amount of public open space
required for each development.
(c) All structures shall be constructed with connectivity to public
open space.
(d) No portion of any road right-of-way area may be used for
calculating the minimum required amount of total open space.
(e) The proposed site plan shall clearly delineate between public
space and private space. Private and semiprivate outdoor
spaces (decks, patios, front and back yards, etc.) are
encouraged, but are not considered public open space.
M. Landscaping.
(1) All landscaping proposed within the Mixed Use District shall be
subject to the review and approval of the Planning Board or Zoning
Board of Appeals, as the case may be, and shall comply with the
Mixed Use Development Manual.
N. Lighting.
(1) Lighting of properties within the Mixed Use District shall be
coordinated so as to provide consistency of design and to maximize
efficient use of energy. All such lighting shall be no more than 16
feet in height, and located so as not to cause glare to any adjacent
sites and shall be approved subject to the Planning Board or Zoning
Board of Appeals, as the case may be, and shall comply with the
Mixed Use Development Manual as written in section 5.1.10.
O. Signage.
(1) All signage proposed in the Mixed Use District shall comply with
the requirements of the Town of Penfield Zoning Ordinance.
P. Architecture.
§ 250-5.12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 250-5.12
1:449
(1) The requirements for architectural design standards are set forth
in the Mixed Use Development Manual. The final design of any
proposed mixed use development shall be subject to the review and
approval of the Planning Board or Zoning Board of Appeals, as the
case may be. The Board may refer the review of architectural
designs to its Architectural Consultant at its discretion for report
and recommendation.
Q. Hours of operation.
(1) Business establishments within the Mixed Use District shall be
permitted to operate from 6:00 a.m. to 12:00 midnight on a daily
basis. Based on the intensity of use and its potential impact on the
neighboring area, the Planning Board or Zoning Board of Appeals,
as the case may be, may modify the hours of operation as part of
the process of granting a conditional use permit.
R. Area rezoned.
(1) The 360+/- acres, as described in Schedules "A" and "B," attached
hereto and made a part hereof, are rezoned to Mixed Use District
(MUD) and the Official Zoning Map and Zoning Ordinance of the
Town of Penfield be and the same are amended to reflect the
aforesaid zoning changes for the properties described in Schedules
"A" and "B."15
S. When effective.
(1) This section shall take effect immediately.
15.Editor's Note: Said schedules are on file in the Town offices.
§ 250-5.12 PENFIELD CODE § 250-5.12
1:450
ARTICLE VI
Overlay Districts
§ 250-6.1. Environmental Protection Overlay Districts (EPOD).
A. Purpose. Notwithstanding any provision of this chapter to the contrary,
under no circumstances shall an Environmental Protection Overlay
District (EPOD) development permit be issued for any explicitly
prohibited use.
(1) The purpose of the Environmental Protection Overlay Districts
established in this article is to provide special controls over land
development located in sensitive environmental areas within the
Town of Penfield. These districts and their associated regulations
are designed to preserve and protect unique environmental
features within the Town as much as possible, including but not
limited to wetlands, steep slopes, floodplains, watercourses and
woodlands.
(2) The regulations contained in each EPOD are not intended to be
substituted for other general zoning district provisions, but can be
superimposed over such district provisions, and should be
considered as additional requirements to be met by the applicant or
developer, prior to project approval. The purpose of the overlay
districts is to provide the Town with an additional level of review
and regulation that controls how land development permitted by
the Town's primary zoning districts should occur in sensitive or
unique environmental areas.
B. Establishment of district. In order to address the specific goals listed in
Subsection A of this section, the Town of Penfield has established the
following Environmental Protection Overlay Districts:
EPOD (1) Wetland Protection Overlay District
EPOD (2) Steep Slope Protection Overlay District
EPOD (3) Woodland Protection Overlay District
EPOD (4) Floodplain Protection Overlay District
EPOD (5) Watercourse Protection Overlay District
C. Official maps. The approximate locations and boundaries of all
Environmental Protection Overlay Districts shall be delineated on an
official set of maps on file in the Town Clerk's office. These maps shall
be known and may be cited as the "Official Town of Penfield EPOD
Maps" and shall include the Environmental Atlas Maps for the Town,
the Official Wetland Maps for the Town, [prepared by the New York
State Department of Environmental Conservation (NYSDEC) and the
Army Corps of Engineers (ACOE)], and the official Flood Insurance Rate
Maps (FIRM) for the Town, prepared by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency (FEMA). The Official Town of Penfield EPOD Maps
shall be used for reference purposes only and shall not be used to
§ 250-6.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 250-6.1
1:451
delineate specific or exact boundaries of the various overlay districts.
Field investigations and/or other environmental analyses may be
required in order to determine whether or not a particular piece of
property is included within one or more of the overlay districts.
D. Interpretation of district boundaries.
(1) The authorized official shall be responsible for interpreting
Environmental Protection Overlay District boundaries based on an
interpretation of the Official Town of Penfield EPOD Maps
determining such district boundaries. The authorized official may
request the assistance of the Town Engineer/County Engineer or
other appropriate department or agency in making such a
determination.
(2) Where environmental protection districts overlay any primary
zoning district delineated on the Official Zoning Map of the Town of
Penfield, the requirements of the overlay district shall be met in
addition to any requirements specified for development in the
respective primary zoning district.
E. Permit application procedures.
(1) EPOD development permit:
(a) An EPOD development permit shall be required prior to the
commencement of any regulated activity or the issuance of any
building permit for regulated development in a designated
Environmental Protection Overlay District within the Town of
Penfield.
(b) The following activities are exempt from the permit procedures
of the article, subject to a determination by the authorized
official that such activities involve necessary normal
maintenance and upkeep of property, and/or are clearly
incidental to the primary use on the property, and/or involve
public health, safety or emergency situations:
[1] Lawn care and maintenance.
[2] Gardening activities.
[3] Tree and shrub care and maintenance.
[4] Removal of dead or deteriorating vegetation.
[5] Removal of structures.
[6] Select cutting and removal of trees in woodlands, that is
not located within a steep slope district, for personal use of
property owner. Sale of said wood is prohibited.
[7] Repair and maintenance of structures.
§ 250-6.1 PENFIELD CODE § 250-6.1
1:452
[8] Repair and maintenance of faulty or deteriorating sewage
facilities or utility lines.
[9] Reconstruction of structures damaged by a natural
disaster.
[10] Customary agricultural activities, except structural
activities.
[11] Public health activities, orders and regulations of the New
York State Department of Health, Monroe County
Department of Health, or other agency, undertaken in
compliance with the New York State Environmental
Conservation Law.
[12] Activities subject to the review jurisdiction of the New
York State Public Service Commission or the New York
State Board on Electric Generation Siting and the
Environment, under the provisions of Article VII of the
New York Public Service Law.
[13] Any actual or ongoing emergency activity which is
immediately necessary for the protection and preservation
of life, property or natural resource values.
(2) Application for permit.
(a) Applications for EPOD development permits shall be made in
writing to the appropriate board or authorized official having
jurisdiction in the matter, on forms available in the Town
Planning Department. Such an application shall be made by
the property owner or his/her agent and shall be accompanied
by any materials or information deemed appropriate by the
Planning Board or Town Board or authorized official, including
but not limited to a scaled (one inches equals 50 feet or one
inch equals 100 feet) site plan prepared and certified by a
licensed engineer or land surveyor, which contains the
following minimum information:
[1] A location plan and boundary line survey of the property.
[2] The location of all Environmental Protection Overlay
District boundaries, designated Town open space, Town,
county or state parkland.
[3] The location of all existing and proposed buildings,
structures, utility lines, sewers, water and storm drains on
the property or within 200 feet of the proposed work site.
[4] The location of all existing and proposed impervious
surfaces such as driveways, sidewalks, etc., on the
property or within 200 feet of the proposed work site.
§ 250-6.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 250-6.1
1:453
[5] Existing and proposed contour levels at one-foot intervals
for the property, unless such property is located within a
steep slope protection district, whereby contour levels
may be shown at two-foot intervals.
[6] The location and types of all existing and proposed
vegetation and shrub masses, as well as all trees with a
diameter of six inches or more within and/or adjacent to
the property.
[7] The location of all existing and proposed drainage
patterns, drainageways, swales, etc., within and/or
adjacent to the property.
(b) Each application for an EPOD development permit shall be
accompanied by the appropriate fee(s) as determined by the
Town Board. The fee(s) shall be in addition to any other fees
required for the development under this chapter and/or the
Town Code.
(3) Permit review.
(a) For projects requiring site plan approval under Article XII of
this chapter, the authorized official shall refer a completed
permit application to the Town Planning Board or Town Board,
as the case may be, for a public hearing in accordance with
Article XII. The authorized official may refer all applications to
the appropriate boards and agencies for their review and
recommendations. Such boards or agencies shall have 30 days
from the date of their receipt of a completed application in
which to review such application and report their
recommendations to the appropriate board or authorized
official. Should such boards and agencies fail to report or make
a recommendation to the authorized official or the appropriate
board regarding applications within the thirty-day time period,
or request an extension, the authorized official or the
appropriate board may take action on the permit application
without such report.
(b) The authorized official or the Town Planning Board or Town
Board, as the case may be, shall have the authority to grant or
deny an EPOD development permit, subject to the standards,
criteria, other regulations contained in this chapter and
regulations contained in the State Environmental Quality
Review Act (SEQRA). The authorized official or the appropriate
board may also request a report from the Town Engineer in
acting on such permit applications.
(c) Any development permit issued by the authorized official or the
Town Planning Board or Town Board, as the case may be, in
accordance with the provisions of this article may be issued
with conditions. Such conditions may be attached as are
§ 250-6.1 PENFIELD CODE § 250-6.1
1:454
deemed necessary to ensure the preservation and protection of
environmentally sensitive areas and to ensure compliance with
the policies and provisions of this article. Every permit issued
pursuant to this article shall contain the following conditions:
[1] The authorized official, Town Engineer/consulting
engineer and/or other appropriate Town official shall have
the right to inspect the project from time to time.
[2] The permit shall expire on a particular date. The board
having jurisdiction will make the determination of the date
of expiration.
[3] The permit holder shall notify the authorized official or
other appropriate Town official of the date on which
project construction is to begin, at least five days in
advance of such date of construction.
(4) Requirement for letter of credit/certified check.
(a) Following approval of an application for an EPOD development
permit, and prior to the issuance of any building or other Town
permit, the applicant shall furnish the Town with an
irrevocable letter of credit or certified check in an amount to
be reviewed and approved in writing by the Town Engineer/
consulting engineer, and sufficient to cover the costs of
compliance, contingencies and inspection of the various
specifications and conditions of the development permit. The
purpose of the letter of credit or certified check shall be to
ensure that all items, activities or structures specified in the
plans approved by the authorized official or the Town Planning
Board are constructed or carried out in accordance with such
plans and specifications and other appropriate requirements of
the Town of Penfield.
(b) The irrevocable letter of credit or certified check shall continue
in full force and effect until such time as the authorized official
has certified that, based on a site inspection, all specifications,
requirements and permit conditions have been completed and/
or complied with, whereupon the letter of credit or certified
check shall be released to the applicant. The authorized
official, upon recommendation of the Town Engineer/
consulting engineer, or other appropriate department or
authorized official, may deduct or withhold an amount from the
letter of credit or certified check sufficient to cover the cost of
noncompliance with any requirements, specification, or permit
condition and/or release the Town from any liability resulting
from such noncompliance.
(5) Suspension or revocation of permits. The authorized official may
suspend a permit (temporarily) until such time as the board having
jurisdiction reviews the suspension. The Town Board may, upon
§ 250-6.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 250-6.1
1:455
recommendation of the authorized official, and after having
provided the permittee five days' written notice, suspend or revoke
a development permit issued in accordance with the provisions of
this section where it has found evidence that the applicant has
not complied with any/all terms or conditions of such permit, has
exceeded the authority granted in the permit, or has failed to
undertake the project in the manner set forth in writing with its
findings and reasons for revoking or suspending a permit issued
pursuant to the section. The authorized official shall forward a copy
of said findings to the applicant. Permitted work shall immediately
cease upon suspension of a permit.
F. EPOD (1): Wetland Protection Overlay District.
(1) Purpose. The purpose of the Wetland Protection Overlay District
regulations is to preserve, conserve and protect freshwater
wetlands located within the Town of Penfield, pursuant to the New
York State Environmental Conservation Law, or federal wetlands
designated by the Army Corps of Engineers (ACOE), as well as any
local laws regulating wetlands. Through this statement of purpose,
it is declared to be the public policy of the Town of Penfield that
these areas be protected as invaluable natural resources that
provide for flood protection, wildlife habitats, recreational and
open space, erosion and pollution control, and protection and
recharging of groundwater supplies. The regulations contained in
this district seek to prevent the despoliation and destruction of
freshwater wetlands by controlling development in these areas,
and by requiring review and permit approval prior to project
commencement.
(2) Delineation of district boundaries. The boundaries of the Wetland
Protection Overlay District shall be delineated on the Official Town
of Penfield EPOD Maps and shall include all wetland areas
designated as Type I, Type II, Type III and Type IV by the New York
State Department of Environmental Conservation (NYSDEC) and
ACOE, as well as any locally regulated wetlands. The provisions of
this subsection shall be applicable to all wetland areas within the
Town of Penfield shown on the official Town maps. Upon application
for a development permit within a Wetland Overlay Protection
District, the authorized official shall refer such application and site
plan to the State Department of Environmental Conservation
(NYSDEC) in order to determine the precise boundary of the
wetland area. The boundary of a Wetland Protection Overlay
District shall include a buffer zone that extends out from the edge
of the wetland area for a distance of 100 feet, or 300 feet, as
determined by the NYSDEC, or local determination of wetland
buffer not under NYSDEC and/or U.S. Army Corps of Engineers
jurisdiction.
(3) Regulated activities. No regulations contained within this article
are intended to supersede the provisions of Title 6, Part 665, of the
§ 250-6.1 PENFIELD CODE § 250-6.1
1:456
New York State Codes, Rules and Regulations (NYCRR), Local
Government Implementation of the Freshwater Wetlands Act and
Statewide Minimum Land Use Regulations for Freshwater
Wetlands, but are intended to supplement said provisions as an
additional level of local review. No person shall conduct any of
the following regulated activities within any Wetland Protection
Overlay District in the Town of Penfield unless such person has first
applied for and obtained an EPOD development permit pursuant to
the requirements of this section:
(a) Any form of draining, dredging, excavation or removal of any
natural or previously deposited materials directly or indirectly
from a wetland.
(b) Any form of dumping, filling or depositing any material either
directly or indirectly within a wetland.
(c) The erection or placement of any structures, roads or any manmade
materials within the wetland.
(d) Any form of pollution, including but not limited to installing a
septic tank, running a sewer outfall, discharging sewage
treatment effluent or other liquid wastes into a wetland.
(e) Any activity which impairs the natural function of wetlands,
whether the impairing activity is located within the wetland or
not.
(f) Any activity regulated by Environmental Conservation Law
§ 24-0701.
(4) Development standards and permit conditions. In granting,
denying or conditioning any application for an EPOD development
permit, the authorized official or the appropriate board shall
consider the effect that the proposed regulated activity will have on
the public health, safety and welfare, and the protection or
enhancement of the several functions and benefits of freshwater
wetland areas as stated in Subsection F(1) of this section.
Furthermore, no permit shall be granted for a regulated activity
within a Wetland Protection Overlay District unless the applicant
can adequately demonstrate that the activity will in no way at
present or at any time in the future:
(a) Alter groundwater reservoir capacities.
(b) Decrease watercourse flood-carrying capacities.
(c) Deteriorate water or air quality.
(d) Alter water retention capabilities.
(e) Increase downstream siltation.
§ 250-6.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 250-6.1
1:457
(f) Alter the natural wildlife balance.
(g) Impair any natural function of the wetland.
G. EPOD (2): Steep Slope Protection Overlay District.
(1) Purpose. The purpose of the Steep Slope Protection Overlay
District is to minimize the impacts of development activities on
steep slopes in the Town of Penfield by regulating activities in these
areas, and by requiring review and permit approval prior to project
commencement. The development impacts include soil erosion and
sedimentation, destruction of vegetation, increased runoff rates
and slope failure. The regulations contained in this district are
designed to minimize the disturbance or removal of existing
vegetation, prevent increased erosion and runoff, maintain
established drainage systems, locate development where it is less
likely to cause future slope failures and to retain, as much as
possible, the natural character of these areas.
(2) Delineation of district boundaries. The boundaries of the Steep
Slope Protection Overlay District shall be delineated on the Official
Town of Penfield EPOD Maps and shall include all areas in the Town
of Penfield within 50 feet of the top and toe of a fifteen-percent
slope or greater. The authorized official and Town Engineer/
consulting engineer may consult other information including, but
not limited to, soil survey reports prepared by the Natural
Resources Conservation Service, topographic maps produced by
the United States Geological Survey, field surveys and other
appropriate sources in order to more accurately locate and
delineate Steep Slope Protection Overlay District boundaries
within the Town.
(3) Regulated activities. No person shall conduct any of the following
regulated activities within any Steep Slope Protection Overlay
District in the Town of Penfield, unless such person has first applied
for and obtained an EPOD development permit pursuant to the
requirements of this section:
(a) Clearing of or construction on any land area within the district,
including construction or clearing activities related to
providing equipment access on the site, except for those
activities exempted from the permit requirements of this
section as indicated in Subsection E of this section.
(b) The construction or placement of any sewage disposal system,
including individual sewage disposal systems, septic tanks,
septic drainage or leach fields.
(c) Filling, cutting, or excavating operations.
(d) Discharge of stormwater and/or construction and placement of
stormwater runoff systems.
§ 250-6.1 PENFIELD CODE § 250-6.1
1:458
(4) Development standards permit conditions.
(a) In granting, denying or conditioning any application for an
EPOD development permit, the authorized official or the Town
Planning Board or Town Board, as the case may be, shall
consider the effect that the proposed regulated activity will
have on the public health, safety and welfare and the
protection or enhancement of the fragile and environmentally
sensitive steep slope areas within the Town.
(b) No permit to undertake a regulated activity within a Steep
Slope Protection Overlay District in the Town of Penfield shall
be issued by the authorized official or the appropriate board
unless the applicant can adequately demonstrate that:
[1] The stable angle of repose of the soil classes found on the
site has been used to determine the proper placement of
structures and other development-related facilities within
the plateau area. Site-specific calculations of the stable
angle of repose for the site must be submitted and shall be
determined by a professional soil scientist or engineer
using the soil classes and nomenclature contained in the
Monroe County soil surveys, and obtained for the site by
borings as well as high-intensity soil survey data provided
by the applicant.
[2] The stability of soils will be maintained or increased to
adequately support any construction thereon, or to
support any landscaping, agricultural, or similar activities.
This shall be documented by soil-bearing data provided by
a qualified testing laboratory or engineer and paid for by
the developer (or applicant).
[3] No proposed activity will cause erosion or slipping of soil,
or cause sediment to be discharged into Irondequoit Bay,
its wetlands or tributaries, or any stream or tributary.
[4] Plant life located on the slopes outside of the minimum
area that needs to be disturbed for carrying on approved
activities shall not be destroyed. Plants or other
acceptable ground cover shall be reestablished in
disturbed areas immediately upon completion of
development activity so as to prevent any of the harmful
effects set forth above to maintain the natural scenic
characteristics of any steep slope.
[5] Access down steep slopes shall be provided with ramp
slopes no greater than 1:16 and side slopes no greater
than 1:3 if not terraced or otherwise structurally
stabilized. Disturbed non-roadway areas shall be stabilized
and adequately drained.
§ 250-6.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 250-6.1
1:459
[6] Construction of erosion protection structures, particularly
along the water side of eroding bluffs, shall provide
protection of bluff features according to the following
standards:
[a] All erosion protection structures shall be designed and
constructed according to generally accepted
engineering principles found in publications of the
U.S. Natural Resources Conservation Service, as
amended.
[b] The construction, modification or restoration of
erosion protection structures shall not be likely to
cause any measurable increase in erosion at the
development site or other locations, and prevent
adverse effects to natural protective features, existing
erosion protection structures, and natural resources
such as significant fish and wildlife habitats.
[7] Drainage of stormwater shall not cause erosion or
siltation, contribute to slope failures, pollute groundwater,
or cause damage to or flooding of property. Drainage
systems shall be designed and located to ensure slope
stability.
[8] Any grading, excavating or other soil disturbance
conducted on a steep slope shall not direct surface water
runoff over the receding edge during construction.
[9] There is no reasonable alternative for the proposed
regulated activity on that portion of the site not containing
steep slopes.
(c) The applicant for a permit shall have the burden of
demonstrating that the proposed regulated activity will be
conducted in accordance with the standards and requirements
set forth above, which may be imposed by the authorized
official or board having jurisdiction.
H. EPOD (3): Woodland Protection Overlay District.
(1) Purpose. The purpose of the Woodland Protection Overlay District
and Tree Preservation Zone Regulations is to preserve and protect
woodland and measurable stands of trees within the Town of
Penfield by regulating or controlling development in those areas,
and by requiring review and conditional permit approval prior to
project commencement.
(2) Delineation of district boundaries. The boundaries of the Woodland
Protection Overlay District shall be delineated on the Official Town
of Penfield EPOD Maps, and shall include all areas in the Town of
Penfield of five or more contiguous acres of woodland. Areas that
§ 250-6.1 PENFIELD CODE § 250-6.1
1:460
involve active orchards shall not be included in the Woodland
Protection Overlay District. Wooded areas smaller than five
contiguous acres may be included in the Woodland Protection
Overlay District if said areas are recommended by the Penfield
Conservation Board, are officially adopted and appear on the
Official EPOD Map.
(3) Regulated activities. No person shall conduct any of the following
regulated activities within any Woodland Protection Overlay
District or Tree Preservation Zone in the Town of Penfield unless
such person has first applied for and obtained an EPOD
development permit pursuant to the requirements of this section:
(a) Clearing of or construction on any land area, except for those
activities exempted from the permit requirements of this
article as indicated in Subsection E of this section.
(b) Woodland management: thinning or harvesting of trees within
the area for commercial purposes.
(4) Development standards and permit conditions.
(a) In granting, denying or conditioning any application for an
EPOD development permit, the authorized official or the Town
Planning Board or Town Board, as the case may be, shall
consider the effect that the proposed regulated activity will
have on the public safety and welfare, and the protection and
enhancement of the woodland and Tree Preservation Zone.
(b) Any application for a permit to undertake a regulated activity
within a Woodland Protection Overlay District or Tree
Preservation Zone in the Town of Penfield shall be required to
adequately demonstrate to the authorized official or the board
having jurisdiction that the proposed activity will in no way at
present, or at any time in the future, adversely affect the
following:
[1] Soil stability.
[2] Velocity or rate of surface water runoff.
[3] Existing drainage systems.
[4] Natural characteristics of a watercourse.
[5] Significant wildlife habitats, including wildlife corridors.
[6] Steep slope areas.
[7] Recreational opportunities, including hiking trails.
[8] Noise levels and visual impacts on adjacent areas.
[9] Water quality.
§ 250-6.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 250-6.1
1:461
(5) Specific standards for EPOD permit application.
(a) Site development or grading.
[1] In planning site development plans, the applicant shall
preserve as much of the original site vegetation, including
understory, brush and shrubs, as possible. The use of Town
Law § 278 should be considered when dealing with sites
where stands of mature trees are present.
[2] The Environmental Protection Overlay District review
process shall include the following:
[a] The applicant shall provide a 1:50 scale tree
preservation plan which shows the following:
[i] Woodland Protection Overlay District and Tree
Preservation Zone boundaries as determined on
the project site. The authorized official or
Planning Board may require a specific tree
inventory on all or part of a proposed project site.
[ii] Limits of proposed clearing for rights-of-way,
utility easements, building sites, access roads and
drainage areas.
[iii] Proposed grade changes in or around treed areas.
[iv] Method of providing positive drainage in any
proposed tree wells or areas where drainage
patterns will be modified.
[b] The applicant shall then schedule a site walk with the
Conservation Board, the Planning Board and/or the
Town's landscape consultant, along with the
applicant's site engineer for the purpose of
determining areas where tree preservation methods
are to be intensified or where stands of trees will be
left untouched.
[c] Once this has been done, the applicant's site engineer
shall then calculate to the satisfaction of the
Conservation Board and Planning Board or Town
Board, as the case may be, that no more than 10% of
the original Woodland Protection Overlay District or
Tree Preservation Zone that exists on the property will
be disturbed. Grade changes of +/- 12 inches will
constitute disturbance.
[d] If the applicant's site engineer finds it impossible to
retain at least 90% of the original Woodland
Protection Overlay District or Tree Preservation Zone
that exists on the property, the applicant shall
§ 250-6.1 PENFIELD CODE § 250-6.1
1:462
adequately demonstrate mitigation of the same
through reforesting as follows: All woodland areas in
excess of the 10% allowed above will be subject to a
reforesting effort, preferably on the subject property.
This effort shall include an inventory of trees to be
removed, including species and diameter at breast
height (dbh). Street tree requirements shall not be
considered in the mitigation of woodland EPOD
disturbance. All trees in excess of eight inches' dbh
shall be replaced as follows:
[i] Eight inches to 18 inches dbh: planting of two
trees (minimum two-inch caliper) per every tree
removed in excess of 10% of the woodland EPOD
on the property.
[ii] Eighteen inches and over: planting of three trees
(minimum two-inch caliper) per every tree
removed in excess of 10% of the woodland EPOD
on the property.
[e] Following approval and prior to commencement of
earth-moving operations, the developer and site
contractor shall demonstrate compliance with the
approved limits of disturbance by delineation with
snow fencing or similar enclosure or other acceptable
means of delineation of these boundaries. Limits of
disturbance shall embrace all tree canopy areas and
extended root systems to be protected.
[f] Once all earth-moving, utility and road construction
has been done, the developer shall have the scheduled
trees installed in locations acceptable to both the
authorized official and developer.
(b) Tree harvesting.
[1] Any activity within a Woodland Protection Overlay District
or Tree Preservation Zone involving the thinning of trees
or harvesting of timber for commercial use shall be subject
to an EPOD permit. Applications for this type of activity
shall be submitted by the applicant to the New York State
Department of Environmental Conservation and Monroe
County Soil and Water Conservation Service for review
and advisory opinions.
[2] Applicants for such activity must submit a management
plan prepared by a qualified consulting forester or a forest
management recommendation prepared by a NYSDEC
forester, which includes the following information:
§ 250-6.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 250-6.1
1:463
[a] A site plan showing limits of the proposed work and
existing size of the woodland.
[b] The species and sizes of trees present and the basal
area of the site before and after the proposed
management activity.
[c] The system of harvesting and access roads.
[d] Definite time frame for the activity.
[e] Proposed erosion and sedimentation control
measures, including revegetation and timing,
designed in accordance with Woodlots of the
Northeast, Erosion and Sediment Control Guidelines,
prepared by the U.S. Department of Agriculture, 1977.
[f] The posting of a letter of credit or certified check
sufficient to pay for completion of remedial measures
upon failure of the applicant to meet the specifications
of the plan, in an amount necessary to complete the
anticipated work.
[g] The recording of timber sale contracts with the Town
Clerk of the Town of Penfield.
[3] The following specific practices shall be used to minimize
soil erosion and sedimentation during tree harvesting
activities:
[a] Stream/Swale crossings shall be kept to a minimum.
[b] Stream banks shall be protected by controlling
skidding and felling close to the stream.
[c] All roads and skid trails shall be reviewed for
appropriate location, design and construction.
[d] Landing locations that avoid erosion problems and
minimize impact to understory shall be selected.
[e] Applications for woodland management shall comply
with all applicable New York State and local fire laws.
[f] Whenever possible, landings shall be kept out of sight.
Landings and access roads shall be restored after use.
(c) Tree preservation. Tree caliper shall be measured six inches
above the ground on trees up to and including four inches in
caliper (diameter) and 12 inches above the ground in larger
trees. At the time of sketch plan review with the Planning
Board, Town Board or authorized official, the Conservation
Board may enter the property for the purposes of reviewing the
size, species and desirability of trees that exist on the property.
§ 250-6.1 PENFIELD CODE § 250-6.1
1:464
The Conservation Board may recommend, prior to preliminary
application, the preservation of any or all of the Woodland
EPOD, identification of specific specimens important to the
site and, if disturbance is still proposed, specific mitigation
to replace trees to be removed. Following receipt of the
Conservation Board recommendations, the Planning Board,
Town Board or authorized official may incorporate one or more
of the following:
[1] The subdivider is required to permanently tag or affix
identification on or provide a mapped inventory of each
tree on the site having a caliper of eight inches or more
prior to the submission of an application for preliminary
subdivision or site plan approval.
[2] The subdivider or developer shall lay out the subdivision in
such a manner as to minimize the number of trees eight
inches or more in caliper to be removed to accommodate
development.
[3] The subdivider or developer may be required to preserve
trees having a caliper of less than eight inches if the
Planning Board or Town Board, as the case may be, finds
that such trees have significant aesthetic value due to
species or location or that their removal would excessively
alter drainage, visual impacts or affect the stability of
slopes.
[4] The subdivider or developer shall install protective
barriers around each tree or group of trees and adjacent
understory not specifically authorized for removal prior to
the start of any construction or may, with the approval of
the Board, erect protective barriers around sections in
which several trees are located. The barriers shall remain
in place and be kept in good repair until all construction
has been completed and removal of the barriers has been
authorized by the Town Engineer. Tree preservation
measures should be covered in an appropriate section of a
letter of credit.
[5] Trees which have been designated for preservation,
including supplemental trees, shall be deemed to be
required site improvements, and their preservation and
replacement, as necessary, including the replacement of
trees damaged during construction, shall remain the
responsibility of the subdivider or developer for a period of
one year after the completion of the development. That
portion of the performance bond calculated to be the cost
of replacing trees to be preserved or supplemental trees
which may be damaged during construction shall be
retained by the Town for at least one year after all
§ 250-6.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 250-6.1
1:465
improvements in the subdivision have been completed.
Prior to release of the bond, the trees shall be inspected to
ensure that they have not been damaged, and that future
growth will be characteristic of the species.
[6] The requirements for tree preservation shall not apply to
lots for existing houses in a new subdivision, provided that
such lots and houses will not be altered to accommodate
development of the subdivision. However, this provision
shall not relieve the subdivider or developer of the
responsibility of including in the tree preservation plan for
the subdivision any tree eight inches or more in caliper
located within 50 feet of a new lot or required subdivision
or development improvement. When lots for existing
houses have been excluded from the tree preservation
plan, the landscape architect shall set forth on the plan
which lots have been excluded, and shall certify that the
plan does include all trees eight inches or more in caliper
located within 50 feet of a new lot or other subdivision
improvement, and that surrounding development will not
substantially alter the environment of the trees on such
lot.
[7] In cases where the number of trees required to satisfy the
penalty cannot be accommodated on the site of the
violation, the penalty shall include planting of trees on
available public spaces and/or payment of $800 per tree to
the Town Tree Fund.
I. EPOD (4): Floodplain Protection Overlay District.
(1) Purpose.
(a) It is hereby found and declared that the unmanaged use of
property, the alteration of topography, and excessive filling,
channel encroachment or other acts affect the natural
discharge of water through floodplains and constitute a threat
to the health, safety and general welfare of the inhabitants of
the Town of Penfield and to the economic vitality of the
community. The purpose of this subsection is to regulate
development within the areas of the Town which are subject to
flooding in order to protect the health, safety and welfare of
the inhabitants of the Town of Penfield from hazards due to
periodic flooding; to prevent loss of property and potential loss
of life in the flood-prone areas; to preserve the water quality; to
minimize expenditures for relief, insurance and flood control
projects; and to limit building and development within the
areas of special flood hazard. The FIRM maps provided by
FEMA dated August 28, 2008, shall be considered the basis for
determining the Town of Penfield Floodplain Protection
§ 250-6.1 PENFIELD CODE § 250-6.1
1:466
Overlay District. Refer to Chapter 120, Flood Damage
Prevention, of the Town Code for regulations.
(b) The boundaries of the Floodplain Protection Overlay District
shall be delineated on the Official Town of Penfield EPOD
Maps, with latest revisions, and shall include all areas of
special flood hazard as defined by Chapter 120, § 120-4, of the
Code of Penfield and as further identified by the Federal
Insurance Administration in a report entitled "Flood Insurance
Study, Monroe County, New York" dated August 28, 2008, with
accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Map and Flood Hazard
Boundary Map. Such maps, and amendments and revisions
thereto, are incorporated by reference herewith and declared
to be a part of this subsection.
J. EPOD (5): Watercourse Protection Overlay District.
(1) Purpose. The purpose of the Watercourse Protection Overlay
District regulations is to preserve and protect watercourses located
within the Town of Penfield by regulating or controlling
development in those areas and by requiring review and permit
approval prior to commencement of any activity.
(2) Delineation of district boundaries. The boundaries of the
Watercourse Protection Overlay District shall be delineated on the
Official Town of Penfield EPOD Maps and shall include all areas in
the Town of Penfield as follows: ALL those areas within 75 feet of
the center line of a natural or man-made watercourse.
(3) Regulated activities. No person shall conduct any of the following
regulated activities within any Watercourse Protection Overlay
District in the Town of Penfield unless such person has first applied
for and obtained an EPOD development permit pursuant to the
requirements of this section:
(a) Clearing or filling, dredging, excavating, depositing of natural
or man-made materials or constructing on any land area which
lies within the Watercourse Protection Overlay District
boundaries, except that the following activities shall be exempt
from the clearing regulations of this subsection:
[1] Customary agricultural operations.
[2] Watercourse maintenance activities.
(b) The construction or placement of any septic tank or septic
drainage field.
(c) Any activity which would alter the natural flow pattern of the
watercourse.
(4) Development standards and permit conditions.
§ 250-6.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 250-6.1
1:467
§ 250-6.2. Historic Preservation Overlay District (HPOD).
(a) In granting, denying or conditioning any application for an
EPOD development permit, the authorized official or the
appropriate board shall consider the effect that the proposed
regulated activity will have on the public health, safety and
welfare and the protection and enhancement of watercourses
within the Town.
(b) Any applicant for a permit to undertake a regulated activity
within a Watercourse Protection Overlay District in the Town of
Penfield shall be required to adequately demonstrate to the
authorized official or the appropriate board that the proposed
activity will in no way at present, or at any time in the future,
adversely affect the following:
[1] Water quality.
[2] Watercourse flood-carrying capacities.
[3] Rate of sedimentation.
[4] Rate/Velocity of groundwater runoff.
[5] Natural characteristics of the watercourse.
(c) When altering the natural flow pattern of a natural or manmade
watercourse, the applicant shall prove that the
alteration:
[1] Is necessary; and
[2] Will not impair the natural functions of the watercourse.
(d) The applicant for a permit shall have the burden of
demonstrating that the proposed regulated activity will be
conducted in accordance with the standards and requirements
listed above.
A. Authorization. In accordance with General Municipal Law § 96-a,
entitled "Protection of historical places, buildings and works of art," the
Town Board of the Town of Penfield has authority to provide by
regulations, special conditions and restrictions for the protection,
enhancement, perpetuation and use of places, districts, sites, buildings,
structures, works of art and other objects having special character or
special historical or other aesthetic interest or value. Pursuant to that
authority, the Town Board has prepared and adopted this section,
setting forth standards to be followed in historic preservation. The
Penfield Historic Preservation Board, established as set forth in
Chapter 11, Article VIII, of the Town Code, is authorized to designate
Penfield landmarks upon consent of the owner or, upon the Board's
initiative, recommend to the Town Board that a site be designated a
landmark. It may also recommend to the Town Board that certain areas
§ 250-6.1 PENFIELD CODE § 250-6.2
1:468
of the Town be designated as Historic Preservation Overlay Districts,
and is authorized to grant certificates of appropriateness for proposed
changes to Penfield landmarks and properties within Historic
Preservation Overlay Districts, and for proposed new construction in
Historic Preservation Overlay Districts and on landmark sites.
B. Purpose.
(1) The purpose of these historic preservation regulations is to:
(a) Preserve the historical and architectural character of certain
sites, structures or districts [hereinafter collectively referred
to as "property(ies)"] within the Town of Penfield.
(b) Prevent impairment of or injury to the historical, architectural
and cultural value to the community of the property(ies).
(c) Provide that a reasonable degree of control may be exercised
over alterations to such property(ies) and over the alteration,
architectural design and construction of structures erected or
to be erected on any such sites or in such districts.
(d) Foster civic pride in the accomplishments of the past.
(e) Protect and enhance Penfield's attractiveness to visitors.
(f) Support and stimulate the economic activities provided by
tourism.
(g) Stabilize and improve property values.
(h) Ensure the harmonious, orderly, and efficient growth and
development of the Town.
(2) Historic preservation (HP) regulations are not intended to be
substituted for other zoning regulations, but are to be
superimposed on the primary zoning regulations and represent an
additional level of review and regulation related specifically to the
preservation of Penfield landmarks, landmark sites and all
properties within an Historic Preservation Overlay District.
C. Criteria and procedures for designation of landmarks.
(1) The Historic Preservation Board may, with the consent of the
property owner, after a public hearing, designate an individual
property as a landmark if it possesses special character or historic
or aesthetic interest or value as part of the cultural, political,
economic, or social history of the locality, Town, state or nation, or
if it is identified with historic persons or events, or if it embodies
the distinguishing characteristics of an architectural style, or is the
work of a designer whose work has significantly influenced an age,
or, because of unique location or physical characteristics,
represents an established and familiar visual feature of the
§ 250-6.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 250-6.2
1:469
neighborhood. In making its determination, the Board may also
consider staff reports, public comments and other evidence
obtained outside of the public hearing in addition to all evidence
presented at the public hearing.
(2) The Town Board, without the consent of the property owner, after
public hearing, and after considering any recommendation from
the Historic Preservation Board, may designate an individual
property as a landmark in accordance with the same criteria in
Subsection C(1). In making its determination, the Board may also
consider staff reports, public comments and other evidence
obtained outside of the public hearing in addition to all evidence
presented at the public hearing.
D. Criteria and procedures for designation of Historic Preservation
Overlay Districts.
(1) The Town Board may designate a group of properties as an Historic
Preservation Overlay District if, after a public hearing, it
determines that it contains properties which meet one or more of
the above criteria for designation as a landmark and, by reason of
possessing such qualities, constitutes a distinct section of the
Town.
(2) Determining whether certain properties should be designated as an
Historic Preservation Overlay District shall be made using the same
criteria and review as for landmark designation and, in addition,
considering the collective merits of all structures within a district's
boundaries and their interrelationship. Before making a
determination, the Town Board must consider any recommendation
from the Historic Preservation Board regarding such designation.
In making its determination, the Board may also consider staff
reports, public comments and other evidence obtained outside of
the public hearing in addition to all evidence presented at the
public hearing. Once the Town Board has issued notice of a public
hearing of a proposed designation, no building permits shall be
issued until the designation decision has been made.
(3) The Town of Penfield shall forward notice of each property
designated as a landmark to the owner(s). The boundaries of each
designated landmark or Historic Preservation Overlay District shall
be recorded in the Monroe County Clerk's office by the Town of
Penfield. Notice shall also be kept in the Town Clerk's office for
public inspection.
E. Regulations.
(1) Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prevent the ordinary
maintenance and repair of any exterior architectural feature of a
landmark or property within an Historic Preservation Overlay
District that does not involve a change in design, material or
outward appearance. No person shall carry out any exterior
§ 250-6.2 PENFIELD CODE § 250-6.2
1:470
alteration, restoration, reconstruction, demolition, new
construction, or moving of a landmark or property within an
Historic Preservation Overlay District, nor shall any person make
any material change in the appearance of such property, its
windows and shutters, exterior light fixtures, signs, sidewalks,
fences, steps, paving, changes in grade, or other exterior elements
which affect the appearance and cohesiveness of the landmark
or Historic Preservation Overlay District, without first obtaining
a certificate of appropriateness from the Historic Preservation
Board.
(2) Prior to the commencement of any work requiring a certificate of
appropriateness, the owner shall file an application with the
Historic Preservation Board. The application shall contain the
name, address and telephone number of the applicant,
photographs of the property, scale plan views and elevation
drawings of proposed changes, including relationship to adjacent
properties, samples of color or materials to be used, and any other
information which the Board may need in order to visualize the
proposed work.
(3) No building permit shall be issued for the proposed work until a
certificate of appropriateness has first been issued. The Board shall
approve, approve with conditions or deny the application within 60
days from receipt of the completed application. All decisions of the
Board shall be in writing and shall state the reasons for its
determination. A copy shall be sent to the applicant and a copy
shall be filed with the Town Clerk's office for public inspection.
Certificates of appropriateness shall be valid for 12 months, after
which time the owner must reapply unless the subject matter of the
certificate of appropriateness has been completed within said 12
months.
(4) After a certificate of appropriateness is granted by the Historic
Preservation Board, the Town Clerk shall issue said certificate of
appropriateness to the applicant(s) pursuant to this subsection.
F. Criteria for issuance of certificate of appropriateness.
(1) In making a decision on a certificate of appropriateness, the
Historic Preservation Board shall not consider changes to interior
spaces unless evidence of such changes appears on the exterior.
The Board's decision shall be based on the following elements:
(a) Any alteration of existing properties shall be compatible with
their historic character, as well as with the surrounding
properties.
(b) Properties which contribute to the character of the Historic
Preservation Overlay District shall be retained with their
historic features altered as little as possible.
§ 250-6.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 250-6.2
1:471
(c) New construction shall be compatible with other properties in
the district in which it is located.
(d) Consideration shall be given to approved municipal plans
affecting the property(ies).
(2) In applying the principle of compatibility, the Historic Preservation
Board shall consider the following factors:
(a) The general design, character and appropriateness to the
property of the proposed alteration or new construction.
(b) The scale and size of the proposed alteration or new
construction in relation to the property itself, surrounding
properties, and the neighborhood.
(c) The texture, materials, and color and their relation to similar
features of other properties in the neighborhood.
(d) The visual compatibility with surrounding properties, including
the proportion of the property's front facade, proportion and
arrangement of shutters, windows and other openings within
the facade, roof shape, and the rhythm of the spacing of other
properties on the streets, including setbacks.
(e) The importance of historic, architectural, or other features to
the significance of the property.
G. Controls on Penfield landmarks and structures within historic districts.
(1) Any owner of a Penfield landmark who desires to repair the exterior
of an existing building or structure has the right to repair with the
identical materials, finishes, and paint colors as were in place at
the time of designation and may do so without a certificate of
appropriateness. The Historic Preservation Board shall have no
control over interior changes in any building or structure as long as
no evidence of such changes appears on the exterior.
(2) Any owners desiring to make alterations to a structure shall design
such alterations only in a manner compatible with the exterior style
of the structure, the design, scale, detail, trim, manner and
materials of construction.
(3) Any owners who desire to demolish a structure shall obtain a
certificate of appropriateness from the Historic Preservation
Board. After granting of such a certificate, a period of 120 days
must elapse before a demolition permit can be issued. During this
period, the Historic Preservation Board may require an appraisal to
determine the fair market value of the property proposed to be
demolished if in its view such appraisal is necessary to grant or
deny a certificate of appropriateness. In addition, anyone who
desires to save the structure by suitable means may also have this
§ 250-6.2 PENFIELD CODE § 250-6.2
1:472
time to determine a fair price by appraisal and to locate a
purchaser who will agree not to raze the structure.
(4) New structures in Historic Preservation Overlay Districts and on
landmark sites shall harmonize with the general character of the
structures in the district or with the landmark. However, new
structures shall not be required to comply with any particular style
or architectural period unless required by an approved Town plan.
H. Hardship criteria and procedures for relief.
(1) An applicant whose application for a certificate of appropriateness
has been denied may apply to the Historic Preservation Board for
relief on the ground of hardship. In order to prove the existence of
hardship, the applicant shall establish that:
(a) The property is incapable of earning a reasonable economic
return, regardless of whether that return represents the most
profitable return possible.
(b) The property cannot be adapted for any other use, whether by
the current owner or by a purchaser, which would result in a
reasonable economic return.
(c) Diligent, good-faith efforts to find a purchaser interested in
acquiring the property and preserving it have failed.
(d) In the case of religious/not-for-profit organizations, the
preservation of a structure interferes with the owners'
religious or charitable purposes.
(2) The Historic Preservation Board shall hold a public hearing on the
hardship application. The applicant shall consult in good faith with
the Historic Preservation Board, local preservation groups and
interested parties in a diligent effort to seek an alternative that will
result in preservation of the property. All hardship decisions of the
Board shall be issued in writing.
I. Permits allowing commercial uses.
(1) The Town Board may, in any district of the Town, grant a permit
allowing a commercial use or uses in a Penfield landmark, provided
that:
(a) The Planning Board, after site plan review, has made a
recommendation to the Town Board on the matter, following a
public hearing.
(b) The Historic Preservation Board has made a recommendation
to the Town Board.
(c) The Town Board, after a public hearing, finds that:
[1] The proposed use is not detrimental to adjacent property.
§ 250-6.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 250-6.2
1:473
[2] The proposed use does not interfere with the lawful
enjoyment of adjacent property.
[3] The proposed use does not diminish the historical
character of the structure,
(d) In granting the permit, the Town Board may impose reasonable
conditions.
(2) The Town Board shall record the permit in the miscellaneous
records of the County Clerk's office, and the applicant shall pay the
appropriate recording fee.
(3) A permit granted pursuant to this section shall be issued by the
Town Clerk upon payment of a fee as required by resolution by the
Town Board.
(4) Cessation or termination of the use for a period of one year or more
shall render the permit null and void.
J. Administration.
(1) Boundaries of all Historic Preservation Overlay Districts, and the
location of Penfield landmarks shall be noted on an overlay to the
Official Zoning Map.
(2) An inventory of Penfield landmarks and overlay districts shall be
maintained by the Town Clerk.
(3) Any person aggrieved by a determination of the Historic
Preservation Board in designating a property as a Penfield
landmark or in denying an application for a certificate of
appropriateness, including those based on hardship, may take an
appeal therefrom to the Zoning Board of Appeals.
(4) All work performed pursuant to a certificate of appropriateness
shall conform to any requirements included therein in addition to
all other requirements of the law. The Building Code Enforcement
Officer shall inspect such work to assure compliance. If work does
not conform to the certificate of appropriateness, and all other
requirements of the law, the Building Code Enforcement Officer
shall issue a stop-work order and all work shall immediately cease.
(5) Failure to comply with any of the provisions of this section shall be
deemed a violation. The penalties for such violation are set forth in
§ 250-15.9 of this chapter.
(6) Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prevent the ordinary
maintenance and repair of any exterior architectural feature of a
landmark or property within an Historic Preservation Overlay
District which does not involve a change in design, material or
outward appearance.
§ 250-6.2 PENFIELD CODE § 250-6.2
1:474
§ 250-6.3. Routes 441/250 Overlay District (TFOD).
(7) No owner or person with an interest in real property designated as
a landmark or included within an Historic Preservation Overlay
District shall permit the property to fall into a serious state of
disrepair so as to result in the deterioration of any exterior
architectural feature which would produce a detrimental effect
upon the character of the designated landmark or the Historic
Preservation Overlay District as a whole or the life and character of
the property itself. Examples of such deterioration include:
(a) Deterioration of exterior walls or other vertical supports.
(b) Deterioration of roofs or other horizontal members.
(c) Deterioration of exterior chimneys.
(d) Deterioration or crumbling of exterior stucco or mortar.
(e) Ineffective waterproofing of exterior walls, roofs or
foundations, including broken windows or doors.
(f) Deterioration of any feature so as to create a hazardous
condition, which could lead to the claim that demolition is
necessary for the public safety.
(8) Any person who demolishes, alters, constructs or permits a
designated property or a property proposed for designation to fall
into a serious state of disrepair in violation of this section shall be
required to restore the property and its site to its appearance prior
to the violation. Any action to enforce this subsection shall be
brought by the Town Attorney upon authorization by the Town
Board. This civil remedy shall be in addition to and not in lieu of any
criminal prosecution and penalty. Pursuant to § 250-7.11, Exterior
property maintenance, of this chapter and Chapter 97, Unsafe
Buildings, of the Penfield Town Code, the Town is authorized to
repair properties that have been allowed to fall into a state of
disrepair and recover the cost of said repairs from the property
owner(s).
A. Purpose. The purpose of the Routes 441/250 Overlay District (TFOD) is
to recognize the unique nature of this area of the Town, which is the
only area in the Town located at the intersection of two heavily traveled
New York State arterials. It is impacted by rapid growth in adjacent
communities both to the south and east of this area. This area is not
currently served by any interstate highway, as are other commercial
zoning districts in the Town. The primary intent in creating the 441/250
Overlay District is to preserve the character of those residential
properties surrounding commercial uses; enhance accessibility and
convenience to commercial uses; lessen traffic congestion; and promote
greater pedestrian and vehicular safety in the area. These objectives
will be accomplished through coordinated access management and
§ 250-6.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 250-6.3
1:475
ensuring that commercial development remains localized in nature and
is scaled to primarily service and support the needs of the residential
areas surrounding it. This overlay district is further designed to safely
manage those existing commercial developments, as well as the
significant number of undeveloped commercial properties, through
improved traffic flow and more efficient use of available lands with
shared access and parking areas, compatible with and not detrimental
to surrounding residential properties.
B. Overlay regulations.
(1) The TF Overlay District shall be overlaid upon the 441/250 area as
delineated on the Town of Penfield Official Zoning Map.
(2) The TF Overlay District regulations are superimposed upon the
primary underlying zoning districts and provide additional
regulations and design standards to achieve the development
purposes of this area of the Town. All provisions of this chapter
applicable to the underlying zoning district shall remain effective in
the overlay district, except as hereinafter provided. In the case of
conflict between regulations contained in the underlying zoning
district and the regulations contained in this overlay district, the
provisions of the district that provides the greater safety protection
for pedestrian or vehicular traffic shall govern. Also, in case of
conflict between setback and buffer requirements, the regulation
containing the larger setback or buffer area shall govern.
(3) The overlay regulations shall employ additional standards designed
to:
(a) Encourage compatibility between residential, retail, business,
service and public uses.
(b) Provide for protective buffers and landscaping to preserve and
promote the residential character and visual aesthetics of the
surrounding area when business and/or service uses are
proposed.
(c) Encourage shared access to enhance traffic flow and promote
pedestrian and vehicular safety.
(d) Encourage shared use of and internal parking linkages
between off-street parking areas.
(e) Minimize alternative access points to off-street parking areas
from Penfield Road and Fairport Nine Mile Point Road in a
convenient, safe and nonintrusive manner.
C. Areas zoned Business Non-Retail District (BN-R). (See also § 250-5.5,
Business Non-Retail District.)
§ 250-6.3 PENFIELD CODE § 250-6.3
1:476
(1) Permitted uses. Notwithstanding any language contained in this
chapter to the contrary, only the following uses are permitted in the
BN-R District:
(a) Offices/Office parks.
(b) Medical and dental offices and clinics, excluding overnight
occupancy.
(c) Banks with related services.
(d) Photographic and art studios.
(e) Uses accessory to the above, which are an integral part of and
used solely by the permitted use and are deemed appropriate
by the authorized official.
(2) Conditional uses. Notwithstanding any language contained in this
chapter to the contrary, only the following uses and their accessory
uses shall be permitted when authorized in accordance with Article
XIII, Conditional Use Permits:
(a) Nursery schools or day-care centers.
(b) Commercial schools providing instruction in such areas as art,
music, dance and business.
(c) Commercial parking facilities, structures or lots, which are not
accessory uses within the meaning of Subsection C(1)(a)
above.
D. Areas zoned Limited Business District (LB). (See also § 250-5.6, Limited
Business District.)
(1) Permitted uses. Notwithstanding any language contained in this
chapter to the contrary, only the following uses are permitted in the
LB District:
(a) Permitted uses and appropriate accessory uses set forth in
Subsection C(1) above related to Business Non-Retail District
areas within the Routes 441/250 Overlay District.
(b) Convenience marts without gasoline service.
(c) Laundromat or dry-cleaning pick-up establishments.
(d) Retail bakeries and pastry shops (excluding wholesale).
(e) Drugstores or pharmacies.
(f) Barber and beauty shops.
(g) Flower shops.
(h) Liquor stores.
§ 250-6.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 250-6.3
1:477
(i) Retail stores, excluding department stores.
(j) Grocery stores.
(k) Hardware stores, garden supply stores and wallpaper stores.
(l) Uses accessory to the above which are an integral part of and
used solely by the permitted uses and which are deemed
appropriate by the authorized official.
(2) Conditional uses. Notwithstanding any language contained in this
chapter to the contrary, only the following uses and their accessory
uses shall be permitted when authorized in accordance with Article
XIII, Conditional Use Permits:
(a) Conditionally permitted uses as set forth in Subsection C(2)
above relating to Business Non-Retail District areas within the
Routes 441/250 Overlay District.
(b) Sit-down restaurants.
(c) Banquet halls and party houses.
E. Areas zoned General Business District (GB). (See also § 250-5.7,
General Business District.)
(1) Permitted uses. Notwithstanding any language contained in this
chapter to the contrary, only the following uses are permitted in the
areas zoned GB District within the Routes 441/250 Overlay District:
(a) Permitted uses and appropriate accessory uses set forth in
Subsection C(1) above relating to Business Non-Retail District
areas within the Routes 441/250 Overlay District.
(b) Permitted uses and appropriate accessory uses set forth in
Subsection D(1) above relating to Limited Business District
areas within the Routes 441/250 Overlay District.
(c) Retail outlets and department stores.
(d) Senior citizen housing.
(e) Proprietary health care facilities/nursing homes.
(f) Uses accessory to the above, which are an integral part of and
used solely by the permitted use and deemed appropriate by
the authorized official.
(2) Conditional uses. Notwithstanding any language contained in this
chapter to the contrary, the following uses and their accessory uses
shall be permitted when authorized in accordance with Article XIII,
Conditional Use Permits:
(a) Conditionally permitted uses as set forth in Subsections C(2)
and D(2) above relating to Business Non-Retail District (BN-R)
§ 250-6.3 PENFIELD CODE § 250-6.3
1:478
and Limited Business District (LB) areas within the Routes
441/250 Overlay District.
(b) Bars, taverns, restaurants or other eating-places.
(c) Theaters (not exceeding 12 screens).
(d) Auto repair shops.
(e) Commercial recreational facilities.
(f) Convenience marts with gasoline service.
(g) Vehicle washes.
(h) Gasoline service stations.
F. Special dimensional requirements.
(1) Freestanding accessory commercial structures, proposed to be
constructed in conjunction with principal commercial uses, such as
plazas, shall be set back not less than 50 feet from the state rightof-
way. All portions of said setback shall be devoted to landscaped
area, and all parking facilities shall be located in a manner which
optimizes green space along the state right-of-way and shall be
incorporated into the parking facilities serving the principal use.
(2) In cases where shared access has been identified and implemented
through municipal approvals, said properties shall be subject to a
maximum 70% developable area and minimum 30% open space or
green space requirement. In all other cases, properties shall be
subject to a maximum 65% developable area requirement and a
minimum 35% green space requirement.
(3) Any structure fronting on any internal access road shall be set back
not less than 20 feet from such right-of-way or 35 feet from the
center line of the road, whichever is greater.
(4) All parking facilities associated with structures fronting on internal
access roads shall be located in areas most remote from residential
properties, where practicable.
G. Design regulations. The Town has identified the necessity of sharing
access and off-street parking areas in this overlay district, including
controlled linkages between existing and proposed off-street parking
areas, as priority objectives. The joint use or sharing of ancillary site
features, including, but not limited to, off-street parking, loading,
access, lighting, landscaping and signage, is desired within the TF
Overlay District.
(1) Written agreement. The board having jurisdiction shall evaluate
the potential for joint or shared use of such facilities in all
development actions within the TFOD. If the board determines that
such joint or shared use is warranted, a written agreement,
§ 250-6.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 250-6.3
1:479
including amendments or modifications, granting or providing such
shared or joint use of facilities or access by two or more entities
shall be approved by the board having jurisdiction as a condition of
subdivision and/or site plan approval, change of use or conditional
use permit approval.
(2) Off-street parking and access. Off-street parking shall be provided
in accordance with § 250-7.7 of this chapter.
§ 250-6.3 PENFIELD CODE § 250-6.3
1:480
ARTICLE VII
Provisions Applicable to All Districts
§ 250-7.1. Fences, hedges and screen plantings.
Fences, hedges and screen plantings shall be permitted or, alternatively,
shall be required as provided in this section.
A. In no case shall barbed wire, electricity or similar materials or devices
be used in conjunction with or as part of any fence. The provisions of
this subsection shall not apply to fences on premises used for farm,
limited industrial and utility purposes.
B. No fence shall be permitted which is expressly designed with the intent
to injure or maim anyone who attempts to climb such a fence.
C. All fences in a residential district shall have their most pleasant or
decorative side facing the adjacent properties.
D. No fence, solid hedge or solid screen plantings over three feet in height
shall be erected or maintained within 20 feet of any front property line
nor shall any fence be constructed greater than six feet in height above
existing ground level. The provisions of this subsection shall not apply
to fences on premises used for farm purposes.
E. Fences, hedges, or screen plantings lawfully existing at the time of the
passage of this chapter shall be deemed nonconforming appurtenances
and shall be treated as nonconforming uses under this chapter.
F. Fences shall be continually maintained, and no fence, hedge or screen
plantings shall be permitted to become unsightly or in a state of
disrepair, as determined by the authorized official.
G. Barbed-wire or electric fences for farm purposes.
(1) A fence eight feet high with a barbed-wire tip or an electric shock
fence which would not be detrimental to the health, safety or
welfare of any person coming into contact with it may be permitted,
provided the fence meets one of the following requirements:
(a) The fence is needed to prevent entry to an area which could be
hazardous to the health, safety or welfare of a person or
persons.
(b) The fence is needed to secure an area where materials and/or
equipment are stored.
(c) The fence is needed to keep animals other than common
household pets, except in a kennel situation, from leaving the
site.
(d) The general community interests or interests of national safety
justify the need for such a fence.
§ 250-7.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 250-7.1
1:481
§ 250-7.2. Buffers, berms and screen plantings.
Buffers, berms and screen plantings shall be provided as set forth below:
§ 250-7.3. Clear vision zone.
There shall be a clear vision zone at all corners of intersecting roads, or
road junctions within a subdivision, consisting of a triangular area defined
by the point of intersection of the right-of-way lines and the two points
extended along such lines for a distance of 35 feet from any intersection
as shown on the diagram below. The clear vision zone for intersections
(2) Where a fence is electrified, signs at intervals of not more than 150
feet shall be erected on the fence to clearly indicate the fence is
electrified.
H. Fencing for Limited Industrial Districts and utility facilities shall be
approved by the board having jurisdiction and/or authorized official.
A. A buffer area of at least 50 feet shall be provided along the boundary
line between a LB or BN-R District which abuts any residential zoning
district, as measured from the zoning district line to the nearest
improvement or appurtenance of the LB or BN-R District.
B. A buffer area of at least 100 feet shall be provided along the boundary
line of a GB District which abuts any residential zoning district, as
measured from the zoning district line to the nearest improvement or
appurtenance of the GB District.
C. A buffer area of at least 150 feet shall be provided along the boundary
of an LI District which abuts any residential zoning district, and 50 feet
between any other district, as measured from the zoning district line to
the nearest improvement or appurtenance of the LI District.
D. Such buffer areas shall contain screen plantings of grass, trees, hedges,
shrubs, and/or earthen berms, etc., as determined by the board having
jurisdiction and/or the authorized official so as to provide a visual and
sound buffer between the different districts.
E. Buffering for the Mobile Home Park District shall be approved by the
board having jurisdiction and/or the authorized official.
F. Conditionally permitted uses in any residential zoning district will
require a fifty-foot buffer area from adjacent properties where new or
substantial alteration is authorized.
G. Landscaping of the perimeter of properties and parking or loading
areas in the TFOD shall be designed so as to provide a coordinated
landscaping scheme to buffer adjacent uses and to enhance the visual
quality of the area adjacent to the rights-of-way of Penfield Road and
Fairport-Nine Mile Point Road and shall be subject to the approval of
the board having jurisdiction.
§ 250-7.1 PENFIELD CODE § 250-7.3
1:482
with and of collector streets and/or major highways shall meet the traffic
safety sight distance criteria. A graphic display of the clear vision zone is
illustrated below. Clear vision zones must comply with the Town of Penfield
development regulations and specifications.
§ 250-7.4. Exceptions to height limitations.
The limitations affecting the height of structures in the district regulations
in Article V of this chapter shall not apply to the appurtenant appendages
and structures such as parapet walls not exceeding three feet in height,
chimneys, smokestacks, church spires, flagpoles, TV antennas, penthouses
for mechanical equipment, or to barns, pole barns, silos, and other common
farm-related structures, and water tanks; provided however, such
appendages and structures shall comply with all other provisions of this
chapter and any other applicable ordinance.
§ 250-7.5. Access regulations.
A. It is the purpose of this section to prevent adverse effects from strip
road frontage development, to promote and protect the public health,
safety and welfare and to prevent the number of entrances and exits
onto and off major state, county and Town highways from multiplying as
land is developed, and, when possible, to reduce the number of
entrances and exits now existing. In reviewing applications for new
development, additions to existing structures and special use permits,
the board having jurisdiction and/or the authorized official in
considering access to and from a parcel shall be guided by the following
criteria:
(1) The proposed access does not, by reason of its location, create a
hazard of any nature to the public in general or to any adjacent
owner or occupant.
§ 250-7.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 250-7.5
1:483
(2) The highway's current and future road function as specified in the
Town of Penfield's Comprehensive Plan and other Town policies.
(3) That more cohesive neighborhoods be developed, and abutting
property owners shall not be unduly and unnecessarily
inconvenienced in the future when it becomes necessary to widen
highways to accommodate greater traffic flows.
B. Major highways.
(1) Listed below are those highways where limited access shall be
considered:
Baird Road
Bay Road
Blossom Road
Carter Road
Creek Street
Empire Boulevard
Fellows Road
Five Mile Line Road
Harris Road
Hatch Road
Huber Road
Jackson Road
Jackson Road Extension
Panorama Trail
Panorama Trail South
Penfield Road
Plank Road
Route 250
Route 286 (Atlantic/Browncroft)
Route 441
Salt Road
Scribner Road
State Road
Watson Road
Whalen Road
(2) In addition to the highways listed above, any other highways shall
be considered for limited access as may be deemed necessary by
the board having jurisdiction and the authorized official.
§ 250-7.5 PENFIELD CODE § 250-7.5
1:484
§ 250-7.6. Noise.
C. Driveways.
(1) All plans for structures to be erected, altered, moved or
reconstructed, and for the use of premises within such districts,
shall contain a plan for the proposed driveway access to the
premises. No such plan shall be approved unless such driveway
access is onto a dedicated public highway or a highway within a
subdivision, which appears upon a subdivision map approved by
the Planning Board or Town Board, as the case may be. All such
plans for structures or uses, other than for a one- or two-family
dwelling, or for farm or dairy structures or uses, shall contain
provisions for a separate paved entrance and exit driveway with a
minimum width of eight feet; or if a single driveway in excess of
100 feet from the right-of-way is provided, the same shall be 16 feet
in width.
(2) In specific cases and in the judgment of the board having
jurisdiction and/or the authorized official, circular driveways may
be considered one curb cut and thereby allowed for the reason that
circular driveways direct traffic in a forward motion which
eliminates backing out onto highways and also for the reason that
such circular driveways often provide more off-street parking than
would otherwise be possible.
D. Private roadways. Private roadways shall be allowed for not more than
five single-family residences. Furthermore, all plans for structures to be
erected on these private roadways shall contain a written notification of
all rights, responsibilities and obligations of those owners of said
residences to be erected thereon and be in a form acceptable for
recording in the Monroe County Clerk's office.
A. Subject to the provisions of this chapter, the creation of any
unreasonably loud, disturbing and unnecessary noise in the Town of
Penfield is prohibited. Noise of such character, intensity and duration as
to be detrimental to the life or health of any individual is prohibited.
B. Enumeration of loud, disturbing and unnecessary noises. The following
acts, among others, are declared to be loud, disturbing and
unnecessary noises in violation of this chapter, but said enumeration
shall not be deemed to be exclusive, namely:
(1) The sounding of any horn or signal device on any automobile,
motorcycle, bus or other vehicle, except as a danger signal; the
sounding of a multitoned or musical horn; the creation, by means of
any such signal device, of any unreasonably loud or harsh sound
and the sounding of such device for an unnecessary and
unreasonable period of time, except that this subsection shall not
apply to vehicles of the Fire Department, Police Department,
§ 250-7.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 250-7.6
1:485
§ 250-7.7. Off-street parking.
emergency vehicles of municipal departments or emergency
vehicles of public service corporations or ambulances.
(2) The playing of any radio, television, phonograph, musical
instrument or other machine or device for the producing,
reproducing or amplification of sound in such a manner or with
such volume, particularly between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00
a.m., as to annoy the quiet, comfort or repose of persons in any
dwelling, hotel or other type of residence. It shall be prima facie
evidence of a violation of this section if the sound emanating from
such machine or device is:
(a) Audible beyond the property line of the premises upon which it
is being used between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
(b) Audible at a distance of 50 feet beyond the property line of the
premises upon which it is being used between the hours of 7:00
a.m. and 11:00 p.m.
(c) Audible at a distance of 50 feet from such machine or device if
operated from within a motor vehicle on a public street.
(3) The keeping of any animal or bird which, by causing frequent or
long-continued noise, shall disturb the comfort and repose of any
person in the vicinity.
(4) The use of any automobile, motorcycle or vehicle so out of repair or
in such a manner as to create loud or unnecessary grating,
grinding, rattling or other noise.
(5) The discharge into the open air of the exhaust of any steam engine,
stationary internal-combustion engine, air compressor or motor
vehicle or motorboat engine or the making of a mechanical noise by
a compressor or refrigeration, except through a muffler or other
device which will effectively prevent loud or explosive noises
therefrom.
A. No building or other permit shall be issued until the required site plans
are conditionally approved by the authorized official and/or board
having jurisdiction to show how the off-street parking and loading
requirements are to be fulfilled.
B. All parking facilities in any district in excess of 5,000 square feet and
any addition to any parking facility of such existing size or where such
addition shall create a parking facility of such size shall require site
plan approval by the Planning Board or Town Board, as the case may be,
pursuant to Article XII. Such parking facilities proposed to be less than
5,000 square feet in area may be approved by the authorized official
pursuant to the standards set forth in Article XII.
§ 250-7.6 PENFIELD CODE § 250-7.7
1:486
C. Off-street parking spaces shall be provided and maintained as set forth
in this article for all uses in all zoning districts. Such off-street parking
spaces shall be provided at the time:
(1) A new and/or existing building is hereafter erected or enlarged.
(2) The use is changed to another use with greater parking
requirements.
D. Number of spaces required. All parking spaces nine feet by 18 feet shall
be provided and satisfactorily maintained by the owner of the property
on the premises or in covenant connection therewith. Off-street parking
spaces shall be provided as follows:
Use Minimum Number of Parking
Spaces Required
Dwellings 2 for each dwelling unit
Professional residential
offices or customary home
occupations
6 for each person engaged in the
professional home occupation
Theaters, churches or other
places of public assemblage
1 for each 3 seats, based on maximum
seating capacity
Bars, taverns, restaurants or
other eating places
1.5 for each 2 persons of legal
occupancy as established by the
Town's Fire Marshal consistent with
the New York State Fire Prevention
and Building Code; and 1 for each
employee
Hospitals, sanitariums,
nursing homes, etc.
1 for each 3 patients, and 1 for each
employee, attendant or member of the
staff
Business districts: all uses in
commercial districts, except
office buildings
5 for each 1,000 square feet of gross
building floor area, exclusive of
covered walkways
Office buildings 1.5 for each 200 square feet of net
office floor area
Industrial buildings 1 for each employee
Hotels and motels 1 per room or suite; plus 1 per 3
employees on maximum shift, plus 1
for 3 persons to maximum capacity of
public meeting rooms, plus 50% of the
spaces otherwise required for
restaurants, accessory uses, etc.
Mobile/Manufactured homes
within new mobile/
manufactured home parks
2 paved (concrete or bituminous)
spaces
§ 250-7.7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 250-7.7
1:487
Use Minimum Number of Parking
Spaces Required
Farm markets 5 per 1,000 square feet of gross
building area devoted to retail sales on
the site
Bed-and-breakfast
establishments
1 for each sleeping room in addition to
other applicable requirements
Child-care facilities 1 for each employee on a shift and 1
for each 8 children on site
(1) Apartment houses and multiple dwellings shall provide and
maintain at the site of such structures and completely off the limit
of any street or highway an improved and usable parking area of
sufficient size to provide two parking spaces for each apartment or
living unit to be contained in such structure. A minimum of 25% of
the number of units shall have covered parking.
(2) There shall be no specific number of on-site parking spaces
required for business establishments operating within the Four
Corners District. The Town Board shall review and make a
determination of an applicant's parking needs and how they can be
met at the time a request for a conditional use permit is made.
(3) Other permitted uses not otherwise specifically listed above shall
furnish parking as required by the board having jurisdiction and/or
the authorized official.
(4) The Planning Board or Town Board, as the case may be, may modify
parking requirements to reflect the needs of a particular use to be
developed, provided that the board is satisfied that the site may be
able to accommodate future uses with more intensive parking
requirements. Said area shall be identified and set aside on an
approved site plan.
E. Shared parking.
(1) The off-street parking requirements of two or more uses, structures
or parcels of land may be satisfied by the same parking or loading
space used jointly, provided that the owners or operators of the
uses, structures or parcels can demonstrate that their operations
and parking needs do not overlap in point in time. If the uses,
structures or parcels are under separate ownership, the right to
joint use of the parking space must be evidenced by a deed, lease,
contract, covenant or other appropriate written document to
establish the joint use.
(2) Where such shared facilities are not on adjacent lots, there must be
evidence of the right of public access across other lands located
between the subject parcels.
§ 250-7.7 PENFIELD CODE § 250-7.7
1:488
§ 250-7.8. Use of parking facilities.
(3) Where two or more properties are to provide shared parking in a
common off-street parking area, the board having jurisdiction may
consider the land area, buildings and site improvements of the
participating parcels as though they were located on a single parcel
of land. In so doing, the dimensional requirements of the total land
area and building improvements shall be used to determine the
required number of off-street parking spaces as required by the
regulations specified in this section.
(4) Where two or more adjacent properties are providing parking in a
common off-street parking area, the board having jurisdiction may,
if deemed appropriate, reduce or waive the requirement for the
setback of off-street parking, loading or access from any abutting
side yard.
(5) Shared access shall be required for sites within the TFOD as
identified in the Town's specifications and design criteria.
(6) Where an applicant proposes the shared use of an accessway or an
off-street parking area by two or more properties, the board having
jurisdiction may authorize a reduction of up to 20% of the total
number of spaces which would have been required by the
application of the standards specified in this section. Any such
reduction shall be authorized on a conditional basis for an initial
period of up to two years. During this period, the authorized official
shall periodically inspect the property to determine if the number
of spaces authorized by the board having jurisdiction and provided
by the applicant is sufficient to serve the needs of the use. If, after
the expiration of the conditional period, the number of spaces
provided by the applicant proves to be sufficient, this condition of
approval may be extended or deleted, upon request by the
applicant to the board having jurisdiction.
(7) The applicant shall specify the location and availability of the
additional spaces that would otherwise have been needed to satisfy
the parking standards specified in this section. These spaces shall
be reserved to ensure their availability if the board having
jurisdiction were to determine that they are actually needed. This
reservation shall be identified by location and established as a
condition of site plan approval and/or a change of use or
conditional use permit. A note to this effect shall be added to the
final site plan or instrument survey. The reserved parking area shall
not include any required buffer areas or setbacks, or other areas
which would otherwise be unsuitable for parking due to the
physical characteristics of the land or other requirements of this
chapter. The reserved area shall be appropriately landscaped.
§ 250-7.7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 250-7.8
1:489
§ 250-7.9. Traffic and parking control standards for all districts,
excluding single-family.
A. Required parking space shall be available on site for the parking of
operable passenger automobiles of residents, customers, patrons, and
employees.
B. Vehicle and traffic control regulations as set forth in Chapter 220,
Vehicles and Traffic, § 220-16, shall apply to all users of a parking area.
A. Owners of subject premises shall be ordered by the authorized official
and/or board having jurisdiction to conform to any or all of the following
standards relating to traffic and parking control on subject premises
where such conformance is deemed necessary by the authorized official
and/or board having jurisdiction, in its discretion, to promote the public
health, safety and welfare and to ensure the safe and nonhazardous use
of such subject premises:
(1) All premises and buildings in the Town of Penfield which the Fire
Department may be called upon to protect in case of fire or
emergency and which are not accessible from public roads shall be
provided with suitable access roads and fire lanes, so that all
buildings on the premises are accessible. The location, size, layout
and nature of said access roads and fire lanes shall be subject to
the approval of the appropriate board upon recommendation of the
Fire Marshal. In those areas where new construction is being
undertaken, suitable roads shall be constructed and maintained so
as to provide access to the Fire Department and other emergency
vehicles prior to the commencement of any aboveground
construction.
(2) Fire lanes for shopping centers, office buildings, places of assembly
and other commercial buildings shall be a minimum of 30 feet in
width, and 25 feet in width in multiple-dwelling residence districts.
Fire lanes shall consist of H-20 loading criteria as per Town
specifications. When the above criteria are not practicable, the Fire
Marshal shall make recommendations to the appropriate board for
the size of fire lanes.
(3) The signs required to be posted by this chapter shall conform to the
size and color requirements for parking signs as set forth in the
Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices of the New York State
Department of Transportation. In addition, said signs shall also:
(a) Have arrows pointing in the direction of the area designated as
a fire lane.
(b) Be posted not more than 50 feet apart.
(c) Be neither of a portable nor moveable type except where
otherwise directed by the Fire Marshal.
§ 250-7.8 PENFIELD CODE § 250-7.9
1:490
(d) Have wording to read: "No Parking — Fire Lane" or "No
Standing — Fire Lane" as required by the Fire Marshal.
(4) Traffic lanes for the control and regulation of automobile, truck,
bicycle, other vehicle and pedestrian flow in the parking area shall
be established and maintained and properly delineated through the
use of pavement markings, signs or median strips.
(5) Parking lines for parking spaces shall be established and
maintained in the parking area and shall be properly painted and
marked as such.
(6) Provision shall be made on the subject premises for the parking of
bicycles and motorbikes.
(7) Provision shall be made for the safe movement of pedestrians while
in the parking area or accessory area through the use of walkways,
medians and crosswalks.
(8) Curbing and traffic barriers or islands shall be built where
necessary and maintained so as to enforce desired traffic patterns
within the parking area. Where possible, traffic islands shall
contain vegetation and landscaping conducive to growth in a
parking area environment.
(9) Stop signs, flashing signals or yield signs shall be erected at
entrance or exit locations to a parking area or at intersections
within the parking area where required for traffic safety.
(10) Signs regulating parking, traffic flow and speed limits on subject
premises shall be erected.
(11) The owner may be required to properly designate an agent for
service of process who resides in and has an office in Monroe
County, State of New York.
(12) In commercial areas, all vehicles shall be placed only in approved
parking areas previously designated as such by the authorized
official and/or appropriate board having jurisdiction for parking.
B. Procedure for establishing traffic and parking control standards.
(1) The authorized official shall notify the owner of subject premises of
the standards for traffic and parking control which must be met.
Such notice shall be in writing and addressed to the owner of
record of such subject premises at the address shown on the last
preceding assessment roll, and sent by certified mail, return
receipt requested, or hand delivered. Within 30 days of the receipt
of such notice, or within such time as the authorized official
consents, such owner shall present to the authorized official a
comprehensive plan and time schedule for conforming to such
standards. The authorized official, after review of such plan by the
Town Engineer/consulting engineer and other appropriate boards
§ 250-7.9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 250-7.9
1:491
or officials, shall present such plan and time schedule to the board
having jurisdiction, which may make such revisions or add such
requirements as it deems necessary to promote the public health,
safety and welfare and to ensure the safe and nonhazardous use
of such subject premises. Such owner shall be notified in writing
by certified mail, return receipt requested, or by hand delivery,
of the approval of such plan and time schedule, together with
revisions and/or additional requirements to be met. Subsequent to
such notification, such owner shall conform to the standards and
requirements as finally determined by the board having jurisdiction
within the time schedule so specified, except where such owner
makes application to the board having jurisdiction for a public
hearing as provided herein, in which case conformance shall be
stayed until the decision of the board having jurisdiction
subsequent to such public hearing.
(2) Within 10 days of receipt of notification of approval of such plan
and time schedule, together with revisions and/or additional
requirements, an owner of subject premises may make written
application to the board having jurisdiction for a public hearing
under this section for the purposes of reviewing the traffic and
parking control standards required by the board having jurisdiction
and to permit such owner to submit any objections to the plan and
time schedule, as may be revised by the board having jurisdiction
for the public record and for the board having jurisdiction.
(3) Failure of the owner of such subject premises to conform to the
standards and requirements as finally determined by the board
having jurisdiction within the specified time schedule shall be a
violation of this chapter and such owner shall be subject to the
enforcement proceedings and penalties set forth in Article XV.
C. The standards set forth in this section shall be applied by the board
having jurisdiction on application by an owner of property for site plan
approval where such property, after approval, would fall within the
definition of "subject premises" herein.
D. Regulations. Any holder of a subject premises shall comply with the
following regulations:
(1) All roads, sidewalks, driveways and parking areas used in
connection with subject premises must be kept in proper repair,
free from potholes, free from dirt where paved and free from
refuse, snow and ice, except that snow may be piled on subject
premises so long as it does not interfere with the internal
circulation and parking of the parking area and does not hinder
driver vision when entering or leaving the subject premises.
(2) The subject premises must be kept free and clear of ashes, dirt,
debris, rubbish, garbage, refuse and other obstructions and must
be kept properly repaired and maintained.
§ 250-7.9 PENFIELD CODE § 250-7.9
1:492
(3) Fire lanes, traffic lanes and parking lines for parking spaces, where
required, shall be maintained and properly painted and marked so
that such lanes and lines will be clearly visible to vehicle operators
and pedestrians.
(4) Because of the traffic and safety hazard resulting from the random
leaving of shopping carts in parking and accessory areas by
persons, holders which provide shopping carts for customers and
allow customers to remove such carts from store premises are
required to take whatever steps are necessary to ensure that such
carts are not left in parking or accessory areas after use by such
customers. Shopping cart collection stations may be used in a
parking area, provided that such stations do not create a traffic
hazard, are kept free of snow and ice and are frequently policed by
the store's employees so that the capacity of the stations is not
exceeded. Failure of a holder to remove its carts from a parking or
accessory area, other than from a cart collection station with
sufficient capacity for more than 30 minutes after use by a
customer, shall constitute a violation of this article by such holder.
Each cart that remains in a parking or accessory area in violation of
this regulation shall constitute a separate offense.
(5) All prescribed lights on subject premises must be kept in proper
working order and lighted during the darkness period when the
subject premises or any portion thereof is being used by the holder,
or the subject premises or any portion thereof is open for business.
The authorized official may require the holder of any subject
premises to reduce outdoor lighting after business hours.
(6) All fences, signs, screening, curbing, traffic barriers and islands,
grass, trees, shrubbery, landscaping, retaining walls, slopes and
other space used in connection with subject premises must be
maintained and/or repaired.
(7) All water drains and water drainage systems used in connection
with subject premises must be kept clean and in proper working
order.
(8) All stormwater retention ponds and systems related thereto used in
connection with subject premises shall be maintained in proper
working condition.
(9) All exterior areas on subject premises must be kept free and clear
of the storage of goods, wares and merchandise unless otherwise
permitted by an outside storage and display permit. Loading and
unloading are to be done in designated zones only.
(10) All refuse and rubbish must be stored in a designated place or
placed in properly covered refuse receptacles, which shall be
screened from public view by fencing or other appropriate
techniques.
§ 250-7.9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 250-7.9
1:493
§ 250-7.10. Pedestrian access.
Any application proposing a development shall provide a pedestrian
circulation plan to be approved by the board of jurisdiction. The plan shall
be required to integrate with existing pedestrian circulation patterns.
§ 250-7.11. Exterior property maintenance; strip mall business
signs.
See also the New York State Property Maintenance Code and Fire Code,
which are hereby incorporated by reference.
§ 250-7.12. Maintenance agreements.
Upon approval of applications for any development that is not single-family
residential development, the applicant shall furnish, if required pursuant
(11) There shall be, at convenient places for use by public, proper trash
receptacles, which shall be sufficiently serviced to prevent
overflow.
(12) Where required, facilities for the parking of bicycles and
motorbikes on subject premises and parking spaces and related
ramps and facilities for handicapped persons shall be maintained
and properly designated.
(13) Traffic and parking control standards to which holders of subject
premises have conformed under this section must be maintained.
(14) Engineering requirements, landscape plans, parking and traffic
control plans or any other criteria or requirements upon which the
approval of a site plan or special use permit for subject premises
shall be obtained from the board having jurisdiction.
A. Any deterioration of the exterior of any building on subject premises
with respect to painted surfaces, siding, roofing, brickwork, mortar
joints, signs, copings, overhangs, porches or other appendages,
entrance or exit doors, display windows or any other part of the
building exterior where such deterioration constitutes a hazard to the
public, would cause significant and serious damage to the structure
itself or is unsightly and aesthetically detrimental to subject premises
or any property near subject premises must be repaired or corrected.
B. Exterior surfaces shall be kept free of graffiti, posters, playbills, or
anything that would cause unsightliness to the structure or premises in
the opinion of the authorized official.
C. Each tenant of a strip mall shall be required to post the name of the
business on the exterior of all exit doors. The business name shall be
installed on door at a height of five feet to the center line. All letters
shall be a minimum of two inches in height and shall sharply contrast in
color from the exit door. Script-style lettering shall not be permitted.
§ 250-7.9 PENFIELD CODE § 250-7.12
1:494
to § 250-12.2 by the authorized official/board having jurisdiction, a
maintenance agreement in accordance with the format as outlined in the
Town's development regulations and specifications, to ensure the ongoing
general maintenance of that commercial development.
§ 250-7.13. Nonconforming uses and structures.
Unless otherwise provided for elsewhere in this chapter, any use of land or
use and/or occupancy of a nonconforming structure, which use was lawful
at the time of the effective date of this chapter or an amendment thereto,
may be continued; provided, however, such use shall have continued in
operation, does not constitute a nuisance, and shall not be enlarged, altered
or changed in area, activity or content during its continuance, except as
provided otherwise by the authorized official.
§ 250-7.14. Preexisting, legal nonconforming natural gas and/or
petroleum extraction activities.
Notwithstanding any provision of this chapter to the contrary, any natural
gas and/or petroleum extraction activities that are being conducted in the
Town as of December 17, 2014, shall be subject to the following:
A. Any nonconforming use or structure which has ceased continued use or
occupation for a period of one year or more shall be considered to have
terminated, and may not thereafter commence operation as before.
B. Any use or structure which was in violation of any previous zoning
ordinances of the Town of Penfield shall not be regarded as
nonconforming under this chapter.
C. With exception, upon a finding by the authorized official that such
enlargement, change or alteration will produce greater compliance
with this chapter, and that the use within such structure is in conformity
with the requirements of this chapter; and further provided that no
enlargement, change or alteration of a nonconforming structure
housing a nonconforming use shall be permitted, except upon a finding
by the Zoning Board of Appeals (or the Town Board in the case of the FC
District or LLD District) that such enlargement, change or alteration
will permit greater compliance with the provisions of this or other
appropriate regulations, and is installed or instituted to minimize the
detrimental effects of the nonconforming use upon adjoining
conforming uses.
D. Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to prevent the strengthening or
restoring to a safe condition of any structure, or part thereof, declared
to be unsafe by the authorized official and which strengthening or
restoration is ordered by said official.
A. Qualifications for preexisting nonconforming use status.
(1) If, as of December 17, 2014, substantive natural gas and/or
petroleum extraction activities are occurring in the Town, and
§ 250-7.12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 250-7.14
1:495
§ 250-7.15. Nonconforming lot size, open space, height or building
size regulations.
those activities are in all respects being conducted in accordance
with all applicable laws and regulations, including without
limitation the possession of valid, unrevoked permits for all matters
for which permits are required, and including compliance with
each, any, and all permit conditions, as are or may be required
by the New York State Department of Environmental Conservation
(DEC) and/or all other regulating local, state, and federal
governments, bureaus, or agencies, then and only then such
activity by or on behalf of the holder of the permit(s) shall be
considered a preexisting, nonconforming use and shall be allowed
to continue; subject, however, to the provisions of Subsections B
and C of this section.
(2) Natural gas and/or petroleum extraction activities that are being
conducted in the Town as of December 17, 2014, and which do not
qualify for treatment under Subsection A(1) above shall not be
grandfathered (or be permitted to continue or deemed lawful
preexisting uses).
B. Upon the depletion, closing, or reclamation of any well which is allowed
to remain in operation after the effective date of this section by virtue of
Subsection A(1) or upon any other substantive cessation of natural gas
and/or petroleum extraction activities for a period of more than 12
months, then and in either of such events the preexisting and/or
nonconforming use status (and any related "grandfathering" rights) of
or relating to such activity shall terminate.
C. Notwithstanding any provision hereof to the contrary, the preexisting,
nonconforming status conferred and recognized by Subsection A(1) is
not intended, and shall not be construed, to authorize or grandfather
any natural gas and/or petroleum extraction activities extending
beyond whatever well bore is authorized in any DEC permit in existence
as of December 17, 2014. Any expansion or attempted or purported
expansion of such well, whether as to its production, depth, horizon(s)
or otherwise, shall not be grandfathered under Subsection A of this
section.
A. Any building, other structure or use of land which is made
nonconforming by any lot size, open space, height or building size
requirements of this chapter, or by any subsequent amendments
thereto, may be continued except as hereinafter provided.
B. Such nonconforming building, other structure or use of land enlarged
or extended shall comply with the regulations of this chapter and shall
be located within a district which permits said use.
§ 250-7.14 PENFIELD CODE § 250-7.16
1:496
§ 250-7.16. Destruction or maintenance of structures.
Nothing in this chapter shall prevent the maintenance, renovation or
destruction of structures in accordance with other provisions of the Town
Code, including Chapter 94, Article I, Building Code Administration and
Enforcement.
§ 250-7.17. Lighting.
§ 250-7.18. Roadside stands; farm markets.
A. Where any use in any district, other than for customary agricultural
operations, involves operation between the hours of 1/2 hour after
sunset and 1/2 hour before sunrise, proper exterior illumination of
suitable intensity may be required by the authorized official at each
entrance and exit and along each side of any building. Said exterior
illumination shall be localized and unobtrusive. In cases where property
owners propose the use of exterior illumination, said illumination shall
be localized and unobtrusive and shall not create a nuisance to
neighboring property owners. Any existing exterior illumination which
is in violation of this section shall be immediately brought into
compliance through the use of approved shielding, decrease in wattage
or relocation.
B. Lighting in TFOD.
(1) Lighting of properties within the TF Overlay District shall be
coordinated so as to provide consistency of design and to maximize
the efficient use of energy. All such lighting shall be located and
designed so as not to cause glare on any adjacent sites and shall be
subject to the approval of the board having jurisdiction.
(2) Exterior lighting proposed within 200 feet of any residential district
shall be no more than 20 feet in height, and in no case shall lighting
be permitted in excess of 30 feet in height. All light poles shall be
landscaped at their bases; the board having jurisdiction shall
approve said landscaping.
A. Any person within any district may erect a roadside stand and sell from
same agricultural products only produced on his/her premises located
within the Town. Any such stand shall be of temporary construction and
shall comply with all the conditions and regulations prescribed for
structures in the district in which the stand is located. Such stand may
not be erected nearer than 20 feet to the macadam surface nor within
the right-of-way. There must be provided for any roadside stand a
parking area sufficient to accommodate vehicles and to eliminate traffic
hazards. In the event that parking occurs along a right-of-way, said
parking shall be conducted in a safe and orderly manner and
coordinated by the farm stand operator, subject to all state, county and
Town requirements. Roadside stands shall be permitted to have two
§ 250-7.16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 250-7.18
1:497
§ 250-7.19. Dumping of waste material; compost piles.
temporary signs, not to exceed 10 square feet each in area, which must
be placed on the site where the sale of produce will occur.
B. Farm markets. Any person within any residential zoning district may
erect a farm market and sell agricultural products, provided the
property complies with the standards set forth herein. Any such market
and its accessory structures shall be permitted by the authorized
official pursuant to Article XII of this chapter and subject to the
following criteria:
(1) Such farm market shall be constructed on not less than five acres of
property identified with the same tax account number.
(2) The maximum building area devoted to farm market retail sales
area shall not exceed 10,000 square feet; however, accessory
growing structures shall be permitted, provided that the principal
farm market and said accessory structures maintain a fifty-foot
setback from all property lines.
(3) The primary function of the farm market operations is to sell
agricultural produce and plant materials which have been grown
on- or off-site (edible and nonedible). Farm markets are also
permitted to sell other such items which are considered incidental
and ancillary to those items listed above, such as fertilizers,
herbicides and pesticides, lawn and garden tools and equipment,
and lawn furniture.
(4) The farm market operations may be conducted 12 months per year.
(5) Farm markets shall be serviced by parking spaces as set forth in
§ 250-7.7 of this chapter.
(6) Outside storage and display of produce and plant materials shall be
permitted on all portions of the property, with the exception of
areas where traffic sight distance will be impacted. No outside
storage and/or display of said materials shall be permitted within
the public right-of-way at any time.
(7) Outside storage and display of all other items accessory and
incidental to a farm market operation shall be placed in an
approved area, not less than 50 feet from any property line. The
size of said storage area shall not exceed 25% of the size of the
principal farm market structure and shall be effectively buffered in
a manner that it will not create a nuisance to adjacent properties,
as determined by the authorized official.
C. Properties may have one farm market or one roadside stand, operated
by the same individual, on any one property. All preexisting
nonconforming farm market operations are subject to the requirements
of § 250-7.13 of this chapter.
§ 250-7.18 PENFIELD CODE § 250-7.19
1:498
§ 250-7.20. Outside storage and display.
A. The dumping of any material not expressly permitted by the
Environmental Protection Ordinance of the Code of the Town of Penfield
is hereby declared to be the dumping of waste material and is
prohibited in all districts in the Town, with the exception of sanitary
landfills which have been approved by the appropriate state, county and
Town agencies. The preceding sentence is not intended and shall not be
construed to authorize (whether in sanitary landfills approved by any
state, county, or other authorities, or otherwise) any natural gas and/or
petroleum exploration, extraction or production wastes disposal/
storage facilities, natural gas and/or petroleum exploration, extraction
or production wastes dumps, or any other explicitly prohibited uses
anywhere within the Town.
B. For the purposes of this section, the term "waste material" is meant to
include, but is not limited to, the following: garbage, refuse, trash, junk,
ashes, decaying vegetation, papers, offal, obnoxious and offensive
substances and any material dumped without authorization under the
provisions of Chapter 187, Article I, Garbage and Refuse Control, of the
Town Code.
C. The authorized official may order waste material dumped in violation of
this section to be removed from the premises where dumped within a
reasonable period of time. Such an order may be issued to the person(s)
who dumped the waste material when he, she or they are known. When
the dumper(s) is not known, an order to remove the dumped waste
material may be issued to the owner of the property upon which the
waste material has been dumped. When an order to remove is issued
pursuant to the authority granted hereinabove, such order shall be in
writing and shall be served personally upon the dumper or the owner of
the property upon which waste material has been dumped, pursuant to
Civil Practice Law and Rules § 308.
D. When a lawful order to remove waste material is not obeyed within a
reasonable time, the authorized official may cause the waste material to
be removed.
E. It shall be an offense for any person to dump waste material in violation
of the provisions of this section or to fail to obey an order issued under
the authority granted hereinabove to the authorized official.
F. Nothing contained in this section shall be construed as prohibiting a
property owner from maintaining a compost pile on his/her property;
nor shall this section be construed as prohibiting normal agricultural
activities. Any compost pile shall meet the minimum setback
requirements for structures within the zoning district in which the
property is located.
A. Purpose. It is the purpose of regulating outdoor storage and display in
all districts to promote aesthetic appeal and end visual pollution and
§ 250-7.19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 250-7.20
1:499
clutter. While recognizing that outdoor storage and display may at
times be necessary or desirable, it is the purpose of this section to
discourage and eliminate such outdoor storage and display whenever
such may be achieved without the creation of a genuine hardship.
B. Business districts.
(1) In any LB, FC, B-NR or GB District, no fixed or portable equipment,
motor vehicles, or other materials shall be permitted to be stored
or displayed nor shall any stands for sale or display be permitted in
such a district outside an enclosed building unless a special use
permit shall have first been granted by the Zoning Board of
Appeals. Such Board may permit the outdoor display or storage of
such equipment or materials upon such conditions as it may deem
reasonable, provided:
(a) Such storage and display is an accessory use to the main
business conducted or to be conducted on the premises.
(b) Such storage and display is not within 100 feet of the line of a
residential zoning district.
(c) Such storage and display is not at such distance from any
public highway as to interfere with the safe use of such
highway.
(d) Such storage and display does not unreasonably interfere with
the quiet enjoyment of property by adjacent property owners.
(2) The fee for the issuance of a special use permit by the Town Clerk
shall be established by resolution by the Town Board. Any permit
granted hereunder may be revoked by the Zoning Board of Appeals
after due hearing on not less than 10 days' written notice to the
person holding such permit in the event that the holder of such
permit violates any of the conditions of the issuance thereof or of
this section.
(3) Unless the Zoning Board of Appeals shall set a shorter period of
duration, each such permit shall be valid for a period of three years.
(4) Temporary outside storage, display and sales permits of a duration
of one week or less may be granted by the authorized official, up to
and including three times per year, provided the applicant
demonstrates the ability to meet the conditions of Subsection B(1)
of this section. The fee for the issuance of a temporary permit shall
be established by resolution by the Town Board. Permits granted
pursuant to this subsection shall be issued by the Town Clerk upon
payment of the required fee. Any temporary permit granted
hereunder may be revoked immediately by the authorized official in
the event the use made hereunder violates any of the conditions of
its issuance or shall have become a nuisance.
§ 250-7.20 PENFIELD CODE § 250-7.20
1:500
C. Limited Industrial Districts. All requirements set forth in Subsection B
of this section pertaining to outdoor storage and display in business
districts shall apply to such outdoor storage and display in Limited
Industrial Districts, except:
(1) No such storage or display shall occur within 150 feet of the line of
any residential zoning district; and
(2) Such permit shall become void one year after approval unless the
permitted activity has commenced.
D. Residential zoning districts.
(1) Applicability. The requirements for this section shall apply to all
outdoor storage and display in any district zoned RA-2, CR-2, RR-1,
R-1-20, R-1-15, R-1-12, MR, TH, PD, LLD, FC or MHP.
(2) Materials, refuse and debris.
(a) No building material, portable equipment, construction
equipment, refuse, rubble, debris or waste shall be permitted
in any portion of the right-of-way, with the exception of refuse
placed by the road less than 24 hours prior to scheduled pick
up by a contracted trash hauler or materials and equipment
used for the maintenance of a public right-of-way or public
utilities when performed by a government agency or
subcontractor of such agency.
(b) No building material, portable equipment, construction
equipment, refuse, rubble, debris or waste shall be stored or
kept in such a manner as to adversely affect the safe use of any
roadway by vehicle traffic or pedestrians.
(c) No building material, portable equipment, construction
equipment, refuse, rubble, debris or waste shall be permitted
to be stored or kept on a property; except that such material
shall be permitted, provided it is stored or kept on a property
temporarily when associated with the maintenance,
construction, service or repair of the property, and further
provided that such material shall be removed immediately
upon completion of such maintenance, construction, service or
repair.
(d) No building material, portable equipment, refuse, rubble,
debris or agricultural waste shall be stored or kept in any
residential zoning district closer to any highway than the front
setback distance applicable to such property.
§ 250-7.20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 250-7.21
1:501
§ 250-7.21. Property numbering.
Property address numbers shall be provided as set forth in the Fire Code of
New York State and the Property Maintenance Code of New York State and
any amendments thereafter, which are hereby incorporated by reference.
§ 250-7.22. Recreational ramps.
A. Purpose. The purpose of this regulation is to promote the health, safety
and general welfare of the Town of Penfield, to regulate and enforce
regulations concerning the use of recreational ramps and to ensure and
not interfere with the quiet enjoyment of property owners within the
Town.
B. General regulations.
(1) Recreational ramps shall be prohibited within any right-of-way or
private roadway;
(2) Recreational ramps must comply with all minimum zoning setback
requirements, but in no case shall a recreational ramp be
constructed less than 30 feet from any adjoining property
boundary.
(3) Only one person may be upon a recreational ramp at one time.
Users must wear protective safety equipment.
(4) Recreational ramps shall be used only between the hours of 11:00
a.m. and 7:00 p.m. or until 8:30 p.m. during daylight savings time.
(5) There shall be no more than one recreational ramp permitted on
any property.
C. Construction requirements.
(1) No recreational ramp shall be in excess of six feet in overall height,
excluding handrails. All building construction shall include
insulation or other sound-deadening materials and shall be
designed and constructed in a safe, workmanlike manner. Closure
of the open ends of the recreational ramp shall be required, and
orientation of the recreational ramp shall direct noise away from
adjacent properties wherever possible. Owners of said facilities
shall be encouraged to buffer, landscape or otherwise screen or
contain the noise generated by skateboarding activities on their
property. The Building Inspector is authorized to place conditions
upon the building permit requiring landscaping improvements to
be installed to minimize and mitigate adverse visual and noise
impacts.
(2) Structural stability. Recreational ramps shall be structurally stable,
and such determination shall be made by the Building Inspector on
any of the following bases:
§ 250-7.21 PENFIELD CODE § 250-7.22
1:502
(a) A certification by a professional engineer or architect licensed
in the State of New York; or
(b) Manufacturer's warranty, if any.
(3) The Town of Penfield shall assume no responsibility for design,
safety, and structural integrity or otherwise in its issuance of a
building permit for a recreational ramp, which shall be the sole
responsibility of the applicant/owner thereof.
(4) The construction of a recreational ramp shall require issuance of a
building permit in accordance with Chapter 94, Article I, Building
Code Administration and Enforcement, of the Town Code. The fee
for a building permit for recreational ramps shall be determined
and set by the Town Board by resolution.
D. Use and maintenance. Such recreational ramps shall be used and
maintained in such a way as not to be detrimental to the health and
safety of any individual or be contrary to the public welfare because of
their hours of operation, noise level, location and type of outdoor
lighting and/or conduct of the person(s) using and/or operating such
ramps.
E. Existing recreational ramps.
(1) Owners of existing recreational ramps without permits shall, within
30 days following the enactment of this section, file an application
for a permit with the Building Department, showing compliance
with this section or seeking a waiver from its terms pursuant to
Subsection F.
(2) Owners of existing recreational ramps who fail to obtain a building
permit for said ramps shall have 90 days, from the effective date of
this regulation or from determination denying the permit,
whichever is later, to remove such nonconforming structures or
uses.
F. Variances. The Zoning Board of Appeals may, upon appeal by an owner/
operator, grant variances from the provisions of this section in
accordance with law, and upon a determination that privacy, use, quiet
enjoyment and value of the neighboring properties shall not be
adversely affected thereby.
§ 250-7.22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 250-7.22
1:503

ARTICLE VIII
Fill and Excavation Permits
§ 250-8.1. Title and interpretation.
This article shall be entitled and known as "Fill and Excavation Permits."
Nothing in this article is intended nor shall be construed to authorize within
the Town any explicitly prohibited use.
§ 250-8.2. Purpose.
It is the purpose of this article to protect the Town of Penfield, its residents,
and its natural environment from the negative effects of land development
and land uses and ensure an accurate and permanent record of the
placement of fill material. This article outlines the defined procedures and
standards established by the Town of Penfield to protect the environment
from the adverse impacts of land disturbances, including, but not limited to,
the following:
§ 250-8.3. Activities requiring permits.
A permit is required for any of the following operations prior to the
commencement of any earth disturbance, except as otherwise provided in
this article:
A. Clearing of land;
B. Prolonged exposure of soil;
C. Changes in drainage characteristics;
D. Changes in rate and volume of water runoff from the land;
E. Obstructing the natural flow of watercourses and natural runoff
patterns;
F. Soil compaction;
G. Land filling; and
H. Land excavation.
A. Fills and excavations that exceed 50 cubic yards of soil, are greater
than four feet in depth, impair surface drainage, or have slopes steeper
than one foot vertical to two feet horizontal.
B. Earth grading/clearing that exceeds 5,000 square feet of area, causes a
grade change of greater than 12 inches at any point, or changes
existing surface drainage.
C. Construction of any aesthetic, recreational, fire protection, fishing
pond, or other pond with a depth greater than three feet or which meets
the above requirements.
§ 250-8.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 250-8.3
1:505
§ 250-8.4. Permits.
§ 250-8.5. Permit application.
Applications for fill and excavation permits shall be submitted to the Town
Board by the owner or the owner’s agent and must be accompanied by the
following materials:
D. Other activities deemed necessary by the Town of Penfield.
E. Any earth disturbance activity occurring over a twelve-month period.
A. The Town Clerk shall, upon presentation of a duly verified application
for a fill and excavation permit, accompanied by the consent, in writing,
of the owner, request a review and determination from the Town Board.
The Town Clerk shall, upon obtaining the Town Board’s approval, issue
the permit upon any conditions as may be imposed by the Town Board
in a particular case. The applicant shall pay all associated fees, as set by
Town Board resolution, and shall provide a financial guarantee (cash or
letter of credit from an approved financial institution) as determined
and approved by the Town Board.
B. Each permit issued pursuant to the terms and conditions set in this
article shall be granted for no more than three months after the date of
its issuance unless further extended by the Town Board, with input from
Town staff. Any extensions of the permit shall require payment of all
fees as determined by the Town Board. Any financial guarantee shall
ensure the faithful performance of the terms and conditions of this
article and any conditions noted in the permit. Each permit shall be
conditioned on the observance of all municipal ordinances. Further, the
applicant shall indemnify and hold harmless the Town Board, the Town
of Penfield, and its employees and its agents from and against any
damage to property of the Town, and for compliance with the terms and
conditions of said permit. The cash proceeds of any guarantee, in the
event of default, shall be conveyed to the Town of Penfield, which shall
be entitled to maintain any action thereupon. Said guarantee shall
remain in full force and effect until a certificate of completion has been
issued by the Town Engineer certifying that all provisions of this article
and the conditions of any permit issued have been fully complied with.
A. A letter describing the project and its purpose;
B. A survey map, prepared by a surveyor licensed in New York State,
showing the location of the work with the property boundary lines and
topography of the site within 100 feet of the proposed fill/excavation for
which the permit is requested;
C. The location of any buildings, structures, and utilities on the site where
work is to be performed;
D. The location of any wetlands, floodplains, steep slopes, watercourses,
or other environmentally sensitive areas within 100 feet of the site;
§ 250-8.3 PENFIELD CODE § 250-8.5
1:506
§ 250-8.6. Permit requirements.
E. The location of adjacent buildings and structures within 100 feet of the
site;
F. Proposed contours of the fill/excavation limits;
G. Information showing all proposed drainage improvements, erosion and
sedimentation control measures, topsoil storage locations, construction
entrances, haul roads, security fencing, retaining walls, and other
features associated with the work;
H. Estimates of the cubic feet of material to be removed or brought onto
the site;
I. A time schedule and sequence of the work;
J. The name and phone number of the contractor who is doing the work;
K. The name and phone number of the trucking company(s) and
subcontractor(s) assigned to the project;
L. Source of fill or disposal location of material to be excavated;
M. An environmental assessment form (EAF) in compliance with the New
York State Environmental Quality Review Act or an environmental
impact statement, if required;
N. An erosion and sedimentation control plan;
O. A restoration plan; and
P. Other materials, plans, soil testing data, or any other data as required
by the Town Board.
A. No excavation or fill activities shall commence until a permit has been
issued, fees paid, and a financial guarantee has been received.
B. The Town Board shall find that the request is in harmony with the
general purpose of this article, taking into account the site location,
quantity of fill, proximity to EPOD areas, truck traffic impacts, and
neighborhood character. The Town Board shall find that the operation,
maintenance, and restoration procedures will not be detrimental to the
health, safety, or general welfare of persons residing or working in the
vicinity of the operation and the operation is not detrimental or
injurious to the property and improvements in the neighborhood or to
the general welfare of the Town of Penfield.
C. Applications shall be reviewed by the Town Board, which shall make a
determination, in its discretion, of the need to require a public hearing
on this matter. Such public hearing will be held not less than three days
nor more than 30 days after the public hearing notice has been given
prescribing the time, date, and place of the public hearing. Such notice
shall be given by the Town Clerk by causing the same to be published in
§ 250-8.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 250-8.6
1:507
the official newspaper of the Town and by posting said notice on the
bulletin board in the Town Hall. Such notice shall contain a brief
explanation regarding the application. Approval or denial of the permit
application by the Town Board shall be rendered after the conclusion of
any public hearing on said application.
D. In granting any permit, the Town Board may attach such conditions as
deemed necessary to protect public and private property, utilities,
watercourses, or other environmentally sensitive areas. The work shall
be conducted so as to not be hazardous to life or property, and in a
manner that will not create a nuisance.
E. A separate permit is required for each separate, noncontiguous site.
F. The Town Board may waive any of the requirements noted herein if the
applicant can provide sufficient information on the application to show
that the work will conform to the requirements of this article.
G. In addition to the requirements for a fill and excavation permit, the
applicant shall be required to obtain an Environmental Protection
Overlay District (EPOD) permit for work located within a steep slope,
regulated wetland, woodlot, or watercourse overlay district.
H. Fill material shall include inert fill materials, gravel, sand, silt, clay,
and/or loam. Fill material shall exclude solid waste, hazardous waste,
organic materials, tires, refuge, offal, hazardous waste, electronic
waste, or any deleterious materials as defined by the Town of Penfield.
Inert fill material shall include rocks, bricks, concrete, or asphalt that
does not exceed 12 inches in size. All fill/excavated areas shall be
covered with a minimum of six inches of topsoil upon completion of the
filling or excavation to the approved grades. No topsoil sales are
permitted without a permit as described in Article IX.
I. Filling, grading, or excavation work shall only be permitted between
7:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. Monday through Friday and between 8:00 a.m.
and 1:00 p.m. on Saturday, except for Memorial Day, Independence Day,
Labor Day, Thanksgiving Day and Christmas Day. Material hauling
trucks shall enter or exit the premises only within the hours permitted.
All equipment operations shall be restricted to the above hours.
J. The applicant shall limit access to the premises at all times to prevent
unauthorized dumping. Failure to do so may result in the revocation of
the permit.
K. A copy of all permits, if required, from the NYSDOT and/or MCDOT
shall be obtained and submitted prior to start of work.
L. All public roadways shall be cleaned of spillage or windblown materials,
as ordered by the Town representative. The owner shall have a sweeper
and water truck on site within 24 hours of request by Town officials.
Construction access and haul roads shall be maintained at all times and
shall be constructed of stone capable of supporting H-20 loading, as
§ 250-8.6 PENFIELD CODE § 250-8.6
1:508
§ 250-8.7. Inspections.
§ 250-8.8. Exceptions.
A permit shall not be required in the following instances:
defined by the American Association of State Highway and
Transportation Officials (AASHTO).
M. Dust control shall be addressed by use of water, mulch, stone, or other
materials as approved by the Town. These shall be used on haul and
access roads and disturbed areas as ordered by the Town official.
N. Any proposed modifications to the approved plans after a permit has
been granted shall be submitted to the Town Board for review. Field
changes shall be requested with a change order to the Town for review
and approval. No field changes shall occur until the change order is
approved in writing by the Town Board or authorized official.
O. No permit shall be transferable without the written consent of the Town
Board.
A. The Town reserves the right to inspect all operations to verify that the
terms and conditions of any permit are being complied with, and the
cost of inspections shall be reimbursed by the permittee. Failure to
allow access to Town personnel or their agents may result in the
revocation of the permit.
B. The applicant shall provide inspections in accordance with the current
Department of Environmental Conservation SPDES permit for
stormwater discharges. Any disturbance of one acre or more shall
require the filing of a notice of intent (NOI) with the NYSDEC prior to
the start of work. A copy of the NOI shall be provided to the Town of
Penfield, along with a copy of the approved stormwater pollution
prevention plan (SWPPP).
C. All active excavation and fill areas shall not exceed five acres at any one
time. The applicant may request a five-acre disturbance waiver from
the Town of Penfield. If granted, all provisions of the current
Department of Environmental Conservation SPDES permit for
stormwater discharges shall be followed.
A. Operations and activities not exceeding the criteria established herein;
B. Sites subject to Town subdivision and site plan review processes,
provided that the application is approved by the appropriate board or
authorized official;
C. Activities subject to permit requirements in Article XIV, Variances and
Special Use Permits, and/or a conditional use permit;
D. Construction, modification, or replacement of individual septic systems
which do not alter the natural terrain;
§ 250-8.6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 250-8.8
1:509
§ 250-8.9. Penalties for offenses.
E. Grading, filling, or excavation within the right-of-way pursuant to a
permit issued by the Highway Department for work associated with
utilities, road work, or other systems for public use;
F. Grading and trenching for utility installation, maintenance or
inspections, only to the extent of any exemption from the provisions of
this article required by state law and provided that plans are submitted
to the Engineering and/or Planning Department and found to be
acceptable; provided, however, that in no event shall the foregoing be
construed to authorize any explicitly prohibited activities to be
conducted within the Town;
G. Excavation for the purpose of constructing a cellar wall, building, or
part thereof of a structure for which a permit has been issued by the
Town of Penfield Building Department;
H. Any capital or public works improvement project authorized by the
NYSDOT, Monroe County, or Town of Penfield; and
I. Customary agricultural operations that are not located in an
Environmental Protection Overlay District (EPOD).
A. The authorized official shall notify the applicant, in writing, of any
violations of this article. The applicant shall have seven calendar days
to remedy any violations.
B. Any person, firm, or corporation who or which violates any provisions of
this article shall be subject to the penalties set forth in § 250-15.9 of this
chapter, as may be amended.
§ 250-8.8 PENFIELD CODE § 250-8.9
1:510
ARTICLE IX
Mining and Topsoil Sales
§ 250-9.1. Title and interpretation.
This article shall be entitled and known as "Mining and Topsoil Sales."
Nothing in this article is intended nor shall be construed to authorize within
the Town any explicitly prohibited use.
§ 250-9.2. Purpose.
It is the purpose of this article to regulate the manner of construction
on, removal of materials from, filling of, draining, cleaning, operating, and
use of any lands or other premises for sand or gravel pits, stone quarries,
topsoil sales or for any other mining and sale of excavated materials and
prohibiting the use of any lands or other premises for the aforesaid
purposes, which do not comply with this article.
§ 250-9.3. Applicability.
§ 250-9.4. Permit provisions.
A. All mining and topsoil excavation activities shall be in conformity with
the provisions of this article and shall be located only within areas
specifically permitted according to the provisions of this chapter.
B. The provisions of this article shall regulate any mining activity that does
not fall within the NYSDEC's jurisdiction as defined in the
Environmental Conservation Law.
A. Before any mining or topsoil sales activities are commenced and before
any topsoil, earth, sand, gravel, rock or other naturally occurring
material is removed from the ground, the owner or lessee of the
premises or the agent of either, duly authorized in writing, for such
purposes, shall obtain a permit therefor, and for that purpose shall file
with the Town Clerk an application for a permit in such form as the
Town Board may prescribe. Each application shall include a detailed
report of the proposed work and a plan setting forth in detail the nature
and extent of the proposed excavation. Such report and plan shall show
the exact condition of the subject plot or premises of land both before
and after the proposed excavation, including the location of haul roads,
impoundment areas, screening operations, water control features,
erosion control measures, and the sequence of operations. There shall
be filed with such application a legal description of said premises,
together with the name and address of the owner of record of such
premises and the names and addresses of the holders of any mortgages
thereon. The location of all buildings upon said premises shall be set
forth upon the plan accompanying said application, which shall be
drawn to scale, giving the location and dimension of any and all
buildings or other structures thereon. Such plan shall further indicate
any and all public or private streets or rights-of-way adjacent to, in or
§ 250-9.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 250-9.4
1:511
upon said premises. A letter of intent shall be submitted outlining the
estimated amount of material to be removed and the schedule for the
work.
B. Any permit issued hereunder shall be conditioned that the premises,
upon the conclusion of such excavation, shall be filled within a period to
be specified therein with clean, nonburnable fill containing no garbage,
refuge, offal, hazardous waste, electronic waste, or any deleterious
materials.
C. Dust-preventive measures shall be used to prevent dust from spreading
from the premises. The restoration of the premises shall include
grading to provide a safe and stable grade. The restoration shall
provide at least six inches of topsoil over all excavated areas, which
shall be immediately reseeded with a permanent seed mixture or other
fast-growing surface vegetation until growth is reestablished.
D. The Town Clerk shall, upon presentation of a duly verified application
for a mining or topsoil sales permit accompanied by the consent, in
writing, of the owner, shall request a review from the Town Board. The
Town Clerk shall issue the permit upon obtaining the Town Board’s
approval for the issuance of a permit upon any conditions as may be
imposed by the Town Board in a particular case. The applicant shall pay
all associated fees as set by Town Board resolution and provide a
financial guarantee (cash or a letter of credit from an approved
financial institution) in an amount determined and approved by the
Town Board. Any financial guarantee shall ensure the faithful
performance of the terms and conditions of this article and any
conditions noted in the permit. Each permit shall be conditioned on the
observance of all municipal ordinances. Further, the applicant shall
indemnify and hold harmless the Town Board, the Town of Penfield, and
its employees and its agents for any and all damage to property of the
Town, and for compliance with the terms and conditions of such permit.
The cash proceeds of any guarantee, in the event of default, shall be
conveyed to the Town and the Town of Penfield shall be entitled to
maintain any action thereupon. Said guarantee shall remain in full force
and effect until a certificate of completion has been issued by the Town
Engineer certifying that all provisions of this article and the conditions
of any permit issued have been fully complied with.
E. Applicants shall complete and submit an environmental assessment
form (EAF) or an environmental impact statement, if required, and
meet any and all requirements of the New York State Environmental
Quality Review Act (SEQR), the New York State Department of
Environmental Conservation (NYSDEC), and the United States Army
Corps of Engineers (USACOE).
F. Each permit issued pursuant to the terms and conditions set forth in
this article shall be granted for no more than six months after the date
of its issuance unless further extended by the Town Board, upon receipt
§ 250-9.4 PENFIELD CODE § 250-9.4
1:512
§ 250-9.5. Dimensional and safety requirements.
of input from the Town staff. Any extensions shall require payment of
fees as may be determined by the Town Board.
G. All applications for mining or topsoil sales shall be reviewed by the
Town Board, which shall make a determination, in its discretion, of the
need to require a public hearing on the matter. Such public hearing will
be held not less than three days nor more than 30 days after the public
hearing notice has been given prescribing the time, date, and place of
the public hearing. Such notice shall be given by the Town Clerk by
causing the same to be published in the official newspaper of the Town
and by posting said notice on the bulletin board in the Town Hall. Such
notice shall contain a brief explanation regarding the application.
Approval or denial of the permit application by the Town Board shall be
rendered after the conclusion of any public hearing on said application.
H. Any proposed modifications to the approved plans after a permit has
been granted shall be submitted to the Town Board for review and
approval. No action shall be taken until a written approval of the Town
Board or authorized official has been issued.
A. No mining or topsoil sales operation shall be conducted closer than 100
feet to a public right-of-way or an adjoining property line, except that
grading may be conducted within such limits in order to provide
adequate access to and buffer of the premises. The setback/buffer area
shall not be used for any use in conjunction with the excavation and
appurtenant activities except for one public notice sign for identifying
use, buffering, and those conditions stated in the permit.
B. All equipment, structures, and other operational facilities, including
sedimentation ponds, shall not be closer than 100 feet to the public
right-of-way or to an adjoining property line.
C. Access and haul roads shall be constructed of a stone base able to
support an H-20 loading, as defined by the American Association of
State Highway and Transportation Officials (AASHTO). All access and
haul roads leading to public highways shall be dust- and mud-free.
Mining/Topsoil screening operations shall be located to minimize
impacts of noise and dust to adjoining residents. The contractor/
operator shall provide dust control measures at all times.
D. Verification of volume of materials to be removed and sufficient reserve
of topsoil for restoration work shall be provided, in writing, from a
licensed professional engineer, surveyor, or landscape architect.
E. Fencing shall be required on all sides of the excavation area with a
depth greater than four feet (vertical).
F. Mining and topsoil sales operations shall only be permitted between
7:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. Monday through Friday and between 8:00 a.m.
and 1:00 p.m. on Saturday, except for Memorial Day, Independence Day,
§ 250-9.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 250-9.5
1:513
§ 250-9.6. Inspections.
§ 250-9.7. Exceptions.
A permit shall not be required in the following instances:
Labor Day, Thanksgiving Day and Christmas Day. Hauling trucks shall
enter and exit the premises only within the hours permitted. All
equipment operations shall be restricted to the above hours.
G. All public roadways shall be cleaned of spillage or windblown materials,
as ordered by the Town representative. The owner shall have a sweeper
and water truck on site within 24 hours of request by Town officials.
H. All equipment, buildings, structures, etc. shall be removed from the site
within two months of termination of the permit.
A. The Town reserves the right to inspect all operations to verify that the
terms and conditions of any permit are being complied with. Failure to
allow access to Town personnel or their agents may be grounds to
revoke the permit. The cost of Town inspections shall be reimbursed to
the Town by the applicant.
B. The applicant shall provide for inspections in accordance with the
current Department of Environmental Conservation SPDES permit for
stormwater discharges. Any disturbance of one acre or more shall
require the filing of a notice of intent (NOI) with the NYSDEC prior to
the start of work. A copy of the NOI shall be provided to the Town in an
approved stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPPP).
C. The active mining and topsoil sales area shall not exceed five acres at
any one time. The applicant may request a five-acre disturbance waiver
from the Town Board. All provisions of the current Department of
Environmental Conservation SPDES permit for stormwater discharges
shall be followed.
A. Nothing contained in this article shall be construed to prevent a person
from removing topsoil from one part of his/her land to another part of
the same premises when such removal is necessary as an accessory use
or is made for the purpose of improving said property;
B. Sites subject to Town subdivision and site plan review processes,
provided that the application has received approval by the appropriate
board or authorized official;
C. Excavation for the purpose of constructing a basement wall, building,
or utility, or part thereof, for which a permit has been issued by the
Town of Penfield Building Department;
D. Any capital or public works project authorized by the Town of Penfield,
NYSDOT, or Monroe County; and
§ 250-9.5 PENFIELD CODE § 250-9.7
1:514
§ 250-9.8. Penalties for offenses.
E. Customary agricultural operations not located in an Environmental
Protection Overlay District (EPOD).
A. The authorized official shall notify the applicant, in writing, of any
violations of this article. The applicant shall have seven calendar days
to remedy any violations.
B. Any person, firm, or corporation who or which violates any provisions of
this article shall be subject to the penalties set forth in § 250-15.9 of this
chapter, as may be amended.
§ 250-9.7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 250-9.8
1:515

ARTICLE X
Signs
§ 250-10.1. Purpose and scope.
§ 250-10.2. Sign permits.
After the effective date of this article and except as otherwise herein
provided, no person shall erect, enlarge or structurally alter any sign
without first obtaining a permit therefor from the authorized official.
Application for the permit shall be made according to the following
regulations:
§ 250-10.3. Special use permits.
A. The purpose of this article is to provide standards to safeguard life,
health, property and public welfare by controlling the number, location,
construction, installation, illumination and maintenance of all signs and
sign structures in the Town of Penfield.
B. It is further the purpose of this article to regulate all signs by
controlling the quality and quantity of signs so as to provide for the
identification of the various business and professional enterprises in the
Town, while at the same time maintaining and improving the visual
quality of the community.
A. Applications for sign permits shall be made in writing to the authorized
official by the owner, lessee or erector and be accompanied by materials
the authorized official may deem necessary, such as, but not limited to:
a scale drawing showing dimensions, proposed design, the legend,
colors, materials, structural details and a tape or plot location map
delineating the location of buildings, parking areas, other signs on the
same property, frontage of each unit, and/or any fences or other
obstructions in relation to the designated location of the proposed sign.
Applicants shall show written approval from the owner of the property
for such sign permits.
B. It shall be the duty of the authorized official, upon filing of an
application for a permit to erect, enlarge or structurally alter a sign, to
examine such plans, specifications and, if necessary, the building or
premises upon which the sign is proposed to be erected. If it shall
appear that the proposed sign is in compliance with all the
requirements of this article and all other regulations of the Town of
Penfield, the authorized official shall issue a permit for the proposed
sign.
A. Applications for signs which are not permitted under this article shall
be made in writing to the authorized official. The authorized official may
issue a permit for such a sign only after the Zoning Board of Appeals or
the Town Board, in the case of the Four Corners and LaSalle's Landing
Districts, approves a special use permit for such a sign. Upon referral of
§ 250-10.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 250-10.3
1:517
§ 250-10.4. Sign fees.
Prior to the issuance of any permit by the Town Clerk for the erection,
enlargement or structural alteration of a sign, a fee shall be paid in
accordance with the schedule of fees established by resolution by the Town
Board.
§ 250-10.5. Sign measurement.
The area of double-faced signs shall be calculated as the total area of both
sides for the purpose of assessing fees. The area of irregularly shaped signs
or panel signs of individual letters shall be calculated by using the total
rectangular area encompassed by the outline.
§ 250-10.6. Permit not transferable.
No permit issued under the terms of this article shall be transferable to any
person without the consent of the authorized official.
such an application to the applicable board, a public hearing shall be
held, with notice of such hearing published in accordance with Article
XV, § 250-15.4. The Zoning Board of Appeals or the Town Board, in the
case of the Four Corners and LaSalle's Landing Districts, may, after
holding such public hearing, direct the authorized official to issue such
permit.
B. Before directing the authorized official to issue a sign permit, the
Zoning Board of Appeals or the Town Board, as the case may be, shall
find that the applicant has demonstrated the following facts to be true:
(1) The proposed sign is in harmony with the standards for permitted
signs and within the spirit of this article.
(2) The proposed sign shall be compatible with and not be detrimental
to neighborhood properties.
(3) The proposed sign does not, by reason of its location, create a
hazard of any nature to the public in general or to any owner or
occupant of neighborhood properties.
(4) The proposed sign does not in any way interfere with the lawful and
aesthetic enjoyment of the public highway or neighborhood
properties.
(5) Where applicable, the proposed sign is necessary to adequately
identify the business(es).
C. The existence of corporate or franchise standards for the design, size or
color scheme of signs shall not be deemed a material reason for
granting a special use permit.
§ 250-10.3 PENFIELD CODE § 250-10.7
1:518
§ 250-10.7. Permit term.
A sign permit shall become null and void if the work for which the permit
was issued has not been started within a period of six months after the date
of issuance of the permit.
§ 250-10.8. Change in advertising copy.
When a property is sold or changes tenancy, a permit shall be required to
change the ad, copy or message on an existing sign. All such changes shall
be reviewed and approved by the authorized official.
§ 250-10.9. Sign maintenance requirements.
The authorized official shall require the proper maintenance of all signs.
Such signs, together with their supports, shall be kept in good repair. The
display surfaces shall be kept neatly painted at all times. The authorized
official may order the removal of any sign and its support structures that
are not maintained by those parties being identified in accordance with
the provisions of this article. Painting, repainting, cleaning or repair
maintenance shall not be considered an erection or alteration which
requires a permit unless a structural change is made.
§ 250-10.10. Sign location.
The location of all signs shall be subject to the approval of the authorized
official unless otherwise specified by the Zoning Board of Appeals or the
Town Board, as the case may be.
§ 250-10.11. General provisions.
The following provisions shall apply to all signs erected, enlarged or
maintained within the Town:
A. Illuminated signs or lighting devices may be permitted, provided that
such signs employ only lights emitting a light of constant intensity, and
no sign shall be illuminated by, or contain flashing or moving light or
lights.
B. All illuminated signs or lighting devices shall be placed or directed so as
to be localized and unobtrusive. An electrical certificate shall be
submitted for every electrically illuminated sign from a Town of Penfield
authorized electrical inspection agency in accordance with Chapter 94,
Article II, Electrical Code, of the Town Code.
C. Except as may be permitted by this article, or any other provisions of
this chapter, the use of pennants, banners, spinners, streamers, moving
signs, or flashing, glittering or reflective, animated or rotating signs or
similar eye-catching devices shall not be permitted. Preexisting signs in
the above category shall conform to this revised regulation immediately
upon the adoption of this article.
§ 250-10.7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 250-10.11
1:519
D. No attached sign shall extend above the roofline of the building to
which it is attached.
E. Graphics, trademarks, and logos shall not exceed 50% of the face area
of any sign. In the case of a double-faced sign, the above shall not
exceed 50% per face.
F. No billboards shall be permitted.
G. No sign shall be erected or maintained so as to prevent ingress to or
egress from any door, window, or fire escape, or so as to prevent free
access from one part of a roof to any other part.
H. No sign, other than safety-related signs, shall be attached to a fire
escape.
I. No sign shall be erected in such a manner as to confuse or obstruct the
view of any traffic sign, signal or device.
J. No sign of any size or description, except traffic signs placed by public
agencies, or mailbox signs, may be erected, placed or maintained
within the highway limits of any public right-of-way within the Town of
Penfield, except as otherwise approved by the Town Board and any
applicable state or county agency.
K. No permanent sign which is suspended over any portion of a public
right-of-way or a public sidewalk in the easement in which the sidewalk
is located shall be permitted or may remain unless the owner delivers to
the Town of Penfield an indemnification agreement, in a form and
substance acceptable to the Town Attorney, which holds harmless the
Town of Penfield for liability or damage suffered by all persons by
reason of the construction or maintenance of such sign; said agreement
shall be submitted prior to the issuance of a sign permit.
L. Attached signs shall be securely attached to the building or to
structurally sound standards.
M. In addition to signs permitted in §§ 250-10.12 and 250-10.13, each
separate business shall be permitted to display one portable temporary
on-site sign. Businesses shall be permitted to advertise their name,
hours of operation and "OPEN" on one portable temporary on-site sign,
subject to the following:
(1) Every sign must be placed on the property where business is
conducted and not within the right-of-way;
(2) The purpose of such signs is intended to only advertise the business
and its hours of operation. No product or pricing information shall
be permitted on such signs; and
(3) Such signs shall be displayed only between the hours of 6:00 a.m.
and 11:00 p.m.
§ 250-10.11 PENFIELD CODE § 250-10.11
1:520
§ 250-10.12. Freestanding signs for business and industry.
N. The discontinuance of business for a period of 60 consecutive days at
any given location shall require the immediate removal of all signs
relating to said business.
O. Any sign found posted or erected within the Town of Penfield contrary
to the provisions of this chapter may be removed by the Town's
authorized official in the manner prescribed by law. The property owner
and/or the person responsible for any such illegal posting shall be cited
and liable for the cost incurred in the inspection and/or removal
thereof, and the Town's authorized official is authorized to effect the
collection of said cost.
P. No person shall operate, stand, or park a vehicle on any property or
cause such vehicle to be so operated, stood, or parked for the purpose
of advertising, except that advertising notices may be put on a motor
vehicle when such vehicle is in use for normal delivery or passenger
service and not merely or mainly for the purpose of advertising.
A. No building to be served by a freestanding sign shall be set back less
than 35 feet from the property line.
B. A freestanding sign identifying a property with:
(1) One to three separate businesses shall not exceed 20 square feet
per face.
(2) Four to six separate businesses shall not exceed 35 square feet per
face.
(3) More than six separate businesses shall not exceed 50 square feet
per face.
C. No property shall be permitted to have more than one freestanding
sign.
D. Freestanding signs shall be set back not less than 20 feet from the front
property line, 25 feet from any adjacent commercial or industrial
property and 50 feet from any adjacent residential property.
E. Freestanding signs shall not exceed a height of 20 feet.
F. Informational signage. In addition to the signage requirements
specified in this chapter, in cases where commercial development is
serviced by an internal access road, said development may be identified
by freestanding signs located where the access roads intersect existing
roads. Such information signs shall be subject to the following criteria:
(1) Such sign(s) shall be of a freestanding directory nature and only
contain the names and addresses of the businesses sharing the
access road.
§ 250-10.11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 250-10.12
1:521
§ 250-10.13. Building-mounted signs permitted for business and
industry.
(2) The sign(s) shall be no larger than 40 square feet in size per side of
a double-faced sign.
(3) Such sign(s) shall be located in such a manner that it is placed
within the property on which the access road is located and set
back a minimum of 10 feet off the macadam surface of said access
road and 20 feet from the state right-of-way and not closer than 50
feet to any adjacent residential property.
(4) Illumination of such sign(s) shall only be from an external source.
(5) Such sign(s) shall not be more than 10 feet in height and shall not
obstruct vision for ingress/egress.
(6) Such sign(s) shall be consistent in design and architectural
treatment to other signage in said development, subject to review
by the authorized official, the Zoning Board of Appeals, or the Town
Board, as the case may be.
G. Waterfront signage. Signage for any development with frontage on
Irondequoit Bay shall be subject to the following restrictions:
(1) In addition to the freestanding sign permitted to identify the
business at the right-of-way, one additional freestanding sign may
be placed no closer than 20 feet to the water's edge to further
identify the business from the Irondequoit Bay. Such signs shall not
exceed 20 square feet in area.
(2) An illuminated freestanding sign shall be externally lit and no
"back-lit" illumination shall be permitted.
A. Permanent signs for business, industrial and professional uses attached
to buildings or structures shall be located on the same premises as the
business, industry or profession to which they refer.
B. The total area of all permanent business signs attached to buildings or
structures (excluding freestanding signs) shall not exceed two square
feet in area for each linear foot of building adjacent to the space being
used for business purposes. The area of freestanding signage shall be in
addition to and not included in calculating the total area of other
permanent business signs. The total area of all permanent industrial
signs attached to buildings or structures (excluding freestanding signs)
shall not exceed 400 square feet. The area of freestanding signage shall
be in addition to and not included in calculating the total area of other
permanent industrial signs. The property owner shall be responsible for
submitting a sign package for his/her property, identifying all proposed
sizes, colors, and designs for the signs to be installed, to the authorized
official or appropriate board for approval.
§ 250-10.12 PENFIELD CODE § 250-10.13
1:522
§ 250-10.14. Gasoline service station signs.
The following signs shall be permitted for gasoline service stations:
§ 250-10.15. Other signs.
§ 250-10.16. Residential signs.
C. Each individual business establishment, shopping center or industrial
use shall be permitted to have one identification sign attached to a
building on the premises. The area requirements for such signage shall
be consistent with the requirements of Subsection B.
A. Building-mounted and freestanding signs identifying gasoline service
stations shall comply with the requirements of §§ 250-10.12 and
250-10.13 of this article.
B. One two-by-three-foot four-sided sign providing information regarding
the safe operation of self-service gasoline pumps shall be provided for
each island where pumps are to be operated by customers.
C. Price signs shall be provided on all gasoline pumps as required by state
law but shall not require a permit. In no case shall pricing signs be
incorporated in any wall-mounted or freestanding business
identification sign.
A. Signage permitted for farm market operations shall be consistent with
the requirements for permanent signs as set forth in §§ 250-10.12 and
250-10.13 of this article; except in the case of farm markets where
produce is offered on site, two additional temporary, double-faced,
freestanding signs may be placed on the premises identifying the types
of produce offered on site; such portable signs shall not be located
closer than 10 feet to any property line. In situations where "U-Pick"
operations are not clearly visible from the right-of-way, the operator
may request a permit from the authorized official to install portable
temporary off-site signage, on private property at the nearest
intersection, during the growing season to be advertised. No extension
to said time frame shall be permitted without approval from the Zoning
Board of Appeals. Such U-Pick signs shall be removed within seven days
after the end of the growing season to which they relate.
B. Time-and-temperature devices may be permitted for business and
industry, subject to the requirements of this article regulating wall,
freestanding and/or projecting signs.
A. For single-family homes, one nameplate sign not exceeding two square
feet per face in area indicating the name and address of the occupant
shall be permitted. Nameplate signs may either be building- or groundmounted.
Ground-mounted signs shall be placed on private property
and shall not be located closer than 10 feet to any side or rear property
line. Said signs shall not require a permit.
§ 250-10.13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 250-10.16
1:523
§ 250-10.17. Traffic control signs.
Signs accessory to parking areas, designating entrances and exits to and
from a parking area, are limited to one sign for each such exit and entrance,
and a maximum size of two square feet each (two square feet per face) shall
be permitted. No permit shall be required. Said signage shall be utilized
for traffic control purposes only and not identification of a use(s) on the
property on which it is located.
§ 250-10.18. Parking area signs.
One sign per parking area designating the conditions of use or identity
of such parking areas, and limited to a maximum size of six square feet,
shall be permitted, provided that on a corner lot two such signs shall be
permitted, one facing each street. No parking area sign shall be placed on
private property, and such signs shall not be located closer than 10 feet to
any side or rear property line. Said sign shall not require a permit.
§ 250-10.19. Home occupation signs.
Where a home occupation is permitted by § 250-5.1D(3), one nameplate
sign may be used to identify the home occupation. Such signs shall not
exceed two square feet per face in area and shall be located on private
property and not less than 10 feet from any side or rear property line.
Said sign shall require a permit and may be building-mounted or groundmounted.
No portable temporary signage shall be permitted in association
with such home occupation.
§ 250-10.20. Portable temporary signs.
B. Each residential subdivision shall be permitted to install two
freestanding signs, at the entrance of each street as it intersects an
existing Town dedicated street, to permanently identify the name of the
subdivision. Said signs shall not exceed 20 square feet in area and any
decorative supporting system shall not exceed 40 square feet in area,
inclusive. All such signs shall be located on private property, shall
comply with all setback requirements in § 250-10.12 of this article, and
their maintenance shall be the responsibility of the owner on whose
property said sign(s) is located. A deed restriction in a form and
substance acceptable to the Town Attorney shall be submitted prior to
the issuance of a sign permit.
A. Portable temporary signs shall not be permitted within any state,
county or Town right-of-way, attached to fences, trees, utility poles,
bridges, traffic signs, and shall in no way obstruct or impair vision or
traffic in any manner or create a hazard or disturbance to the health
and welfare of the general public. Such signs shall be located on private
property and not closer than 10 feet to any side or rear property line.
B. Portable temporary on-site and/or off-site signs shall be permitted to be
used in connection with publicizing any charitable or civic event or
§ 250-10.16 PENFIELD CODE § 250-10.20
1:524
§ 250-10.21. Real estate signs.
Signs advertising the prospective sale or rental of residential, commercial
and industrial properties shall comply with the following standards:
issue. Such signs shall be erected only on private property with the
consent of the owner or occupant of the property on which such signs
are located. Such signs shall be installed no more than 14 calendar days
prior to and must be removed within two days after the event to which
they relate or decision on the issue to which they relate, as the case
may be.
C. The use of one portable temporary on-site sign used in conjunction with
contractors, e.g., siding, roofing, painting, chimney sweeps, lawn
maintenance, snow plowing, etc., pertaining to properties in the Town
of Penfield is permitted from commencement to completion of work.
Such sign shall be placed on private property and not be located closer
than 10 feet to any side or rear property line. Said sign shall not require
a permit.
D. The aggregate area of all temporary signs shall not exceed 60 square
feet on a single lot or premises.
A. Such signs shall not be permitted within any state, county or Town
right-of-way, attached to fences, trees, utility poles, bridges, traffic
signs, and shall in no way obstruct or impair vision or traffic in any
manner or create a hazard or disturbance to the health and welfare of
the general public. Such signs shall be placed on private property and
not closer than 10 feet to any side or rear property line. Said signs shall
not require a permit.
B. Undeveloped lots not exceeding one acre in area that are being offered
for sale or lease shall be permitted to display one portable temporary
sign. Such sign shall be erected on private property and not closer than
10 feet to any side or rear property line. Said signs shall not require a
permit.
C. Sites greater than one acre in area that are being offered for sale or
lease shall be permitted to display one thirty-two-square-foot single- or
double-faced freestanding sign placed on such site to identify its sale,
lease or proposed development, which sign shall be no more than eight
feet in height from adjacent grade. Such sign shall be erected on
private property and not closer than 10 feet to any side or rear property
line. Such signs shall require a permit and shall be removed within two
days of completion of the sale, lease or development of the subject site.
D. Single-family residences for sale or lease are permitted to display one
portable temporary on-site sign on site. Such sign shall be erected on
private property and not be located closer than 10 feet to any side or
rear property line. In addition to the portable temporary on-site sign,
portable temporary off-site signs may be displayed on off-site private
§ 250-10.20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 250-10.21
1:525
§ 250-10.22. Driveway signs.
Signs indicating the private nature of driveways or "no trespassing" signs
shall be permitted on the site, provided that the size of any such sign shall
not exceed one square foot per face. Such signs shall not be less than 10
feet from any side or rear property line. Such signs shall not require a
permit.
§ 250-10.23. Existing signs.
Any sign existing and erected before the adoption of this article, which
is nonconforming and for which a permit was issued, shall be removed
within three years from June 1, 2011, except that in no event shall such an
existing sign be required to be removed less than 10 years from the date
of issuance of the permit. Such nonconforming signs shall not be altered,
rebuilt, enlarged, extended, or relocated, unless such action changes a
nonconforming sign into a conforming sign as provided herein.
§ 250-10.24. Exemptions.
The following signs shall be exempt from permit requirements:
property on Saturdays and Sundays only between the hours of 10:00
a.m. and 6:00 p.m. directing prospective buyers to the residence being
offered for sale or rent. Said signs shall be removed by 6:00 p.m. on
each day. Said signs shall not require a permit.
E. On developed commercial and industrial sites where the advertising of
lease space is necessary, the owner shall be permitted to display one
thirty-two-square-foot single- or double-faced sign advertising the sale
or lease of the structure(s) or individual tenant spaces within the
structure, which sign shall be no more than eight feet in height from
adjacent grade. Such sign shall be erected on private property and not
closer than 10 feet to any side or rear property line. Such signs shall
require a permit and shall be permitted for a period of one year. All such
signs shall be removed within two days of completion of the sale, lease
or development of the subject site. In addition, the property owner shall
be permitted to place signage inside of the window of the space to be
leased identifying lease space available. No permit shall be required for
such signs. All such signs addressed in this section must be removed
once the vacancy has been leased.
A. Public signs: signs of a noncommercial nature and in the public
interest, erected by or on the order of a public officer in the
performance of his/her public duty, such as safety signs, danger signs,
trespassing signs, traffic control signs, memorial plaques, signs of
historical interest and the like.
B. Integral signs. Names of buildings, dates of erection, monumental
citations, commemorative tablets and the like, when carved into stone,
concrete or similar material, or made of bronze, aluminum, or other
§ 250-10.21 PENFIELD CODE § 250-10.24
1:526
§ 250-10.25. Political signs.
Each property owner, resident or tenant of any lot or premises may display
portable temporary on-site political signs subject to the following standards:
permanent types of construction are considered an integral part of the
structure.
C. Garage sale signs. Each property owner conducting a garage sale shall
be permitted to erect portable temporary on-site and/or off-site signs in
conjunction with said sale on private property only. Said signs shall be
erected by the individual conducting the sale no sooner than 24 hours
prior to the sale and must be removed on the last day of said sale. Such
signs shall not be permitted within any state, county or Town right-ofway,
attached to fences, trees, utility poles, bridges, traffic signs, and
shall in no way obstruct nor impair vision or traffic in any manner or
create a hazard or disturbance to the health and welfare of the general
public. Such sign shall be erected on private property and not be
located closer than 10 feet to any side or rear property line.
D. Ideological signs shall be exempted from the permit requirements, but
shall comply with dimensional and setback requirements set forth in
Article II of this chapter.
A. Such signs shall not require a permit.
B. Such signs must be removed within two days after the election to which
they relate. In cases where signs have been installed prior to a primary
election, said signs may remain in place until after a subsequent
general election, in which case they must be removed consistent with
this section.
C. The owner or occupant of the property on which such signs are posted
must consent to the erection of such signs.
D. The political Town party leader, or in the absence of a political Town
party leader the candidate, shall designate a sign coordinator
responsible for compliance with this section with respect to placement,
size, location and maintenance during a campaign. The sign
coordinator shall provide the authorized official with his/her name and
appropriate means of contact, such as telephone number and/or e-mail
address.
E. Such signs shall not be permitted within any state, county or Town
right-of-way, attached to fences, trees, utility poles, bridges, traffic
signs, and shall in no way obstruct or impair vision or traffic in any
manner or create a hazard or disturbance to the health and welfare of
the general public. Such sign shall be erected on private property and
not closer than 10 feet to any side or rear property line.
§ 250-10.24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 250-10.25
1:527
§ 250-10.26. Four Corners signage.
Businesses operating within the Four Corners District shall be subject to the
requirements of this article, with the exception of the following:
F. Such signs shall be displayed on private property only and shall not be
displayed on any publicly owned lands and shall comply with all other
requirements of the law.
G. The aggregate area of all such signs shall not exceed 60 square feet on
a single lot or premises.
A. Freestanding signs shall not be located closer than 15 feet to the front
property line nor closer than 50 feet to any adjacent residential
property.
B. Freestanding signs shall be no greater than eight feet in height.
C. Illumination of wall-mounted or freestanding signs shall only be from an
external source.
D. Such sign shall be consistent in design, architectural treatment and the
use of materials with the buildings and uses it is intended to serve.
E. Businesses shall be permitted to display one portable temporary on-site
sign. Portable temporary on-site signs are permitted, subject to the
requirements of § 250-10.11M of this article.
§ 250-10.25 PENFIELD CODE § 250-10.26
1:528
ARTICLE XI
Subdivision Approval
§ 250-11.1. Purpose.
The purpose of subdivision approval is to ensure compliance with the
objectives of this chapter, thereby promoting the public health, safety and
general welfare.
§ 250-11.2. Authorization to approve or deny subdivision plats.
§ 250-11.3. Factors for consideration.
The appropriate board's subdivision review shall include, but is not limited
to, the following considerations:
A. The power to approve, approve with conditions, or deny subdivision
plats as required by this article is vested in the Planning Board or Town
Board, as the case may be. Whenever any subdivision of land is
proposed to be made, and before any contract for the sale of or any
offer to sell any lots in such subdivision or any part thereof is made, and
before any permit for the erection of a structure in such proposed
subdivision shall be granted, the subdivider or his/her duly authorized
agent shall apply in writing for approval of such proposed subdivision in
accordance with adopted current requirements and procedures of the
appropriate board.
B. In the event a transfer of property is proposed which does not create an
additional building lot or substandard lot, the authorized official shall
review said transfer and may require information including, but not
limited to, instrument surveys of all affected properties and/or input
from the Planning Board or Town Board, as the case may be. No deed
for such transfer of property shall be accepted by the Assessor unless
accompanied by a written recommendation from the authorized official.
C. In the event that property previously subdivided is proposed to be
resubdivided, resulting in a reduction of the number of approved lots,
the Planning Board or Town Board, as the case may be, shall review the
proposed resubdivision plat and, at its option, require a public hearing
to properly consider such resubdivision. The appropriate board may
approve, deny or approve with conditions said request for
resubdivision, in conformance with the adopted rules and regulations of
the Penfield Planning Board or Town Board, as the case may be.
D. The owner of property in the Town of Penfield is not permitted to
mortgage less than the entire parcel of land.
A. Character of the land, including topography and watercourses.
B. Conformity to the Official Zoning Map and harmony with the current
Comprehensive Plan of the Town.
§ 250-11.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 250-11.3
1:529
C. Current development regulations and specifications.
D. Street layout and design.
E. Street names.
F. Arrangement of lots.
G. Drainage improvements.
H. Utility, sidewalk and pedestrian access, and conservation easements.
I. Parks and open space.
(1) Parks, open spaces, and natural features, including ownership, use,
and maintenance of such lands. Where deemed essential by the
Planning Board or Town Board, as the case may be, upon
consideration of the particular type of development proposed in the
subdivision, and especially in large-scale neighborhood unit
developments not anticipated in the Comprehensive Plan, the
Planning Board or Town Board, as the case may be, may require the
dedication or preservation of areas or sites of a character, extent,
and location suitable to the needs created by such development for
a park or parks, playground or other recreational uses.
(2) If the Planning Board or Town Board, as the case may be,
determines that a suitable park or parks of adequate size cannot be
properly located in any such subdivision, or are otherwise not
practical, the Board shall require, as a condition of approval of the
subdivision plat, a payment to the Town of a playground or
recreation site and development fee as established by resolution by
the Town Board. Such fee shall be paid to the Town Clerk at the
time of the issuance of a building permit for new residential or
apartment construction, and shall be used exclusively to purchase,
acquire, develop and equip park, playground and other
recreational areas.
J. Density calculation. An applicant shall subtract from the total land area
the following: land for roads and streets, areas unsuited for
development, areas left vacant for park and recreation facilities,
buffering, and all other applicable requirements. The density
calculation can then be performed based on the minimum lot size and
density requirements of the zoning district.
K. Special benefited districts required, including, but not limited to,
lighting, sewer, water, ponds, parks, or other improvements.
L. Applications utilizing on-site individual sewage disposal systems will
require the approval of the Monroe County Health Department.
Proposed lot geometry must conform to the Monroe County Health
Department's criteria as well as this chapter.
M. Documents required for dedication of public improvements.
§ 250-11.3 PENFIELD CODE § 250-11.4
1:530
§ 250-11.4. Cluster development.
§ 250-11.5. Required subdivision map.
A. The Planning Board or Town Board, as the case may be, is empowered
to modify applicable provisions of this chapter in accordance with the
provisions of Town Law § 278 for the purpose of enabling and
encouraging flexibility of design and development of land in such a
manner as to promote the most appropriate use of land, to facilitate the
adequate and economic use of streets and utilities and to preserve the
natural and scenic qualities of open lands.
B. A subdivider or the Planning Board or Town Board, as the case may be,
may request the use of Town Law § 278, in which case the subdivider
shall present, along with the proposal in accordance with the provisions
of Town Law § 278, a conventional sketch plat which is consistent with
all the criteria established by this chapter.
C. Upon determination of the Planning Board or Town Board, as the case
may be, that such proposal is suitable for application under Town Law
§ 278, the applicant may proceed with his/her application for
subdivision review.
D. On the filing of a plat in which Town Law § 278 has been used in the
office of the County Clerk, the subdivider shall file a copy with the Town
Clerk, who shall make appropriate notations and reference thereto on
the Official Zoning Map.
E. For any areas that are intended as open space with the intent to
preserve the natural and scenic qualities of open lands, which may
include otherwise considered "nonconforming lots" as deemed
appropriate per the use of Town Law § 278, the plat shall incorporate a
note identifying the approval per Town Law § 278 and therefore is not
subject to further subdivision.
A. For the purpose of this chapter, the division of any premises into more
than one lot is hereby declared to be a subdivision. No permit for any
construction shall be issued for more than one main structure on any
premises unless a map of said premises has been prepared in
accordance with all applicable statutes and ordinances and in
accordance with the current adopted rules and regulations of the
Penfield Planning Board or Town Board, as the case may be, and the
map has been filed in the office of the Monroe County Clerk.
B. Approval of a final plat shall expire within 180 days after the date of the
Planning Board resolution of approval as provided by Town Law § 276.
Extension may be granted by the Planning Board or Town Board, as the
case may be, under Town Law § 276.
§ 250-11.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 250-11.5
1:531

ARTICLE XII
Site Plan Approval
§ 250-12.1. Purpose.
The purpose of site plan approval is to ensure compliance with the
objectives of this chapter, thereby promoting the public health, safety and
general welfare.
§ 250-12.2. Authorization to approve or deny site plans.
The power to approve, approve with conditions, or deny site plans as
required by this article is vested in the Planning Board or Town Board,
as the case may be. Furthermore, the appropriate board/authorized official
in the approval process may require ongoing maintenance of approved
commercial development subject to the requirements of § 250-7.12. Prior
to issuing a building permit, the authorized official shall refer the site plan
and supporting documentation for all construction, except additions of less
than 1,000 square feet of ground coverage or one single-family home and
its accessory uses, to the Planning Board or Town Board, as the case may
be, for approval. The above-referenced exceptions shall be subject to the
review and approval of the authorized official. All site plan applications
shall comply with the adopted, current requirements and procedures of the
appropriate board.
§ 250-12.3. Factors for consideration.
The appropriate board's site plan review shall include, but is not limited to,
the following considerations:
A. Adequacy and arrangement of pedestrian traffic access and circulation,
vehicular traffic, parking, walkway structures, control of intersections
with vehicular traffic, pedestrian convenience, and appropriate
provisions for handicapped persons.
B. Location, arrangement, size, architectural features and design of
buildings, lighting and signs. As much as is possible, consideration
should be given to noise sources, privacy and outdoor waste disposal
locations.
C. Adequacy, type and arrangement of trees, shrubs and other landscaping
constituting a visual and/or noise-deterring buffer between these and
adjoining properties. Site plans should also show existing stands of
trees on the site.
D. In the case of an apartment house or multiple dwelling, the adequacy of
usable open space for playgrounds and informal recreation.
E. Adequacy of stormwater, sanitary waste disposal, and public water
facilities.
§ 250-12.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 250-12.3
1:533
§ 250-12.4. Limitation on construction time.
Construction must begin within one year after the date of the appropriate
board's resolution of approval or approval by the authorized official,
provided final site plan approval has been filed with the Town Clerk;
otherwise, an extension or reapproval must be obtained.
§ 250-12.5. Irrevocable letter of credit or certified check.
After the approval of the application and before the issuance of any permit,
the applicant shall furnish the authorized official with an irrevocable letter
of credit in an amount to be approved by the Town Engineer/consulting
engineer, which letter shall ensure that all items as may be deemed
necessary are constructed in accordance with the approved plan and the
statement and specifications of the Town of Penfield. A certified check may
be submitted in lieu of an irrevocable letter of credit.
F. Protection of adjacent properties and the general public against noises,
glare, and unsightliness, or other objectionable features.
G. The effect of the proposed development on environmentally sensitive
areas such as, but not limited to: wetlands, floodplains, woodlands,
steep slopes and watercourses.
H. Compliance with this chapter, the current Town Comprehensive Plan,
the current development regulations and specifications, the New York
State Environmental Quality Review Act (SEQRA), Irondequoit Bay
Plan, the Local Waterfront Revitalization Program16 and any other
current and future plans, policies, and requirements.
I. Provision for adequate drainage away from walls or structures.
J. Maintenance agreements, easements and other required legal
documentation shall be approved by the Town Attorney.
K. The impact of the proposed use on adjacent land uses.
16.Editor's Note: See Ch. 232, Waterways.
§ 250-12.3 PENFIELD CODE § 250-12.5
1:534
ARTICLE XIII
Conditional Use Permits
§ 250-13.1. Purpose.
The purpose of conditional use permit approval is to allow the proper
integration of uses into the community and appropriate zoning districts.
Because of their characteristics, or the special characteristics of the area in
which they are to be located, conditional uses require special consideration
so that they may be properly located with respect to the objectives of this
chapter and their effect on surrounding properties.
§ 250-13.2. Authorization to approve or deny conditional uses.
In cases where a conditionally permitted use is proposed to be developed on
property and the subdivision and/or site plan approval process is required,
the Planning Board or Town Board, as the case may be, shall have
jurisdiction in granting such a permit. In all other cases, the Zoning Board
of Appeals shall have the authority to grant such a permit. In permitting a
conditional use or the modification of a conditional use, the board having
jurisdiction may impose any additional conditions which the board
considers necessary to protect the best interests of the surrounding
property, the neighborhood or the Town as a whole, in addition to those
standards and requirements expressly specified by this article. These
conditions may include, but are not limited to, increasing the required lot
size or yard dimensions; limiting the height of buildings; controlling the
location and number of vehicle access points; increasing the street widths;
increasing the number of off-street parking and loading spaces required;
limiting the number, size and location of signs; and required diking, fencing,
screening, landscaping, or other facilities to protect adjacent property. All
permits granted pursuant to this section shall be issued by the Town Clerk
at a fee as required by resolution by the Town Board.
§ 250-13.3. Application for conditional use.
A property owner(s) or his/her agent(s) may initiate a request for a
conditional use or the modification of a conditional use by filing an
application with the authorized official using forms provided for such
requests by the Town. The applicant shall submit all information required
to review said application and deemed necessary by the authorized official
and a filing fee as required by resolution by the Town Board.
§ 250-13.4. Standards governing conditional uses.
A conditional use shall comply with the standards of the zoning district in
which it is located. Notwithstanding any provision of this chapter to the
contrary, in no event shall a conditional use permit be issued to authorize
any explicitly prohibited use.
A. In order to approve any conditional use, the board having jurisdiction
shall find that the request is:
§ 250-13.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 250-13.4
1:535
§ 250-13.5. Public hearing.
Before a conditional use is permitted, the use shall be considered by the
board having jurisdiction at a public hearing. Notice of said hearing shall be
given as provided in § 250-15.4.
§ 250-13.6. Golf courses.
(1) In harmony with the general purpose and intent of this chapter and
the zoning district in which it is proposed.
(2) Not detrimental to adjacent properties because of its:
(a) Means of ingress and egress.
(b) Adequacy of parking facilities.
(c) Potential impact to both present or future uses.
(d) Compatibility with the general area in which it is to be located.
(e) Type and amount of signage.
(f) Potential noise level.
(g) Clear sight distance.
(h) Existing or proposed buffering.
(i) Proposed generation of noxious odors.
(j) Exterior lighting.
(k) Proposed hours of operation.
(3) Not detrimental to the health, safety or general welfare of persons
residing or working in the neighborhood of such proposed use or
detrimental or injurious to the property and improvements in the
neighborhood, or to the general welfare of the Town.
B. A conditional use permit shall become void one year after approval
unless the permitted activity has commenced, or as otherwise specified.
C. The Zoning Board of Appeals may revoke any conditional use permit for
noncompliance with conditions set forth in the approval of said permit
after first holding a public hearing and giving notice of such hearing as
provided in § 250-15.4.
A. The Planning Board or Town Board, as the case may be, may grant a
conditional use permit to be issued by the Town Clerk for the
construction and maintenance of a golf course, as hereinafter defined,
in any district of the Town, pursuant to § 250-13.2.
B. A golf course, as defined in Article II of this chapter, may include the
following facilities as also permitted with the principal use:
§ 250-13.4 PENFIELD CODE § 250-13.6
1:536
(1) Clubhouse, including kitchens, dining areas, game rooms, bar, grill,
locker rooms, and baths. In cases where a clubhouse is approved
with dining facilities, said facilities may be utilized on a year-round
basis.
(2) Swimming pools.
(3) Parking areas.
(4) Tennis or paddleball courts.
(5) Designated area dedicated to outdoor events, such as awards
ceremonies, banquets, weddings, musical functions, etc. Said area
may be open-air or tented.
C. In the case of a golf course containing 18 or more holes of play, there
may be included the following additional facilities as accessory to the
principal use:
(1) Pitch-and-putt course, unlighted.
(2) Driving range, unlighted.
D. Prior to the granting of such a permit, the board having jurisdiction
shall find, after public notice and hearing, that such action would not:
(1) Be detrimental to adjacent property.
(2) By reason of its location or nature create a significant hazard of any
nature to the public or to any adjacent owner or occupant.
(3) Unreasonably interfere with the lawful enjoyment of the public
highway or of adjacent property.
(4) Endanger or tend to endanger the public health, safety, morals or
the general welfare of the community. In making such
determination, the Board shall consider lot areas; necessity for and
size of buffer zone; type of construction; parking facilities; traffic
hazards; fire hazards; offensive odors, smoke, fumes, noise and
lights; the general character of the neighborhood; the nature and
use of other premises, and the location and use of other buildings in
the vicinity; and whether or not the proposed use will be
detrimental to neighborhood property.
(5) Discourage the appropriate development and use of adjacent land
and buildings nor impair the value thereof; further, that the
proposed use will be in harmony with the probable future
development of the neighborhood.
E. In granting such a permit, the Board may attach such conditions and
limitations as it considers to be desirable in order to ensure compliance
with the application and the purposes of this chapter.
§ 250-13.6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 250-13.6
1:537
§ 250-13.7. Gasoline service stations.
F. Subject to the payment of the annual renewal fee, as hereinafter
provided, any such permit granted hereunder shall be deemed to be
indefinitely extended; provided, however, that it shall expire if the
special use shall be terminated, abandoned or cease for more than six
months for any reason, or if there is a default in the payment of the
renewal fee; and further provided that it may be revoked by the board
having jurisdiction after due hearing on not less than 10 days' notice to
the person holding such permit in the event the use thereof violates any
of the conditions or restrictions imposed by the board or becomes a
nuisance.
A. The Zoning Board of Appeals (or in cases of new construction where
subdivision and/or site plan approval is required, the Planning Board or
Town Board, as the case may be) may issue a conditional use permit for
the operation of a gasoline service station in any LB, GB or FC District.
Such conditional use shall be issued to the operator of a gasoline
service station, and no gasoline service station shall be operated in the
Town without the required gasoline service station conditional use
permit. Prior to the first issuance, as distinct from a renewal, of a
permit under this section, the board having jurisdiction may require the
applicant to submit such information as it may require and to fix the
location of all structures on the premises. Prior to the first issuance of
such conditional use permit, the board shall find, at a public hearing,
that:
(1) The proposed structures are located consistent with the
regulations of the LB, GB or FC District in which they are to be
located, and that the design and type of the proposed structures
are in harmony with other structures in such neighborhood.
(2) The proposed use will not create a traffic hazard at the proposed
location. To this end, a minimum frontage of 200 feet will be
required on any road used for access to the station.
(3) The applicant has, in writing, agreed to construct and operate such
proposed station in strict accordance with such conditions and
restrictions as may be imposed by the board having jurisdiction.
(4) The lot area is sufficient to permit construction of the largest
station that might be needed in the future. This should, at the least,
provide for four inside bays and parking for 15 cars, of which 10
spaces must be in a screened area behind the station.
(5) All parking and outside storage shall comply with the front, side
and rear lot setback requirements.
(6) At the time of application for a permit, the applicant shall submit a
full site plan or instrument survey of the property showing all tank
locations, island setbacks, and such other and further information
§ 250-13.6 PENFIELD CODE § 250-13.7
1:538
that may be necessary to determine compliance with the provisions
of this chapter and any other provisions of law.
B. Permit regulations.
(1) Any permit granted hereunder shall be issued by the Town Clerk
for a period of one year initially, and shall be renewable annually
thereafter upon a favorable recommendation of the Fire Marshal.
Prior to making such favorable recommendation to the Zoning
Board of Appeals, the Fire Marshal shall first assure himself/
herself, based upon a physical inspection, that the gasoline service
station is operated in a manner consistent with the requirements of
current fire codes.
(2) Any permit granted hereunder shall be automatically terminated in
the event the operator in whose name the permit has been issued
ceases to operate the gasoline service station referred to in the
conditional use permit.
(3) The fees for the issuance of a conditional use permit shall be the
fees as established by resolution by the Town Board.
(4) Any conditional use permit granted hereunder may be revoked by
the board having jurisdiction after due hearing on not less than 10
days' notice to the person holding such permit in the event that the
use violates any of the conditions or restrictions imposed by the
board having jurisdiction upon the issuance of such conditional use
permit, or shall have become a nuisance.
C. General regulations.
(1) Gasoline service stations shall be operated and maintained at all
times in conformity with the requirements of this article, National
Fire Protection Association Code No. 30, state fire protection codes
and all other New York applicable regulations.
(2) All vehicles at motor vehicle supply station facilities shall be stored
within a building when the facilities are not open for business.
However, licensed vehicles at motor vehicle supply stations for
minor repairs may be left outside for a period not to exceed 72
hours. At no time shall any unlicensed or dismantled automobiles,
trucks, tractors, trailers or accessories thereof be outside of a
building. At no time shall any vehicles for sale be displayed inside
or outside of a building.
(3) There shall be no outside storage or display of accessories or
portable signs when gasoline service station facilities are not open
for business.
(4) Rubbish, oil cans, tires, discarded motor vehicle parts and
components and other waste materials may be temporarily stored
in a completely fenced-in opaque enclosure adjacent to the gasoline
§ 250-13.7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 250-13.7
1:539
service station facility building. The area of such enclosure shall
not exceed 200 square feet. There shall be no storage at any time
of any of the above-mentioned items outside of such enclosure.
(5) No repair work may be performed out of doors. This does not
preclude, however, adding oil to motor vehicles, changing
windshield wipers or other similar simple repairs normally
performed in conjunction with the sale of gasoline.
(6) Snow must be piled on a gasoline service station facility site so that
it does not interfere with the internal circulation and parking or
driver vision when entering or leaving the facility.
(7) During the hours that a gasoline service station facility is open, all
cars of employees, customers and tow trucks must be parked only
in areas designated on the site plan for such vehicles.
(8) All landscape areas designated on the gasoline service station
facility site plan and/or landscaping plan must be maintained in a
neat and healthy condition.
(9) Motor vehicles being serviced shall not extend over the public
sidewalk.
(10) A nearby exterior door of the lubritorium or wash rack shall be
open when a car motor is running, unless the exhaust gases of the
car are carried directly to the outside by means of a flexible tube
designed for this purpose.
(11) Liquids shall be stored in approved closed containers not
exceeding 60 gallons' capacity, or in tanks located in the ground, or
above ground, subject to permit issuance by the Fire Marshal.
(12) Class I liquids (liquids having a flash point below 100° F.) shall not
be stored or handled within a building having a basement or pit into
which flammable vapors may travel, unless adequate ventilation is
supplied.
(13) Accurate on-premises inventory records shall be maintained on all
Class I liquid storage tanks for possible indication of leakage from
tanks or piping.
(14) Signs.
(a) Signs shall be conspicuously posted setting forth the operating
instructions of the dispensing units and also incorporating the
following or equivalent wording:
WARNING —
1) IT IS UNLAWFUL TO DISPENSE GASOLINE INTO
CONTAINERS NOT APPROVED FOR SUCH USE.
2) NO SMOKING.
§ 250-13.7 PENFIELD CODE § 250-13.7
1:540
3) STOP ENGINE.
(b) A clearly visible numeral or letter at least six inches in height
shall be conspicuously posted on each island with a smaller
corresponding numeral or letter.
(15) In locations where flammable vapors may be present, precautions
shall be taken to prevent ignition by eliminating or controlling
sources of ignition, which may include open flames, lighting,
smoking, cutting and welding, hot surfaces, friction heat, sparks,
spontaneous ignition, chemical and physical chemical reaction and
radiant heat.
(16) Gasoline, diesel fuel, and all Class I and Class II flammable liquids
shall be stored in approved underground storage tanks. The total
aggregate storage of such fuel at any one location shall not exceed
24,000 gallons.
(a) All accidental spillage or leakage of a flammable liquid in
quantities of five gallons or greater, whether or not it may
enter sewers, shall be immediately reported to the Fire
Department.
(b) Five fifty-pound bags of Stay Dry absorbent, or equivalent,
must be kept on the premises at all times for flammable liquid
spills, and should be used for this purpose whenever possible
instead of flushing with water.
(c) The telephone number of the owner, lessee or station operator
shall be posted on the door in a conspicuous location so that
proper notification can be made in the event of an emergency.
(17)No gasoline may be sold or dispensed unless into an approved
container. Said product sales shall be made into approved
containers clearly marked with the name of the product contained
therein, and equipped with a closure filled with a screwed or spring
cover, and a spout so designed that the contents can be poured. In
addition, no gasoline sales shall be permitted to persons under the
age of 16 without a parent or guardian present.
(18) There shall be no smoking on the driveway of gasoline service
stations in the areas used for fueling motor vehicles, dispensing
flammable anti-freeze or receipt of products by tank vehicles, or in
those portions of the building used for servicing automobiles,
tractors or internal combustion engines. Conspicuous signs
prohibiting smoking shall be posted within sight of the customer.
Letters on such signs shall be not less than four inches high. The
motors of all vehicles being fueled shall be shut off during the
fueling operation.
(19) Vents from underground tanks shall terminate at least 12 feet
above grade and be carried around and above any nearby building
§ 250-13.7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 250-13.7
1:541
overhang or other obstruction. They shall be in operating condition
at all times.
(20) There is to be no more than one tank truck on the premises at any
one time. Before making any deliveries to underground tanks, the
driver shall set the brakes of the truck and shall turn off the engine
of the vehicle. The driver shall remain at the point of delivery to
prevent spillage and overflow. In case of overflow, fire authorities
and the Town Fire Marshal are to be notified immediately.
(21) The premises are to be maintained in a neat and clean condition
without the accumulation of used materials, automobile parts,
dismantled cars or cars left by their owners over a considerable
period of time. Used rags are to be kept in covered metal
containers. Grease and other filters and/or traps shall be approved
as required by the Superintendent of Sewers and the Monroe
County Health Department for the purpose of protection of the
public sewer system and public bodies of water.
(22) There shall be one or more fire extinguishers capable of fighting
Class A, B and C fires (Underwriters' Laboratories classification)
hung in the sales room of the gasoline service station. There shall
also be one or more fire extinguishers of the same capability hung
in the lubritorium. At least one fire extinguisher having a minimum
classification of 5B, C shall be hung within 100 feet of each pump,
dispenser or underground fill pipe opening.
(23) All electric wiring, fixtures and equipment shall be inspected and
approved by the New York State Board of Fire Underwriters or
other organization, which may be approved by the Town Board, by
resolution and maintained in first class condition. All existing
wiring material equipment and installations in hazardous locations,
as defined in Chapter 5 of the National Electrical Code, shall
conform to the requirements of that code, including current
revisions.
(24) Air compressors shall be installed at least one foot six inches above
the main floor level of the station, and open-flame heaters shall be
installed at least eight feet zero inches above said floor.
(25) Alcohol or kerosene shall be dispensed from drums or tanks using
equipment which meets the approval of the American Petroleum
Institute and NFPA standards. Said drums or tanks shall be placed
in locations which are remote from any exit.
(26) Gasoline shall never be used for cleaning motor parts or cleaning
the floor of the service station. Accumulation or spillage of oil or
grease should be dried with Fuller's earth or equal.
D. Attendants.
§ 250-13.7 PENFIELD CODE § 250-13.7
1:542
§ 250-13.8. Gasoline self-service stations.
(1) Each gasoline service station open to the public shall, at all times it
is operating, have a qualified attendant or supervisor on duty.
(2) Said attendant shall have been qualified by the gasoline service
station facility operator, by means of instructions and certification,
as well versed in proper handling and care of all petroleum
dispensing equipment on premises and familiar with all necessary
aspects of emergency operation.
(3) It shall be the specific duty of the attendant to directly supervise,
observe and control the dispensing of all flammable liquids. In
addition, he/she shall be responsible for the control of sources of
ignition and the immediate handling of accidental spills and fire
extinguishers.
E. Tanks, pumps and piping.
(1) Tanks, pumps and piping shall in general be designed and equipped
so as to comply with all principles of sound engineering design.
They shall be able to withstand all necessary pressures and to
adequately control the escape of liquids and vapors. All equipment
on premises shall be constructed and equipped so as to ensure the
safe and proper dispensation of Class I liquids and shall comply
with necessary guidelines as expressed in National Fire Protection
Association No. 30, Flammable and Combustible Liquids Code.
(2) Class I liquids shall be conveyed from a main storage tank to the
dispensing pump by means of a system of piping utilizing an
arrangement of three swing joints laid in a horizontal position.
(3) No gasoline pump shall be located closer than 25 feet to any
property line.
(4) Leaking tanks containing any flammable or combustible liquid or
any pump or piping used in connection therewith which may be
defective or in need of repair shall be repaired or replaced
immediately, and it shall be within the sole discretion of the Fire
Marshal as to whether the station or facility must cease any or all
operations while such repairs or replacements are being made.
(5) No installation, alteration or replacement of underground or
aboveground tanks, pumps, piping and other equipment relating to
the storage of flammable liquids shall be permitted without prior
notification to the Fire Marshal, nor shall any pressure test or other
test for leaks be conducted without giving at least 24 hours' prior
notification to the Fire Marshal.
A. Each gasoline self-service station shall have a qualified attendant on
duty whenever the station is open for business. It shall be the
responsibility of the qualified attendant to control and operate remote
§ 250-13.7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 250-13.8
1:543
pumping equipment. Class I liquids shall at no time be dispensed
without the direct supervision of the qualified attendant.
B. A control shall be provided that will permit the pump to operate only
when a dispensing nozzle is removed from its bracket on the dispensing
unit and the switch for this dispensing unit is manually activated. This
control shall also stop the pump when all nozzles have been returned to
their brackets. Lock open devices are not permitted on nozzles.
C. Each gasoline self-service station shall have the remote dispensing
equipment situated in such a manner as to give the qualified attendant
controlling said equipment an optimum view of the dispensing of Class I
liquids.
D. Class I liquids may be dispensed only by customers possessing a valid
motor vehicle operator's license. No sale of gasoline is permitted to a
minor (under the age of 16) without a parent or guardian present.
E. Gasoline self-service stations shall provide adequate fire protection
systems in the form of an approved system of dry powder release, which
will act as an automatic fire extinguisher. All systems shall be approved
by the Fire Marshal prior to the start of operation.
F. An automatic fire extinguishing system shall be installed in conformity
with nationally recognized good practices and standards and approved
by the Fire Marshal. Said system shall also be designed to be activated
from a location remote from the pump island area. Said location shall be
in the control room area if said station is so equipped, and be able to
automatically terminate the electrical power to all service islands in the
event of system malfunctions. Where a service station has one selfservice
island within 30 feet of a full-service island, both the self-service
and full-service island shall be so equipped with the automatic fireextinguishing
system as provided for herein.
G. Self-service pumps and nozzles shall be confined to service islands with
no more than three self-service dispensing units per island, each of
which dispensing units shall utilize no more than two hoses and nozzles
per unit. Approved dispensing devices, such as but not limited to coinoperated,
card-operated and remote preset types, shall be permitted,
provided that the dispensing of Class I liquids is under the direct
supervision of a qualified attendant.
H. A traffic mirror, of sufficient size, shall be located on each end of each
pump island to give the attendant a clear and unobstructed view of each
island, said mirrors to be installed in locations acceptable to the Fire
Marshal. An approved video camera system that permits unobstructed
view of each island pump location shall be permitted in lieu of mirrors,
subject to the approval of the Fire Marshal.
I. A two-way communications system of the public address type shall be
installed to facilitate direct and individual communication between the
§ 250-13.8 PENFIELD CODE § 250-13.8
1:544
§ 250-13.9. Bed-and-breakfast facilities.
A conditional use permit for a bed-and-breakfast facility shall be granted
for a period deemed to be appropriate by the board to comply with all
applicable provisions of this chapter. The proposed bed-and-breakfast
facility shall comply with the following standards:
§ 250-13.10. Child-care facilities.
control room area and each pump island at all times that Class I liquids
are being dispensed.
J. Each gasoline self-service station shall provide a means of keeping
pumps locked or otherwise inoperable when the station is not open for
business.
A. The maximum number of sleeping rooms for transient guests shall be
three, which rooms shall be located in the principal dwelling structure
on site and not in any other detached buildings or structures.
B. The maximum length of stay for transient guests shall be one week.
C. The principal dwelling unit shall be owner-occupied.
D. No exterior changes shall be made.
E. Nameplate signs only may be used to identify the bed-and-breakfast
facility. Such signs shall not exceed two square feet in area or be
located closer than five feet to any property line. Such signs may be
building-mounted or ground-mounted.
F. Breakfast shall not be offered to the public at large, but only to such
transient guests. No other meals shall be offered to any persons
relating to the bed-and-breakfast operation.
G. Off-street parking shall be provided as set forth in § 250-7.7.
H. No kitchens shall be attached to or located within sleeping rooms.
A. Child-care facilities shall be permitted in all zoning districts and shall
comply with current state regulations and the following criteria:
(1) "Child care" shall be defined as that care relating to children
between the ages of six weeks and 12 years of age.
(2) All child-care facilities proposed to be located in any residential
zoning district shall be situated on no less than five acres of land.
(3) No child-care facility shall exceed 8,000 square feet in total area.
(4) No more than 135 children (inclusive of all programs) shall be
permitted at any child-care facility.
§ 250-13.8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 250-13.10
1:545
§ 250-13.11. Telecommunication systems.
(5) All outdoor play areas shall be fenced by a minimum four-foot-high
fence and shall be sized to accommodate 100 square feet of area
per child utilizing the area at any given time.
(6) There shall be a minimum one-hundred-foot buffer from all
structures, play areas, parking facilities and driving lanes to any
adjacent residential property line.
(7) Parking shall be provided as set forth in § 250-7.7.
(8) There shall be an adequate circular means of ingress and egress
and turning radii for school buses and emergency vehicles.
(9) There shall be a specific drop-off/pick-up zone to accommodate the
site.
(10) The school district in which the facility is proposed shall review and
make recommendation to the board having jurisdiction with
respect to location, serviceability and potential impact to the
respective district.
(11) In the case of nonresidential sites such as plazas and office parks,
the board having jurisdiction shall determine the appropriate
amount of lot area and parking facilities necessary to accommodate
a child-care facility and its relation to other tenants operating from
the site.
B. In-home day care and those child-care facilities being conducted in
conjunction with and accessory to religious or educational institutions
within the Town of Penfield are not subject to review by the Town and
are not subject to the criteria hereinabove.
A. Systems in general.
(1) Purpose.
(a) The intent of this section is to provide a means of regulating
the installation and maintenance of telecommunications
systems for the use, enjoyment and convenience of the
residents of the Town of Penfield, while at the same time
providing for the maximum protection of the health, safety and
aesthetic sensibilities of the residents.
(b) It is a further purpose of this section to minimize visual
intrusion of such telecommunication systems and to protect
residents from unsafe structures and equipment. Further, this
section is intended to promote the health, safety, and general
welfare of the residents of the Town of Penfield, to provide
standards for the safe provision of telecommunications
consistent with applicable federal and state regulations, and to
§ 250-13.10 PENFIELD CODE § 250-13.11
1:546
protect, as much as possible, the natural features and aesthetic
characteristics of the Town of Penfield.
(c) The Town of Penfield recognizes the increased demand for
wireless communications facilities and the need for the
services they provide. Often the facilities require the
construction of communication structures. The intrusion of
large or high structures of unusual shape or size,
monolithically towering above standard-appearing homes and
structures, can be aesthetically objectionable and disturbing to
visual sensitivities. Bulk and visual impact of such installations
create aesthetic problems, making it appropriate to have some
special limitations as to size and placement thereof. The intent
of this section is to protect the Town’s interest by properly
siting structures in a manner consistent with sound land use
planning while also allowing wireless services providers to
meet their technological and service objectives.
(d) The proliferation of the construction and installation of
telecommunication systems must be regulated so as to protect
the health, safety, and welfare of the citizens to the maximum
degree possible and to coordinate and control the same so as
to preserve and protect the aesthetic qualities of the Town of
Penfield and its environs.
(e) Among other things, reasonable controls contribute to the
good appearance of the Town, stabilize property values, assure
the safety of the owner and others, and, in general, contribute
to the preservation of a pleasant community within which to
work and live. This section shall be construed and
administered so as to not unduly hamper satisfactory reception
or transmission of other communication signals.
(2) Applicability.
(a) Unless otherwise exempted by this section, no freestanding
telecommunication system shall hereafter be used, erected,
moved, reconstructed, changed or altered except after
approval of a conditional use permit and in conformity with
these regulations.
(b) No existing structure shall be modified to serve as a
telecommunication system unless in conformity with this
section.
(3) Exemptions. The following are exempt from the requirements of
securing a conditional use permit and site plan approval pursuant
to this section:
(a) The repair and maintenance of existing telecommunication
systems.
§ 250-13.11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 250-13.11
1:547
(b) Co-location on an existing telecommunication system and
where components of a telecommunication system exist or
have previously been approved for use.
(c) Satellite dish antennas measuring one meter or less in
diameter.
(d) Commercial satellite dish antennas measuring two meters or
less in diameter located in the following commercial districts:
Limited Industrial (LI), General Business (GB), Limited
Business (LB), Business Non-Retail (BN-R), Four Corners (FC),
and LaSalle’s Landing Development District (LLD).
(4) Existing applications. The board having jurisdiction is hereby
empowered to continue the processing of any applications for
telecommunication systems that are pending before it as of the
effective date of this section. Notwithstanding the foregoing, those
boards shall apply the specifications and standards contained in
this section in considering such applications.
B. Telecommunication towers.
(1) Height. The maximum height for all telecommunication towers
permitted under this section, including any antennas, extensions,
or other devices extending above the structure of the tower,
measured from the ground surface immediately surrounding the
site, shall be no higher than 190 feet.
(2) Commercial telecommunication towers and accessory structures
permitted in certain primary zoning districts. Telecommunication
towers and their accessory structures are permitted in any of the
following primary zoning districts, subject to final site plan
approval pursuant to Article XII by the Planning Board or Town
Board, as the case may be, and upon approval and issuance of a
conditional use permit pursuant to Article XIII and under the
procedures set forth in this chapter and subject to and complying
with all other applicable laws, rules and regulations:
Limited Industrial (LI)
General Business (GB)
Limited Business (LB)
Residential R-1-20*
Rural Residential 1 (RR-1)*
Rural Agricultural 2 (RA-2)*
Conservation Residential (CR-2)*
Notes:
*On the above-referenced zoning district parcels having a
minimum of five acres.
§ 250-13.11 PENFIELD CODE § 250-13.11
1:548
(3) Minimum lot area in single-family residential use districts.
Notwithstanding any language to the contrary in § 250-5.1F of this
chapter, the minimum lot area in single-family residential use
districts for the installation of a commercial telecommunication
tower shall be a minimum of five acres.
(4) Commercial telecommunication towers and accessory structures
prohibited in certain primary zoning districts. Commercial
communication towers and accessory structures are not permitted
in the following zoning districts:
Residential R-1-12
Residential R-1-15
Mobile Home Park (MHP)
Planned Development (PD)
Townhome (TH)
Business Non-Retail (BN-R)
LaSalle’s Landing Development (LLD)
Historic Preservation (HP)
Four Corners (FC)
(5) Review procedures for commercial telecommunication towers.
(a) For the purposes of this section, all commercial
telecommunication towers are subject to site plan approval
and to the conditional use permit process pursuant to the
requirements of Articles XII and XIII of this chapter. The
Planning Board shall have jurisdiction in the both the site plan
review and conditional use permit review.
(b) Notwithstanding the foregoing subsection, to encourage
subsequent carriers seeking co-location of telecommunication
facilities on existing commercial and noncommercial towers
within the Town of Penfield, the authorized official is hereby
authorized to issue conditional use permits to allow such colocation
but may refer an application for co-location to the
appropriate board for review if, in his/her opinion, the
proposed co-location facilities are not consistent with those
existing facilities.
(6) Conditional use permit and site plan application requirements.
Prior to the issuance of a conditional use permit and site plan
approval by the Planning Board or Town Board, as the case may be,
the following requirements shall be complied with:
(a) Conditional use permit and site plan. All applications for a
conditional use permit and site plan approval shall be by
written application on forms provided by the Town of Penfield
Planning Department. The application shall include a site plan
§ 250-13.11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 250-13.11
1:549
setting forth specific site data on a map, acceptable in form
and content to the Planning Board or Town Board, as the case
may be, and shall be prepared to scale and in sufficient detail
and accuracy and shall show the following:
[1] The location of property lines and permanent easements.
[2] The location of the communication tower, together with
guy wires and guy anchors, if applicable.
[3] A side elevation or other sketch of the tower showing the
proposed antennas.
[4] The location of all structures on the property and all
structures on any adjacent property within 200 feet of the
base of the proposed tower and at a minimum of 200 feet
from all property lines.
[5] The names of adjacent landowners as they appear on the
Town of Penfield Assessor’s records.
[6] The location, nature, and extent of any proposed fencing,
landscaping and/or screening.
[7] The location and nature of proposed utility easements and
access road, if applicable.
[8] Inventory of other existing and proposed communication
towers within the Town of Penfield and adjacent
communities.
[9] A completed visual environmental assessment form (visual
EAF) and a landscaping plan addressing other standards
listed within this section, with particular attention to
visibility from key viewpoints within and outside of the
municipality as identified in the visual EAF. The Board may
require submittal of a more detailed visual analysis based
on the results of the visual EAF.
[10] Verification that the proposed facility will comply with all
applicable FCC rules and regulations.
(b) Preference for siting communications towers. The following
establishes a system of preferred locations in which a proposed
tower is located. This relates to a specific setting or in a
specific area or zoning district, assuming there is a
technologically feasible and available location. A guideline for
the preference from most favorable to least favorable district/
setting/property is as follows:
[1] Property with an existing structure suitable for colocation.
§ 250-13.11 PENFIELD CODE § 250-13.11
1:550
[2] Municipal or government-owned property
[3] Property where the tower can be located within or
immediately adjacent to an EPOD (3) Woodland District.
[4] Residential districts:
[a] Rural Agricultural 2 (RA-2) District.*
[b] Conservation Residential 2 (CR-2) District.
[c] Rural Residential 1 (RR-1) District.*
[d] Residential R-1-20 District*
*On the above-referenced zoning district parcels
having a minimum of five acres.
[5] Limited Industrial (LI) District.
[6] Commercial districts:
[a] General Business (GB) District.
[b] Limited Business (LB) District.
(c) Shared use.
[1] Communication towers shall be designed to provide for colocation
of at least three carriers or designed so that they
can be retrofitted to accommodate a minimum of three
carriers. Additionally, where such shared use is
unavailable, location of an antenna on preexisting
structures shall be considered the next preferable
location. An applicant shall be required to present a
report, inventorying existing towers within the Town of
Penfield and adjacent municipalities and outlining
opportunities for shared use of existing facilities and use of
other preexisting structures as alternatives to new
construction.
[2] An applicant intending to share use of an existing tower
shall be required to document consent from an existing
tower owner for that shared use. The applicant shall pay
all reasonable fees and costs of adapting an existing tower
or structure to a new shared use. Those costs of adapting
an existing tower or structure to a new shared use include,
but are not limited to, structural reinforcement,
preventing transmission or receiver interference,
additional site screening, and other changes, including
real property acquisition or lease required to
accommodate the shared use.
§ 250-13.11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 250-13.11
1:551
[3] In the case of new communication towers, the applicant
shall be required to submit a report demonstrating goodfaith
efforts to secure shared use from owners of existing
towers. Copies of written requests and responses for
shared use shall be provided. The applicant shall also be
required to submit a report justifying its inability to place
its communication tower and related facilities in areas set
forth in Subsection B(6)(b).
[4] The appropriate board or authorized official, as the case
may be, shall have the power to grant a waiver of the colocation
requirement, provided the applicant proves that
such waiver is required in order for the applicant to render
safe and adequate service.
(d) Aesthetics. In order to minimize any adverse aesthetic effect
on neighboring properties to the maximum extent practicable,
the Planning Board or Town Board, as the case may be, may
impose reasonable conditions on the applicant, including the
following:
[1] All communication towers and accessory facilities or
structures shall be sited to have the least adverse visual
effect on the environment.
[2] A freestanding tower instead of a guyed communication
tower.
[3] Reasonable landscaping consisting of trees or shrubs to
screen the base of the communication tower and/or to
screen the tower to the extent possible from adjacent
residential property. Existing on-site trees and vegetation
shall be preserved to the maximum extent practicable.
[4] As defined in Subsection B(6)(c)[3], the applicant shall
show that it has made good-faith efforts to co-locate on
existing towers or other available and appropriate
structures and/or to construct new towers near existing
towers in an effort to consolidate visual disturbances.
However, such request shall not unreasonably delay the
application.
[5] Towers should be designed and sited so as to avoid,
whenever possible, application of Federal Aviation
Administration (FAA) lighting and painting requirements.
The tower shall not be artificially lighted except as
required by the FAA. Any lighting utilized shall not result
in glare on adjacent properties. Towers are to be of a
galvanized finish or painted matte gray unless otherwise
required by the FAA.
§ 250-13.11 PENFIELD CODE § 250-13.11
1:552
[6] No communication tower shall contain any advertising
signs or devices. Safety warning signs shall not be
considered advertising and shall be permitted, the size and
type to be determined and approved by the appropriate
board.
[7] Accessory facilities and structures shall maximize the use
of building materials, colors, and textures designed to
blend with the natural surroundings.
(e) Setbacks.
[1] All freestanding communication towers and accessory
structures shall be set back from abutting parcels, public
property, or right-of-way lines a distance sufficient to
contain on-site substantially all ice fall or debris from
tower failure, or 200 feet, whichever is greater.
[2] All appurtenances and attachments, such as guy wires,
must be located at a minimum setback from any property
line a distance of at least 200 feet or the minimum setback
of the underlying zoning district, whichever is greater. The
minimum setback requirement of this subsection may be
increased at the discretion of Planning Board or Town
Board, as the case may be, as part of the site plan approval
procedures, or it may be decreased in those instances
where the owner/applicant has submitted plans for a tower
designed in such a manner as to collapse within a smaller
area. Such tower design and collapse zone must be
acceptable to the Town Engineer and the Building
Inspector.
(f) Radiofrequency effects. It is recognized that federal law
[Telecommunications Act of 1996, Public Law 104-104, Section
704 (February 8, 1996)] prohibits the regulation of cellular and
PCS communication towers based on the environmental effects
of radiofrequency emissions where those emissions comply
with the Federal Communications Commission (FCC)
standards for those emissions. The Board shall, however,
impose a condition on the applicant that the communication
antennas be operated only at FCC-designated frequencies and
power levels and require applicants to submit evidence, upon
approval and periodically thereafter, demonstrating that the
proposed use is in compliance with such standards.
(g) Indemnification. To the maximum extent permitted by law, the
applicant shall execute an agreement indemnifying and
holding the Town harmless from any and all liabilities, claims
of personal injury or property damage arising out of or in any
way related to the installation and operation of the tower and
its accessory structures and facilities.
§ 250-13.11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 250-13.11
1:553
(h) Traffic, access, and safety.
[1] A road and parking will be provided to assure adequate
emergency and service access. Maximum use of existing
roads, public or private, shall be made. Road construction
shall be consistent with Town standards for private roads
and shall at all times minimize ground disturbance and
vegetation cutting. Road grades shall closely follow
natural contours to assure minimal visual disturbance and
reduce soil erosion potential. Public road standards may
be waived in meeting the objective of this subsection.
[2] All communication towers and guy anchors, if applicable,
shall be enclosed by climb-proof fencing of a height
sufficient to protect it from trespassing or vandalism.
[3] The applicant must comply with all applicable state and
federal regulations, including, but not limited to, FAA and
FCC regulations.
(i) Existing vegetation. Existing on-site vegetation shall be
preserved to the maximum extent possible, and no cutting of
trees exceeding four inches in diameter (measured at a height
of four feet off the ground) shall take place prior to approval of
the conditional use permit.
(j) Letter of credit/security. The applicant and the owner of record
of the premises shall be required to execute and file with the
Town Clerk of the Town of Penfield a letter of credit or other
form of security acceptable to the Town Attorney and Town
Director of Finance as to form and manner of execution in an
amount sufficient for the faithful performance of the terms and
conditions of this section, the conditions of the permit or
approval issued hereunder, for the observation of all Town local
laws or ordinances to cover the maintenance of the tower
during its lifetime, and provide for its removal. The amount
required shall be determined by the Town Engineer. In the
event of default upon the performance of any of such
conditions, the letter of credit or security shall be forfeited to
the Town of Penfield, which shall be entitled to maintain an
action thereon. The letter of credit or security shall remain in
full force and effect until the removal of the tower, antenna,
pole, accessory facility/structure, and site restoration. Further,
the applicant and owner shall be required to furnish evidence
of adequate insurance, the adequacy of which shall be
determined by the Town’s insurance consultant.
(k) Abandonment or cessation of use. The conditional use permit
and site plan approval shall expire upon:
[1] The failure to commence active operation of the
communication tower, antenna, pole, or accessory facility/
§ 250-13.11 PENFIELD CODE § 250-13.11
1:554
structure within 12 months of the issuance of a conditional
use permit and final site plan approval by the Planning
Board or Town Board, as the case may be; or
[2] The discontinuance of the active and continuous operation
of the communication tower, antenna, pole, or accessory
facility/structure for a continuous period of 12 months,
regardless of any reservation of an intent not to abandon
or discontinue the use or of an intent to resume active
operations. Upon such abandonment or cessation of use,
the applicant shall remove the tower and related facilities.
(l) Conditions. The Planning Board or Town Board, as the case
may be, may impose reasonable conditions and restrictions in
granting approvals applied for under this section.
(m) Verification of compliance. The applicant shall submit, on an
annual basis, a written report of compliance to the authorized
official, verifying that the site has maintained compliance with
all applicable FCC emission requirements and mechanical
safety regulations.
(7) Noncommercial telecommunication towers.
(a) Radio and television towers and antennas, amateur radio
service transmitting and receiving towers and antennas are
accessory uses within all districts, provided that a conditional
use permit and a building permit are first issued, in accordance
with the following regulations:
[1] Towers and antennas must be so situated that the
placement of the tower base is set back a minimum of the
tower height from any property line; should the structure
fall from whatever cause, it would not collide with any
structure off the lot in which it is located, or with any
telephone or electric power lines or poles, or within the
public right-of-way. Freestanding towers and/or antennas
may not be located in front of principal structures and,
when located on the side or rear of principal structures,
must observe the setback requirement for accessory
structures in the district, whereby the portion of the tower,
base, antenna or any component or accessory thereto
(whether vertical or horizontal) closest to the side or rear
property line shall not be within the minimum setback area
for accessory structures within the zoning district.
[2] Towers shall be so designed and constructed that guy
wires or other accessories shall not cross or encroach
upon any street, public space, right-of-way or over any
telephone, electric power or cable television lines or
encroach upon any other privately owned property.
§ 250-13.11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 250-13.11
1:555
[3] Permitted freestanding towers, climbable from the ground
up to a distance of 12 feet above the ground, or if the
tower and antenna require mechanical equipment
associated with, and necessary for operation, including an
enclosure for batteries and storage cells, and if said
equipment is located outside the principal structure, then
there shall be provided a completely enclosed (sides and
top) area, the size and extent of which shall be determined
by the Building Inspector or his/her designee, but the
extent shall be the minimum necessary for safe enclosure.
[4] Permitted freestanding towers and antennas shall not be
lighted in any way, unless such lighting is required by the
FAA or other controlling agency.
(b) Abandonment or cessation of use. The conditional use permit
and site plan approval shall expire upon:
[1] The failure to commence active operation of the
communication tower, antenna, pole, or accessory facility/
structure within 12 months of the issuance of a conditional
use permit and final site plan approval by the Planning
Board or Town Board, as the case may be; or
[2] The discontinuance of the active and continuous operation
of the communication tower, antenna, pole, or accessory
facility/structure for a continuous period of 12 months,
regardless of any reservation of an intent not to abandon
or discontinue the use or of an intent to resume active
operations. Upon such abandonment or cessation of use,
the applicant shall remove the tower and related facilities.
(8) Review procedures for noncommercial telecommunications towers
and accessory structures. For the purposes of this section, the
regulation of noncommercial telecommunications systems that are
not exempt shall be subject to the requirements of Article XV of this
chapter, and the Zoning Board of Appeals shall have jurisdiction
over the review process. Further, in cases where site plan approval
may be required in addition to the conditional use permit process
pursuant to Article XII, the Planning Board shall have jurisdiction.
C. Satellite dish antennas.
(1) Noncommercial satellite dish antennas.
(a) Unless exempt pursuant to Subsection A(3) of this section, all
noncommercial satellite dish antennas (more commonly known
as "satellite dishes") shall comply with the specifications and
standards set forth herein.
§ 250-13.11 PENFIELD CODE § 250-13.11
1:556
(b) Satellite dish antennas are considered a permitted accessory
use within all districts pursuant to the procedures of this
chapter.
[1] All satellite dish antennas of a size of one meter or less are
exempt from permit requirements. Satellite dish antennas
in excess of one meter shall be subject to conditional use
permit review and approval by the Zoning Board of
Appeals and issuance of a building permit.
[2] Satellite dish antennas may be mounted on the residence.
They may also be placed in the yard, subject to compliance
with minimum setback requirements for the zoning district
in which they are proposed to be installed. Any such
ground-mounted satellite dish antenna that cannot comply
with minimum setback requirements shall be subject to
area variance approval of the Zoning Board of Appeals.
[3] Satellite dish antennas shall only be placed on the
property which they serve.
[4] Satellite dish antennas, when building-mounted, shall not
be installed on any chimney, fire escape or in front of any
window or door in such a manner as to obstruct or prevent
emergency egress from the residence.
[5] The authorized official may also refer the applicant to the
Zoning Board of Appeals, if in its determination said
placement will adversely impact an adjacent property
owner or cause harm to the general public or the property
owner. In such cases, the applicant shall apply to the
Zoning Board of Appeals for relief from the authorized
official’s decision.
(2) Commercial satellite dish antennas.
(a) Unless exempt pursuant to Subsection A(3) of this section, all
noncommercial satellite dish antennas (more commonly known
as "satellite dishes") shall comply with the specifications and
standards set forth herein.
(b) Satellite dish antennas are considered a permitted accessory
use within all districts pursuant to the procedures of this
chapter.
[1] All commercial satellite dish antennas of a size of two
meters or less are exempt from permit requirements.
Commercial satellite dish antennas in excess of two meters
shall be subject to conditional use permit review and
approval by the Zoning Board of Appeals.
§ 250-13.11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 250-13.11
1:557
[2] Satellite dish antennas shall be building-mounted in
accordance with the applicable requirements of the New
York State Building Code.
[3] In cases where it has been technically demonstrated that it
is not reasonable or practicable to have satellite dish
antennas mounted on the roof or walls of the commercial
establishment, the applicant shall comply with the
minimum setback requirements for accessory structures
when determining the placement of such satellite dish
antennas. In such cases, their placement shall be subject
to the approval of the Zoning Board of Appeals.
§ 250-13.11 PENFIELD CODE § 250-13.11
1:558
ARTICLE XIV
Variances and Special Use Permits
§ 250-14.1. Purpose.
Where practical difficulties, unnecessary hardships and results inconsistent
with the general purposes of this chapter may be the result of the
application of the provisions thereof, variances may be granted as provided
in this article.
§ 250-14.2. Authorization to grant or deny variances.
Any variance granted from this chapter shall be authorized by the Zoning
Board of Appeals in accordance with the standards and procedures set forth
in this article. In granting a variance, the Zoning Board of Appeals may
impose conditions to protect the best interests of the surrounding property,
the neighborhood or the Town as a whole.
§ 250-14.3. Application for variance or special use permit.
A property owner(s) or his/her agent(s) may initiate a request for a variance
or special use permit by filing an application with the authorized official
using forms provided for such requests by the Town. Such application shall
be accompanied by all information deemed necessary by the Zoning Board
of Appeals and/or the authorized official and a filing fee as required in the
Town's fee schedule, established by resolution by the Town Board consistent
with the provisions set forth under Article XV of this chapter.
§ 250-14.4. Circumstances for granting variances.
The Board of Appeals shall have the authority, on appeal from the decision
or determination of the Zoning Officer, or otherwise as contemplated by this
chapter, to grant use variances and area variances, subject to and upon the
terms and conditions set forth herein.
A. Use variances. No use variance shall be granted unless, in addition to
satisfying all other applicable provisions of law and this chapter, the
Board of Appeals finds that otherwise applicable zoning regulations and
restrictions have caused unnecessary hardship.
(1) Unnecessary hardship. In order to prove such unnecessary
hardship, the applicant is required to clearly demonstrate to the
Board of Appeals that, with respect to every permitted use under
the zoning regulations for the particular district where the
property is located, each and every of the following four criteria is
satisfied:
(a) The applicant cannot realize a reasonable return on the entire
parcel of property, and such lack of return is substantial as
demonstrated by competent financial evidence;
§ 250-14.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 250-14.4
1:559
(b) The alleged hardship relating to the property in question is
unique, and does not apply to a substantial portion of the
district or neighborhood involved;
(c) The requested use variance, if granted, will not alter the
essential character of the neighborhood; and
(d) The alleged hardship has not been self-created.
(2) Reasonable rate of return. In evaluating whether the applicant can
realize a reasonable rate of return, the Board of Appeals shall
examine whether the entire original or expanded property holdings
of the applicant are incapable of producing a reasonable rate of
return (and not just the site of the proposed project). No use
variance shall be granted unless, in addition to satisfying all other
applicable provisions of law and this chapter, the Board of Appeals
finds that the applicant has clearly demonstrated, by detailed,
written "dollar and cents" proof, the inability to obtain a reasonable
return for the entire parcel (and not just the site of the proposed
project) and for each and every permitted use in the district
(including those uses permitted by special use permit).
(3) Unique hardship. No use variance shall be granted unless, in
addition to satisfying all other applicable provisions of law and this
chapter, the Board of Appeals finds that the entire parcel of which
the project is a part possesses unique characteristics that
distinguish it from other properties in the area.
(4) Essential character of the neighborhood. No use variance shall be
granted unless, in addition to satisfying all other applicable
provisions of law and this chapter, the Board of Appeals finds that
the proposed project will not alter the essential character of the
neighborhood.
(a) In making its determination of whether the proposed project
will alter the essential character of the neighborhood, the
Board of Appeals shall take into account factors that are of
vital importance to the citizens of the Town, including, without
limitation:
[1] The rural residential, agricultural and historic character of
the Town;
[2] Its irreplaceable recreation and tourism sites;
[3] The extent of hazard to life, limb or property that may
result from the proposed project;
[4] Health impacts;
[5] The social and economic impacts of traffic congestion,
noise, dust, odors, emissions, solid waste generation and
other nuisances;
§ 250-14.4 PENFIELD CODE § 250-14.4
1:560
[6] The impact on property values; and
[7] Whether the applicant will use a style of development that
will result in degradation to the air quality, water quality or
scenic and natural resources of the Town.
(b) In order to find that the proposed project does not alter the
essential character of the neighborhood, the Board of Appeals
shall interpret the public interest in said essential character of
the neighborhood to require, at a minimum, that the project
will not do any of the following:
[1] Pose a threat to the public safety, including public health,
water quality or air quality;
[2] Cause an extraordinary public expense; or
[3] Create a nuisance.
(5) Self-created hardship. No use variance shall be granted unless, in
addition to satisfying all other applicable provisions of law and this
chapter, the Board of Appeals finds that the alleged hardship was
not self-created. The Board of Appeals may find that the applicant
suffers from a self-created hardship in the event that the Board
finds that:
(a) The applicant’s inability to obtain a reasonable return on the
property as a whole results from having paid too much or from
a poor investment decision;
(b) The applicant previously divided the property and is left with
only a portion which suffers from some unique condition for
which relief is sought and which did not apply to the parcel as a
whole; or
(c) When the applicant purchased the property, he/she knew or
should have known the property was subject to the zoning
restrictions.
(6) The Board of Appeals, in the granting of use variances, shall grant
only the minimum variance that it shall deem necessary and
adequate to allow an economically beneficial use of the property,
and at the same time preserve and protect the essential character
of the neighborhood and the health, safety and welfare of the
community.
(7) The Board of Appeals, in the granting of use variances, shall have
the authority to impose such reasonable conditions and restrictions
as are directly related to and incidental to the proposed project.
Such conditions shall be consistent with the spirit and intent of this
chapter, and shall be imposed for the purpose of minimizing any
adverse impact such use variance may have on the neighborhood or
community. Such conditions may include, but are not limited to,
§ 250-14.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 250-14.4
1:561
landscaping, lighting, access and egress, signs, screening,
architectural features, location and layout of buildings, limitations
upon the use or characteristics of the use which are reasonably
related to the public health, safety and general welfare and as
may be necessary to carry out the intent of this chapter. If the
applicant refuses to accept such requirements and conditions, the
use variance shall be denied.
B. Area variances.
(1) In making a determination whether to grant, grant conditionally, or
deny an application for an area variance, the Board of Appeals shall
take into consideration the benefit to the applicant if the area
variance is granted, and balance this benefit against the detriment
to the health, safety and welfare of the neighborhood or community
by making such grant. In making such determination, the Board
shall consider each of the following factors:
(a) Whether an undesirable change will be produced in the
character of the neighborhood or a detriment to nearby
properties will be created by the granting of the area variance;
(b) Whether the benefit sought by the applicant can be achieved
by some method, feasible for the applicant to pursue, other
than an area variance;
(c) Whether the requested area variance is substantial;
(d) Whether the proposed area variance will have an adverse
effect or impact on the physical or environmental conditions in
the neighborhood or district; and
(e) Whether the alleged difficulty was self-created. (In contrast to
the context of a use variance, in the context of an area variance
application, whether or not the alleged difficulty was selfcreated
shall be relevant to the decision of the Board of Zoning
Appeals but a finding that the difficulty was self-created shall
not in and of itself preclude the granting of the area variance.)
(2) The Board of Appeals, in the granting of area variances, shall grant
the minimum area variance that it shall deem necessary and
adequate and at the same time preserve and protect the character
of the neighborhood and the health, safety and welfare of the
community.
(3) In addition to the application requirements from time to time
established pursuant to law and this chapter, applications for an
area variance shall contain a typewritten narrative explaining what
the application is for and how the project meets or exceeds all of
the criteria for an area variance.
§ 250-14.4 PENFIELD CODE § 250-14.4
1:562
§ 250-14.5. Appeals, variances and special use permits.
(4) The Board of Appeals shall, in the granting of area variances, have
the authority to impose such reasonable conditions and restrictions
as are directly related to and incidental to the proposed use of the
property. Such conditions shall be consistent with the spirit and
intent of this chapter, and shall be imposed for the purpose of
minimizing any adverse impact such area variance may have on the
neighborhood or community. If the applicant refuses to accept such
requirements and conditions, the area variance shall be denied.
A. Appeals. Any interested or aggrieved party shall have the right to
appeal to the Zoning Board of Appeals from any order, requirement,
decision or determination made by the Building Official, and said Board
shall thereupon hear and determine the same.
B. Variances on appeal. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall have the power,
upon appeal and after public notice and hearing, to vary or modify the
application of any of the regulations or provisions of this chapter
relating to the use, construction, or alteration of structures, or the use
of land, where it shall appear that there are practical difficulties or
unnecessary hardships in the carrying out to the strict letter of this
chapter, to the end that the spirit of this chapter shall be observed,
public safety and welfare secured and substantial justice done.
C. Special use permits and variances.
(1) When in its judgment the public convenience and welfare will be
served and the appropriate use of neighboring property will not be
substantially injured thereby, the Zoning Board of Appeals may, in
appropriate and specific cases, after public notice and hearing and
subject to appropriate conditions and safeguards, vary the
application of the regulations of this chapter and grant exceptions
in harmony with their general purpose and intent, as follows:
(a) Grant a permit whenever it is provided in this chapter that
approval of the Zoning Board of Appeals is required or refuse
to grant the same where such action is justified.
(b) Permit such variation of the yards, lot area or lot width
requirements of this chapter as may be necessary to secure an
appropriate improvement of a parcel of land where such parcel
was separately owned or where such parcel was subdivided
and recorded in the office of the Clerk of Monroe County at the
time of the adoption of this chapter and is of such restricted
area or exceptional topography that it cannot be appropriately
used or improved without such variation.
(c) Permit in any district such modification of the requirements of
these regulations as to height, yards, lot area and lot width as
said Board may deem necessary and proper to secure
§ 250-14.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 250-14.5
1:563
§ 250-14.6. Recreational areas.
appropriate development of a lot where adjacent thereto are
buildings or structures that do not conform to such
regulations.
(d) Permit the extension of a nonconforming use or structure,
provided such use or structure existed at the time this chapter
became effective.
(e) Permit the extension of a structure or use into a more
restricted district immediately adjacent thereto, but not more
than 50 feet beyond the boundary line of the district in which
said structure or use is authorized.
(f) Permit such modification or variation of the yards, lot area and
lot width requirements of this chapter as will permit
completion of the development of a tract of land according to
the ordinance in effect when such development was first
commenced, in instances where a map of a part of such tract
has been approved and construction actually commenced prior
to the adoption of this chapter.
(2) Further, all special use permits granted pursuant to this article
shall be issued by the Town Clerk at a fee as required by resolution
by the Town Board.
A. The authorized official may, on application, grant a temporary permit to
be issued by the Town Clerk upon payment of a fee set by resolution by
the Town Board, for the use of a specified area in any district for
temporary recreational uses, whether operated for profit or not;
however, the above shall not apply to personal recreational uses. The
authorized official may require the applicant to submit such information
as he/she may require and may fix the location of all structures on the
premises. Prior to the granting of such permit, the authorized official
shall find that the contemplated use will not:
(1) Be detrimental to adjacent property.
(2) By reason of its location or nature create a hazard of any nature to
the public or to any adjacent owner or occupant.
(3) Unreasonably interfere with the lawful enjoyment of the public
highways or of adjacent property.
B. Any permit granted hereunder may be revoked immediately by the
Town Clerk upon order of the authorized official, in the event that the
use made thereunder violates any of the conditions of its issuance or
shall have become a nuisance, and any such permit may be renewed by
the authorized official, upon application, in accordance with the
procedures for the original permit.
§ 250-14.5 PENFIELD CODE § 250-14.6
1:564
C. In granting such a permit, the authorized official may attach such
conditions and limitations as it considers to be desirable in order to
ensure compliance with the application and the purpose of this chapter.
§ 250-14.6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 250-14.6
1:565

ARTICLE XV
Miscellaneous Provisions
§ 250-15.1. Amendments.
§ 250-15.2. Fees.
Fees shall be collected by the Town Clerk upon the filing of an application.
Such fees shall be as established by resolution by the Town Board and are
not refundable.
§ 250-15.3. Engineering review fee.
A. Purpose. This chapter may be amended by changing the boundaries of
districts or by changing any other provision thereof, whenever the
public necessity and convenience and the general welfare require such
amendment, by following the procedures of this article.
B. Authorization to initiate amendments. An amendment to the text or the
Zoning Map may be initiated by:
(1) Resolution of intention of the Town Board.
(2) Application by one or more property owners, or their agents.
C. Application for an amendment. A property owner(s) or his/her agent(s)
may initiate a request for an amendment to this chapter by filing an
application with the Town Clerk using forms provided for such requests
by the Town. Such application shall be accompanied by a legal
description and a map of the property or properties to be rezoned, and a
filing fee as required in the Town's fee schedule established by
resolution by the Town Board.
D. Public hearing on amendment. A public hearing shall be held by the
Town Board before an amendment is permitted. Notice of said hearing
shall be provided as required in § 250-15.4 of this article.
E. Referral to Planning Board. The Town Board shall refer an
application(s) for a zoning amendment to the Planning Board for review
and recommendation.
F. Records of amendments. The Town Clerk shall maintain separate files
and records of each amendment to the map of this chapter, which shall
be open to public inspection upon request.
A. An engineering review fee shall be paid by any applicant or his/her
agent whenever the services of the Town Engineer are required to
review sketches, plats or plans submitted to any board of the Town, the
Planning Department, Department of Public Works, Highway
Department, or the Department of Sewers and Sanitation. Such fee
shall apply to all types of building and development, and to all of the
districts, and to all of the proceedings of any board of the Town of
§ 250-15.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 250-15.3
1:567
§ 250-15.4. Notice of public hearing; neighbor notification.
§ 250-15.5. Limitation on new applications.
In a case where an application is denied by the board having jurisdiction,
unless specifically stated to be without prejudice, that application shall not
be eligible for resubmission for a period of one year from the date of said
denial unless, in the opinion of the board having jurisdiction, new evidence
is submitted or conditions have significantly changed to an extent that
further consideration is warranted.
§ 250-15.6. Essential services.
Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit the provision of essential services,
provided the installation of such service does not violate any other
Penfield, where the services of the Town Engineer are required to
review sketches, plats or plans on behalf of the Town or any of its
boards or departments. The payment of such fee shall be a prerequisite
to any such review.
B. The engineering review fee, based on the number of units, shall be
established by resolution by the Town Board.
C. Payment.
(1) When the Town Engineer is required to review in two stages
(preliminary and final), then the applicant or his/her agent shall pay
1/2 of the engineering review fee upon submission for preliminary
review of such sketches, plats, or plans, and 1/2 of the fee upon
submission for final review.
(2) When the sketches, plats or plans are able to be reviewed as a onestage
review by the Town Engineer, then the required fee shall be
paid in full, as heretofore directed, before any board, department
or officer of the Town shall grant final approval for building
permits.
A. When the Town Board, Planning Board, Zoning Board of Appeals or
Historic Preservation Board is required to hold a public hearing, as
provided for in this chapter or elsewhere by law, notice of the hearing
shall be given pursuant to the provisions of Town Law § 264.
B. Fees collected by the Town Clerk upon the filing of an application shall
pay for the Town’s neighbor notification procedures. Such
neighborhood notification procedures shall be as established by
resolution by the Town Board for the purpose of notifying interested
parties through a variety of media outlets to include, but not be limited
to, website posting, post card mailings, and sign posting on the subject
property. Implementation of the neighborhood notification policy is the
responsibility of the Town department to which the application was
made.
§ 250-15.3 PENFIELD CODE § 250-15.6
1:568
applicable provision of this chapter. Nothing in this section shall be
construed to permit the erection, construction, or enlargement of any
aboveground structures, except utility poles and wires and such facilities as
otherwise permitted in this chapter.
§ 250-15.7. Temporary uses.
Nothing in this chapter shall prevent the use of a travel trailer, mobile
home, or other similar mobile structures, in any district except a floodplain
district, as a temporary construction field office for a period not to exceed
the period of construction; provided, however, such structure is not used for
overnight sleeping accommodations and adequate arrangement for sanitary
facilities are made; and provided, further, that the temporary field office
has been verified as such and conforming to this chapter by the authorized
official.
§ 250-15.8. Order to abate violation.
Upon the determination by the authorized official that there has been a
violation of any provision of this chapter, the authorized official shall deliver
or mail to the holder of any permit issued under this chapter, or if no such
permit has been issued, then to the owner and/or the person occupying the
land where the violation shall have occurred, an initial order, in writing,
directing that the conditions specified therein be corrected within 30 days
after the delivery of such order.
§ 250-15.9. Penalties for offenses.
A. Any person, firm, company or corporation who or which shall omit,
neglect or refuse to do any act required by this chapter, or who or which
shall omit, neglect or refuse to do any act or condition imposed by the
Town Board, Zoning Board of Appeals or the Planning Board, or who or
which shall build any structure contrary to the plans or specifications
submitted to the authorized official and certified by him/her as
complying with this chapter, shall be subject to enforcement and
penalties as follows:
(1) For conviction of a first offense, a fine of not more than $350 or
imprisonment not to exceed 15 days, or both.
(2) For conviction of a second offense, both of which were committed
within a period of five years, a fine of not less than $350 nor more
than $700, or imprisonment not to exceed 15 days, or both.
(3) For conviction of a third or subsequent offenses, all of which were
committed within a period of five years, a fine of not less than $700
nor more than $1,000, or imprisonment not to exceed 15 days, or
both.
B. Each and every week that a violation of any of the provisions of this
chapter continues after written notice shall have been delivered or
§ 250-15.6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 250-15.9
1:569
§ 250-15.10. Assessment of charges.
mailed to the person in violation of this chapter shall constitute a
separate violation. In addition to the remedies set forth, the Town Board
may institute an appropriate action to proceed to abate any violation of
the provisions of this chapter or to compel compliance therewith.
C. Any person, firm, company or corporation who or which shall fail to
acquire any permit or license herein required within 30 days of the time
that said permit or license should have been acquired under this
chapter shall pay to the Town Clerk, before the issuance of any said
permit or license, a sum equal to three times the fee set for the issuance
thereof.
A. In order to secure compliance with this chapter and to protect and
preserve public health, safety and welfare, the Town Board shall have
the power to perform work, labor and services as required of persons
under this chapter and to add the cost thereof to the Town tax bill
applicable to the property where such is performed, pursuant and
subject to the terms and conditions of this section.
B. Upon inspection by the authorized official and subsequent to the
service of an order to abate violation as set forth in § 250-15.8 of this
chapter, the authorized official may report to the Town Board in writing
his/her findings and recommendations regarding any act or acts
required of any person, firm, company or corporation who or which
shall have omitted, neglected or refused to do any such act required of
him/her pursuant to this chapter.
C. The Town Board shall thereafter consider such report and shall by
resolution determine, if in its opinion such report warrants, that such
act or acts shall, in the interest of public health, safety or welfare, be
performed and may order that such be performed. Such resolution and
order shall contain the following:
(1) A description of the subject premises and/or structure;
(2) A statement of the particular act or acts required of the person,
firm, company or corporation, or its agent or person in control
thereof;
(3) A statement that such act or acts shall commence within 10 days
after service of the order and be completed within a reasonable
time thereafter as the Town Board may specify, which may (for
good cause shown) be extended by the Town Board;
(4) A date, time and place for a public hearing before the Town Board
on the act or acts required by its order, which hearing shall not be
scheduled less than five business days from the date of service of
the resolution and order; and
§ 250-15.9 PENFIELD CODE § 250-15.10
1:570
(5) A statement that, in the event of the neglect or refusal to comply
with the Town Board order, the Town Board shall undertake to
cause the same to be performed and that the costs incurred in so
doing shall be levied as a special charge against the property where
said is performed.
D. A certified copy of the resolution and order adopted by the Town Board
pertaining to said act or acts required shall be:
(1) Served upon the owner, agent or person in control of the property
where such act or acts shall be performed, in the same manner as
prescribed for the service of a summons pursuant to the Civil
Practice Law and Rules;
(2) Posted upon the property where such act or acts are to be
performed; and
(3) Filed in the office of the Monroe County Clerk.
E. In the event of the refusal or neglect of the person so notified to comply
with said resolution and order of the Town Board, and after a hearing,
the Town Board shall provide for the required act or acts to be done by
Town employees or by contract. Any contract for such act or acts in
excess of $5,000 shall be awarded by competitive bid.
F. After completion by the Town of the required act or acts, the Town shall
submit by mail, to the person and address as shown in the records of
the Town Assessor of the owner of the property where such shall have
been performed, an itemized statement which shall specify the act or
acts performed, the provider of such, the cost thereof, and a reasonable
charge by the Town for administration thereof (including but not limited
to the cost of publication, service of process, engineering and legal fees,
interest charged at the specified rate permitted for judgments, and the
like). If after a reasonable period of time said charge remains unpaid,
the Town Board shall pass a resolution assessing the same as a special
charge and directing the Assessor to add said charge to the Town tax
bill of the property owner in the same manner as provided in Article 15
of the Town Law for the assessment of special charges.
§ 250-15.10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 250-15.10
1:571
Chapter 255
ZONING, INCENTIVE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Zoning and land use — See Ch. 250.
§ 255-1. Title.
This chapter shall hereinafter be known and cited as the "Incentive Zoning
Law of the Town of Penfield."
§ 255-2. Purpose.
It is the purpose of this chapter to empower the Town Board to grant
incentives or bonuses to advance the Town's specific physical, cultural and
social policies in accordance with the Town of Penfield's Comprehensive
Plan and in coordination with other community planning mechanisms or
land use techniques.
§ 255-3. Legislative authority.
In accordance with Town Law § 261-b, the Town Board of the Town of
Penfield is empowered to provide for a system of zoning incentives, or
bonuses, as the Town Board deems necessary and appropriate consistent
with the purposes and conditions set forth in § 261-b.
§ 255-4. Jurisdiction.
This chapter shall apply to the entire area of the Town of Penfield.
§ 255-5. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
COMMUNITY BENEFITS OR AMENITIES — Open space, housing for
persons of low or moderate income, parks, housing for seniors, elder care,
day care or other specific physical or social or cultural amenities, or cash in
lieu thereof, of benefit to the residents of the community authorized by the
Town Board.
INCENTIVES or BONUSES — Adjustments to the permissible population
density, area, height, open space, use, or other provisions of a zoning
ordinance or local law for a specific purpose authorized by the Town Board.
INCENTIVE ZONING — The system by which specific incentives or bonuses
are granted, pursuant to Town Law § 261-b, on condition that specific
physical, social, or cultural benefits or amenities would inure to the
community.
§ 250-15.10 PENFIELD CODE § 255-6
1:572
§ 255-6. Amenities for which incentives may be offered.
§ 255-7. Incentives permitted.
The following incentives may be granted by the Town Board to an
application on a specific site:
§ 255-8. Criteria and procedure for approval.
A. The following amenities may be either on or off the site of the subject
application:
(1) Preservation of open space.
(2) Regional parks.
(3) Utilities and appurtenances, including land devoted to regionalized
drainage facilities.
(4) Road and highway improvements in excess of those required to
mitigate proposed impacts.
(5) Preservation of cultural or historic facilities.
(6) Other facilities or benefits to the residents of the community, as
determined by the Town Board.
(7) Any combination of above-listed amenities and/or cash in lieu of
any amenity(s) for specific purposes identified.
B. These amenities shall be in addition to any mandated requirements
pursuant to other provisions of Chapter 250, Zoning and Land Use, of
the Town of Penfield and development regulations and specifications of
the Town of Penfield.
A. Increases in residential/nonresidential unit density.
B. Changes of use.
C. Increases in lot coverage.
D. Changes in setbacks or height.
E. Increases in floor area.
F. Reduction of required buffer area.
G. Any other changes in Chapter 250, Zoning and Land Use, of the Town of
Penfield and development regulations and specifications of the Town of
Penfield.
A. Applications for incentives in exchange for amenities shall be submitted
to the Planning Board for review and to the Town Board concurrently,
after discussions with Town staff for appropriate input. Both
§ 255-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 255-8
1:573
submissions shall follow the adopted procedures and shall include the
following information:
(1) Proposed amenity.
(2) The cash value of the proposed amenity.
(3) A narrative which:
(a) Describes the benefits to be provided to the community by the
proposed amenity.
(b) Gives preliminary indication that there is adequate sewer,
water, transportation, waste disposal and fire protection
facilities in the zoning district in which the proposal is located
to handle the additional demands the incentive and amenity, if
it is an on-site amenity, may place on these facilities beyond the
demand that would be placed on them as if the district were
developed to its fullest potential.
(c) Explains how the amenity helps implement the physical, social
or cultural policies of the Comprehensive Plan as
supplemented by the local laws and ordinances adopted by the
Town Board. [Amended 12-16-2015 by L.L. No. 3-2015]
(4) The requested incentive.
(5) Sets of maps containing both the requested incentive layout and a
layout conforming to current requirements.
(6) A completed Environmental Assessment Form, Part I.
B. The Planning Board shall review the submission in a scheduled work
session or meeting. Following said meeting, the Planning Board shall
prepare comments pertaining to the submission and forward them to
the applicant and the Town Board.
C. The Town Board shall determine, based upon input from the Planning
Board and other information/input it deems necessary, if the application
warrants further consideration under this chapter. Said determination
shall be disclosed in a findings report or similar document, a copy of
which shall be made available to the applicant and the Planning Board.
If further consideration is appropriate, the applicant shall be directed
to prepare an application for subdivision and/or site plan, pursuant to
Chapter 250, Zoning and Land Use, Articles XII and Article XIII, of the
Penfield Town Code. Once the application has been determined to be
complete, a public hearing will be scheduled before the Town Board.
The Town Clerk shall give notice of the hearing in the official newspaper
of the Town at least 10 days prior to the date of the hearing.
D. The applications shall be referred to other agencies for input as
appropriate, including but not limited to the Monroe County
Department of Planning and Development, the Town's consulting
§ 255-8 PENFIELD CODE § 255-8
1:574
§ 255-9. Cash payment in lieu of amenity.
If the Town Board finds that a community benefit is not suitable on site
or cannot be reasonably provided, the Town Board may require a cash
payment in lieu of the provision of the amenity. These funds shall be placed
in a trust fund to be used by the Town Board exclusively for amenities
specified in these provisions. Cash payments shall be made prior to the
issuance of a building permit.
Disposition List
Chapter DL
DISPOSITION LIST
engineer, Conservation Board and applicable county, state or federal
agencies.
E. All applicable requirements of the State Environmental Quality Review
(SEQR) Act shall be complied with as part of the review and hearing
process. In addition to other information that may be required as part of
an environmental assessment of the proposal, the assessment shall
include verification that the zoning district in which the proposal is to
be located has adequate sewer, water, transportation, waste disposal
and fire protection facilities to: [Amended 12-16-2015 by L.L. No.
3-2015]
(1) First, serve the remaining vacant land in the district as though it
were developed to its fullest potential under the district regulations
in effect at the time of the amenity/incentive proposal; and
(2) Then, serve the on-site amenity and incentive, given the
development scenario in Subsection E(1) above.
F. In order to approve an amenity/incentive proposal, the Town Board
shall determine that the requirements of SEQR have been met and the
proposed amenity provides sufficient public benefit to provide the
requested incentive. Thereafter, the Town Board is authorized to act on
an application for approval pursuant to Chapter 250, Zoning, Article
XXII and Article XXIII and this local law. [Amended 12-16-2015 by
L.L. No. 3-2015]
§ 255-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:575
§ DL-1. Disposition of legislation.
L.L. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
L.L. No.
1-2016
3-23-2016 Moratorium on public
golf course
redevelopment
NCM
Res. 4-6-2016 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 220
L.L. No.
2-2016
10-6-2016 Contracts: best value
contracts
Ch. 13, Art. I
L.L. No.
1-2017
3-22-2017 Extension of moratorium
on public golf course
redevelopment
NCM
L.L. No.
2-2017
5-3-2017 Taxation: solar, wind
energy and farm waste
energy system
exemptions
Ch. 207, Art. X
L.L. No.
3-2017
11-1-2017 Zoning and land use
amendment
Ch. 250
§ DL-1 PENFIELD CODE § DL-1
1:576