Part I, Administrative Legislation
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
1:1

ARTICLE I
Adoption of Code
[Adopted 11-17-2003 by L.L. No. 2-2003]
§ 1-1. Legislative intent.
In accordance with Subdivision 3 of § 20 of the Municipal Home Rule Law,
the local laws, ordinances and certain resolutions of the Village of Palmyra,
as codified by General Code Publishers Corp., and consisting of Chapters 1
through 200, together with an Appendix, shall be known collectively as the
"Code of the Village of Palmyra," hereafter termed the "Code." Wherever
reference is made in any of the local laws, ordinances and resolutions
contained in the "Code of the Village of Palmyra" to any other local law,
ordinance or resolution appearing in said Code, such reference shall be
changed to the appropriate chapter title, chapter number, article number
or section number appearing in the Code as if such local law, ordinance or
resolution had been formally amended to so read.
§ 1-2. Continuation of existing provisions.
The provisions of the Code, insofar as they are substantively the same as
those of local laws, ordinances and resolutions in force immediately prior to
the enactment of the Code by this local law are intended as a continuation
of such local laws, ordinances and resolutions and not as new enactments,
and the effectiveness of such provisions shall date from the date of adoption
of the prior local law, ordinance or resolution. All such provisions are hereby
continued in full force and effect and are hereby reaffirmed as to their
adoption by the Board of Trustees of the Village of Palmyra, and it is the
intention of said Board that each such provision contained within the Code
is hereby reaffirmed as it appears in said Code. Only such provisions of
former local laws and ordinances as are omitted from this Code shall be
deemed repealed or abrogated by the provisions of § 1-3 below.
§ 1-3. Repeal of enactments not included in Code.
All local laws and ordinances of a general and permanent nature of the
Village of Palmyra in force on the date of the adoption of this local law
and not contained in such Code or recognized and continued in force by
reference therein, including the 1974 Code, are hereby repealed from and
after the effective date of this local law.
§ 1-4. Enactments saved from repeal; matters not affected.
The repeal of local laws and ordinances provided for in § 1-3 of this local law
shall not affect the following classes of local laws, ordinances, rights and
obligations, which are hereby expressly saved from repeal:
A. Any right or liability established, accrued or incurred under any
legislative provision of the Village of Palmyra prior to the effective date
§ 1-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-4
1:3
§ 1-5. Severability.
If any clause, sentence, paragraph, section, article, chapter or part of
this local law or of any local law, ordinance or resolution included in this
of this local law or any action or proceeding brought for the
enforcement of such right or liability.
B. Any offense or act committed or done before the effective date of this
local law in violation of any legislative provision of the Village of
Palmyra or any penalty, punishment or forfeiture which may result
therefrom.
C. Any prosecution, indictment, action, suit or other proceeding pending
or any judgment rendered prior to the effective date of this local law,
brought pursuant to any legislative provision of the Village of Palmyra.
D. Any agreement entered into or any franchise, license, right, easement
or privilege heretofore granted or conferred by the Village of Palmyra.
E. Any local law or ordinance of the Village of Palmyra providing for the
laying out, opening, altering, widening, relocating, straightening,
establishing grade, changing name, improvement, acceptance or
vacation of any right-of-way, easement, street, road, highway, park or
other public place within the Village of Palmyra or any portion thereof.
F. Any local law or ordinance of the Village of Palmyra appropriating
money or transferring funds, promising or guaranteeing the payment of
money or authorizing the issuance and delivery of any bond of the
Village of Palmyra or other instruments or evidence of the village's
indebtedness.
G. Local laws or ordinances authorizing the purchase, sale, lease or
transfer of property, or any lawful contract, agreement or obligation.
H. The levy or imposition of special assessments or charges.
I. The annexation or dedication of property.
J. Any local law or ordinance relating to salaries and compensation.
K. Any local law or ordinance amending the Zoning Map.
L. Any local law or ordinance relating to or establishing a pension plan or
pension fund for municipal employees.
M. Any local law or ordinance or portion of a local law or ordinance
establishing a specific fee amount for any license, permit or service
obtained from the village.
N. Local Law No. 4-1989, if adopted and still in force and effect. (There
was no existing record of this local law.)
O. Any local law adopted subsequent to 4-21-2003.
§ 1-4 PALMYRA CODE § 1-5
1:4
Code now or through supplementation shall be adjudged by any court of
competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such judgment shall not affect, impair
or invalidate the remainder thereof but shall be confined in its operation
to the clause, sentence, paragraph, section, article, chapter or part thereof
directly involved in the controversy in which such judgment shall have been
rendered.
§ 1-6. Copy of Code on file.
A copy of the Code, in loose-leaf form, has been filed in the office of the
Village Clerk of the Village of Palmyra and shall remain there for use and
examination by the public until final action is taken on this local law; and,
if this local law shall be adopted, such copy shall be certified by the Village
Clerk of the Village of Palmyra by impressing thereon the Seal of the Village
of Palmyra, and such certified copy shall remain on file in the office of said
Village Clerk to be made available to persons desiring to examine the same
during all times while said Code is in effect. The enactment and publication
of this local law, coupled with the availability of a copy of the Code for
inspection by the public, shall be deemed, held and considered to be due
and legal publication of all provisions of the Code for all purposes.
§ 1-7. Amendments to Code.
Any and all additions, deletions, amendments or supplements to any of
the local laws, ordinances and resolutions known collectively as the "Code
of the Village of Palmyra" or any new local laws or resolutions, when
enacted or adopted in such form as to indicate the intention of the Board
of Trustees to be a part thereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated into
such Code so that reference to the Code shall be understood and intended to
include such additions, deletions, amendments or supplements. Whenever
such additions, deletions, amendments or supplements to the Code shall
be enacted or adopted, they shall thereafter be printed and, as provided
hereunder, inserted in the loose-leaf book containing said Code as
amendments and supplements thereto. Nothing contained in this local law
shall affect the status of any local law, ordinance or resolution contained
herein, and such local laws, ordinances or resolutions may be amended,
deleted or changed from time to time as the Board of Trustees deems
desirable.
§ 1-8. Code book to be kept up-to-date.
It shall be the duty of the Village Clerk to keep up-to-date the certified copy
of the book containing the Code of the Village of Palmyra required to be filed
in the office of the Village Clerk for use by the public. All changes in said
Code and all local laws and resolutions adopted by the Board of Trustees
subsequent to the enactment of this local law in such form as to indicate
the intention of said Board to be a part of said Code shall, when finally
enacted or adopted, be included therein by temporary attachment of copies
of such changes, local laws or resolutions until such changes, local laws or
§ 1-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-8
1:5
resolutions are printed as supplements to said Code book, at which time
such supplements shall be inserted therein.
§ 1-9. Sale of Code book; supplementation.
Copies of the Code, or any chapter or portion of it, may be purchased from
the Village Clerk, or an authorized agent of the Clerk, upon the payment of
a fee to be set by resolution of the Board of Trustees. The Clerk may also
arrange for procedures for the periodic supplementation of the Code.
§ 1-10. Penalties for tampering with Code.
Any person who, without authorization from the Village Clerk, changes or
amends, by additions or deletions, any part or portion of the Code of the
Village of Palmyra or who alters or tampers with such Code in any manner
whatsoever which will cause the legislation of the Village of Palmyra to be
misrepresented thereby or who violates any other provision of this local law
shall be guilty of an offense and shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to
a fine of not more than $250 or imprisonment for a term of not more than
15 days, or both.
§ 1-11. Changes in previously adopted legislation; new provisions.
A. In compiling and preparing the local laws, ordinances and resolutions
for publication as the Code of the Village of Palmyra, no changes in the
meaning or intent of such local laws, ordinances and resolutions have
been made, except as provided for in Subsection B hereof. In addition,
certain grammatical changes and other minor nonsubstantive changes
were made in one or more of said pieces of legislation. It is the intention
of the Board of Trustees that all such changes be adopted as part of the
Code as if the local laws, ordinances and resolutions had been
previously formally amended to read as such.
B. In addition, the amendments and/or additions as set forth in Schedule A
attached hereto and made a part hereof are made herewith, to become
effective upon the effective date of this local law. (Chapter and section
number references are to the local laws, ordinances and resolutions as
they have been renumbered and appear in the Code.)1
C. Nomenclature.
(1) Throughout the Code, all references to "Building Inspector" are
updated to read "Code Enforcement Officer"; and all references to
"Dog Catcher," "Dog Warden" or "Dog Control Officer" are updated
to read "Animal Control Officer."
1. Editor's Note: In accordance with § 1-11B, the chapters, parts and sections which were
added, amended, adopted or deleted by this local law are indicated throughout the Code
by a footnote referring to Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article I. During routine
supplementation, footnotes indicating amendments, additions or deletions will be
replaced with the following history: "Amended (added, deleted) 11-17-2003 by L.L. No.
2-2003." Schedule A, which contains a complete description of all changes, is on file in the
Village offices.
§ 1-8 PALMYRA CODE § 1-11
1:6
§ 1-12. Incorporation of provisions into Code.
The provisions of this local law are hereby made Article I of Chapter 1 of
the Code of the Village of Palmyra, such local law to be entitled "General
Provisions, Article I, Adoption of Code," and the sections of this local law
shall be numbered §§ 1-1 to 1-13, inclusive.
§ 1-13. When effective.
This local law shall take effect immediately upon filing with the Secretary of
State of the State of New York.
(2) Throughout Ch. 200, references to former §§ 29-41 and 29-44 are
updated to refer simply to "Article VII."
D. Fees. In the following sections, the specific amounts of fees and charges
are replaced with the provision that said fees and charges shall be as
set from time to time by resolution of the Board of Trustees: §§ 67-5A,
94-2B(7), 108-11B, 139-4C, 139-6A, 147-7, 189-5A, 189-9, 189-13 and
189-16B.
§ 1-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-13
1:7
Chapter 5
ASSESSMENTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Taxation — See Ch. 172.
§ 5-1. Legislative intent.
The intent of the Board of Trustees of the Village of Palmyra is to implement
§ 1402(3) of the Real Property Tax Law providing for the voluntary
termination of the Village’s status as an assessing unit, as now provided in
the Village Law and the Real Property Tax Law. It is also the intent of this
chapter to abolish the position of Assessor (or Board of Assessors) and to
terminate any and all responsibility as provided by law for the review of the
assessments of real property located within the Village of Palmyra.
§ 5-2. Status as assessing unit terminated.
On or after the effective date of this chapter, the Village of Palmyra shall
cease to be an assessing unit.
§ 5-3. Abolishment of Assessor.
The position of Assessor in the Village of Palmyra is hereby abolished.
§ 5-4. Abolishment of Board of Assessment Review.
The Board of Assessment Review in the Village of Palmyra is hereby
abolished.
§ 5-5. Assessment of taxes.
On or after the effective date of this chapter, taxes in the Village of Palmyra
shall be levied on a copy of the applicable part of the assessment roll of the
Town of Palmyra with the taxable status date of such town controlling for
Village purposes.
§ 5-6. Filing of chapter.2
Within five days of the effective date of this chapter, the Board of Trustees
of the Village of Palmyra shall file a copy of such chapter with the Clerk and
Assessor of the Town of Palmyra and with the State Board of Real Property
Services.
2. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 1-13 PALMYRA CODE § 5-7
5:8
§ 5-7. When effective; referendum required.
This chapter shall take effect immediately upon filing with the Secretary
of State; provided, however, that such chapter is subject to a permissive
referendum and the Village Clerk shall forthwith proceed to notice such fact
and conduct such referendum if required by petition.3
Chapter 11
DEFENSE AND INDEMNIFICATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Code of Ethics — See Ch. 16.
§ 11-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the defense and indemnification
of Village employees pursuant to § 18 of the Public Officers Law.
§ 11-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
VILLAGE EMPLOYEE — Any commissioner, member of a public board
or commission, trustee, director, officer, employee, volunteer expressly
authorized to participate in a publicly sponsored volunteer program or any
other person holding a position by election, appointment or employment in
the service of the Village of Palmyra, whether or not compensated. The term
“Village employee” shall not include an independent contractor. The term
“Village employee” shall include a former employee, the employee's estate
or a judicially appointed personal representative.
§ 11-3. Defense.
The Village of Palmyra hereby confers the benefits of § 18 of the Public
Officers Law upon its employees, subject to the limitations set forth in said
§ 18.
§ 11-4. Indemnification.
The Village of Palmyra hereby agrees to be held liable for the costs incurred
under § 18 of the Public Officers Law, subject to the limitations set forth in
said § 18.
Chapter 16
3. Editor's Note: This local law passed by permissive referendum 6-17-1991.
§ 5-7 DEFENSE AND INDEMNIFICATION § 11-4
11:9
ETHICS, CODE OF
§ 16-1. Legislative intent.
Pursuant to the provisions of General Municipal Law § 806, the Board of
Trustees of the Village of Palmyra recognizes that there are rules of ethical
conduct for public officers and employees which must be observed if a high
degree of moral conduct is to be obtained and if public confidence is to be
maintained in our unit of local government. It is the purpose of this chapter
to promulgate these rules of ethical conduct for the officers and employees
of the Village of Palmyra. These rules shall serve as a guide for official
conduct of the officers and employees of the Village of Palmyra. The rules of
ethical conduct of this chapter, as adopted, shall not conflict with but shall
be in addition to any prohibition of Article 18 of the General Municipal Law
or any other general or special law relating to ethical conduct and interest
in contracts of municipal officers and employees.
§ 16-2. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the terms used herein are defined as
follows:
INTEREST — 4 A direct or indirect pecuniary or material benefit accruing
to a municipal officer or employee as the result of a contract with the
municipality which such officer or employee serves. For the purposes of this
chapter, a municipal officer or employee shall be deemed to have an interest
in the contract of:
MUNICIPAL OFFICER OR EMPLOYEE — An officer or employee of the
Village of Palmyra, whether paid or unpaid, including members of any
administrative board, commission or other agency thereof. No person shall
be deemed to be a municipal officer or employee solely by reason of being a
volunteer fireman or civil defense volunteer, except a fire chief or assistant
fire chief. 5
His spouse, minor children and dependents, except a contract of
employment with the municipality which such officer or employee
serves.
A.
A firm, partnership or association of which such officer or employee is
a member or employee.
B.
A corporation of which such officer or employee is an officer, director
or employee.
C.
A corporation, any stock of which is owned or controlled directly or
indirectly by such officer or employee.
D.
4. Editor’s Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
5. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 11-4 PALMYRA CODE § 16-3
11:10
§ 16-3. Standards of conduct.
Every officer or employee of the Village of Palmyra shall be subject to and
abide by the following standards of conduct:
A. Gifts. He shall not directly or indirectly solicit any gift, whether in the
form of money, service, loan, travel, entertainment, hospitality, thing or
promise, or any other form, under circumstances in which it could
reasonably be inferred that the gift was intended to influence him, or
could reasonably be expected to influence him, in the performance of
his official duties or was intended as a reward for any official action on
his part.6
B. Confidential information. He shall not disclose confidential information
acquired by him in the course of his official duties or use such
information to further his personal interest.
C. Representation before one’s own agency. He shall not receive, or enter
into, any agreement, express or implied, for compensation for services
to be rendered in relation to any matter before any municipal agency of
which he is an officer, member or employee or of any municipal agency
over which he has jurisdiction or to which he has the power to appoint
any member, officer or employee.
D. Representation before any agency for a contingent fee. He shall not
receive or enter into any agreement, express or implied, for
compensation for services to be rendered in relation to any matter
before any agency of his municipality, whereby his compensation is to
be dependent or contingent upon any action by such agency with
respect to such matter, provided that this subsection shall not prohibit
the fixing at any time of fees based upon the reasonable value of the
services rendered.
E. Disclosure of interest in legislation. To the extent that he knows thereof,
a member of the Board of Trustees of the Village of Palmyra, Palmyra
Urban Renewal Agency, Planning Board of the Village of Palmyra,
Zoning Board of Appeals of the Village of Palmyra and Board of Fire
Commissioners of the Village of Palmyra, and any officer or employee of
said boards or agencies, whether paid or unpaid, who participates in
the discussion or gives official opinion to said boards or agencies, shall
publicly disclose on the official record the nature and extent of any
direct or indirect financial or other private interest he has in such
legislation or any other action of said boards or agencies.
F. Investments in conflict with official duties. He shall not invest or hold
any investment directly or indirectly in any financial, business,
commercial or other private transaction which creates a conflict with
his official duties.
6. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 16-3 DEFENSE AND INDEMNIFICATION § 16-3
11:11
§ 16-4. Claims against Village.
Nothing herein shall be deemed to bar or prevent the timely filing by a
present or former municipal officer or employee of any claim, account,
demand or suit against the Village of Palmyra, or any agency thereof, on
behalf of himself or any member of his family arising out of any personal
injury or property damage or for any lawful benefit authorized or permitted
by law.
§ 16-5. Distribution of code.
The Mayor of the Village of Palmyra shall cause a copy of this Code of Ethics
to be distributed to every officer and employee of the said Village within
30 days after the effective date of this chapter. Each officer and employee
elected or appointed thereafter shall be furnished a copy before entering
upon the duties of his office or employment.
§ 16-6. Penalties for offenses.
In addition to any penalty contained in any other provision of law, any
person who shall knowingly and intentionally violate any of the provisions of
this code may be fined, suspended or removed from office or employment,
as the case may be, in the manner provided by law.
Chapter 28
POLICE DEPARTMENT
G. Private employment. He shall not engage in, solicit, negotiate for or
promise to accept private employment or render services for private
interests when such employment or service creates a conflict with or
impairs the proper discharge of his official duties.
H. Future employment. He shall not, after the termination of service or
employment with such municipality, appear before any board or agency
of the Village of Palmyra in relation to any case, proceeding or
application in which he personally participated during the period of his
service or employment or which was under his active consideration.
§ 16-3 PALMYRA CODE § 16-6
28:12
ARTICLE I
Authority to Waive Reimbursement for Training
[Adopted 7-1-1996 by L.L. No. 1-1996]
§ 28-1. Purpose.
Section 72-c of the General Municipal Law confers upon the Village of
Palmyra the ability to secure compensation whenever a member of its Police
Department, who has attended a police training school at Village expense,
terminates employment with the Village and commences employment with
any other municipal corporation or county sheriff. In such cases, the
employer municipal corporation or county sheriff shall reimburse the
Village for such expenses on a pro rata basis using the statutory method
of calculation if subsequent employment occurs within three years of
completion of police training school. In order to promote the efficient
operation of the Village Police Department in terms of transfer and
maintenance of personnel and costs associated therewith, there may be
circumstances in which the best interest of the Village is to waive the
reimbursement requirement imposed upon the subsequent employer
municipal corporation or county sheriff. Accordingly, pursuant to § 10 of the
Municipal Home Rule Law, this article is adopted to provide the authority to
do so and to repose such authority in the Board of Trustees of the Village of
Palmyra.
§ 28-2. Authority to waive reimbursement.
The Board of Trustees may resolve to waive, on an individual ad hoc
basis or pursuant to a policy adopted under this article, payments due the
Village under § 72-c of the General Municipal Law if the Board of Trustees
determines that to do so promotes the efficient operation of the Village
Police Department in terms of transfer and maintenance of personnel and
costs associated therewith.
§ 28-1 POLICE DEPARTMENT § 28-2
28:13
Chapter 34
RECORDS MANAGEMENT
§ 34-1. Establishment of program; Clerk designated as officer.7
There shall be a records management program established under the aegis
of the office of the Village Clerk and headed by a records management
officer (RMO). The Village Clerk is designated as the records management
officer and will be responsible for administering the noncurrent and
archival public records and storage areas for the Village of Palmyra in
accordance with local, state and federal laws and guidelines.
§ 34-2. Powers and duties of officer.
The officer shall have all the necessary powers to carry out the efficient
administration, determination of value, use, preservation, storage and
disposition of the noncurrent and archival public records kept, filed or
received by the offices and departments of the Village of Palmyra.
A. The records management officer shall continually survey and examine
public records to recommend their classification so as to determine the
most suitable methods to be used for the maintaining, storing and
servicing of archival material:
(1) Obsolete and unnecessary records according to New York State
Records Retention and Disposition Schedules thereby subject to
disposition; or
(2) Information containing administrative, legal, fiscal, research
historical or educational value which warrant their permanent
retention; or
(3) Records not subject to disposition according to state law.
B. The records management officer shall establish guidelines for proper
records management in any department or agency of the Village of
Palmyra in accordance with local, state and federal laws and guidelines.
C. The records management officer shall report annually to the chief
executive official and the governing body on the powers and duties
herein mentioned, including, but not limited to, the cost/benefit ratio of
programs effectuated by the department.
D. The officer shall operate a records management center for the storage,
processing and servicing of all noncurrent and archival records for all
Village of Palmyra departments and agencies.
E. The officer shall establish a Village of Palmyra archives and perform the
following functions:
7. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 28-2 PALMYRA CODE § 34-2
34:14
§ 34-3. Records Advisory Board.
There shall be a Records Advisory Board designated to work closely with
and provide advice to the records management officer. The Board shall
consist of the RMO, Court Clerk, Treasurer, Mayor, Police Chief and the
Historian. The Board shall meet periodically and have the following duties:
§ 34-4. Custody of records.
(1) Advise and assist Village of Palmyra departments in reviewing and
selecting material to be transferred to the Village of Palmyra
archives for preservation.
(2) Continually survey and examine public records to determine the
most suitable methods to be used for the creating, maintaining,
storing and servicing of archival materials.
(3) Establish and maintain an adequate repository for the proper
storage, conservation, processing, and servicing of archival
records.
(4) Promulgate rules governing public access to and use of records in
the archives, subject to the approval of the Records Advisory
Board.
(5) Develop a confidentiality policy for archival records designated
confidential, providing such policy does not conflict with any
federal or state statutes.
(6) Provide information services to other Village of Palmyra offices.
(7) Collect archival materials which are not official Village of Palmyra
records but which have associational value to the Village of
Palmyra or a close relationship to the existing archival collection.
Such collecting shall be subject to archive space, staff, and cost
limitations, and to the potential endangerment of such materials if
they are not collected by the archives.
(8) Develop a procedure whereby historically important records are to
be identified at the point of generation.
A. Provide advice to the records management officer on the development
of the records management program;
B. Review the performance of the program on an ongoing basis and
propose changes and improvements;
C. Review retention periods proposed by the records management office
for records not covered by state archives schedules;
D. Provide advice on the appraisal of records for archival value and to be
the final sign-off entity as to what is or is not archival.
§ 34-2 RECORDS MANAGEMENT § 34-4
34:15
§ 34-5. Replevin.
The Legal Department may take steps to recover government records which
have been alienated from proper custody, and may, when necessary,
institute actions of replevin.
§ 34-6. Disposal of records.
No records shall be destroyed or otherwise disposed of by a department of
the Village of Palmyra unless approval has been obtained from the records
management officer. No records shall be destroyed or otherwise disposed of
by the records management officer without the express written consent of
the department head having authority.
§ 34-7. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ARCHIVES — Those official records which have been determined by the
officer and advisory committee to have sufficient historical or other value to
warrant their continued preservation by the local government.
RECORDS — Any documents, books, papers, photographs, sound
recordings, microforms, or any other materials, regardless of physical form
or characteristics, made or received pursuant to law or ordinance or in
connection with the transaction of official Village of Palmyra business.
RECORDS CENTER — An establishment maintained by the Village of
Palmyra primarily for the storage, servicing, security and processing of
records which must be preserved for varying periods of time and need not
be retained in office equipment or space.
RECORDS DISPOSITION —
A. A Village of Palmyra department is the legal custodian of its records and
shall retain custody of records deposited in the records center. Records
transferred to or acquired by the archives shall be under the custody
and control of the archives rather than the department which created
or held them immediately prior to being transferred to the archives.
B. Records shall be transferred to the archives upon the recommendation
of the RMO, with the approval of the head of the department which has
custody and the approval of the Records Advisory Board.
C. Records may be permanently removed from the archives at the request
of the RMO or the head of the department which had custody of the
records immediately prior to the transfer of those records to the
archives, subject to the approval of the Records Advisory Board.
The removal by the Village of Palmyra; in accordance with approved
records control schedules, of records no longer necessary for the
A.
§ 34-4 PALMYRA CODE § 34-7
34:16
RECORDS MANAGEMENT — The planning, controlling, directing,
organizing, training, promotion and other managerial use and records
disposition, including records preservation, records disposal and records
centers or other facilities.
SERVICING — Making information in records available to any Village of
Palmyra agency for official use or to the public.
Part II, General Legislation
Chapter 59
ADULT USES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Zoning — See Ch. 200.
§ 59-1. Legislative purpose.
It is hereby declared the policy of the Village of Palmyra, State of New York,
that in order to preserve public peace and good order and to safeguard the
health, safety, and welfare of the Village, and to prevent the deleterious,
secondary and blighting effects of adult entertainment establishments, it
is necessary to regulate and control the operations and conduct of places
offering adult entertainment and to fix certain responsibilities and duties
of persons owning, operating, or controlling such establishments and
employed therein.
§ 59-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ADULT BOOKSTORE —
conduct of business by such agency through removal methods which
may include:
(1) The disposal of temporary records by destruction or donation; or
The transfer of records to the records center/archives for
temporary storage of inactive records and permanent storage of
records determined to have historical or other sufficient value
warranting continued preservation; and
(2)
The transfer of records from one Village of Palmyra agency to any other
Village of Palmyra agency.
B.
Any business enterprise having as a substantial portion of its stock-intrade
books, magazines, pamphlets, pictures, drawings, photographs,
A.
§ 34-7 RECORDS MANAGEMENT § 59-2
34:17
ADULT ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENT —
motion-picture films or sound recordings, or printed, visual and audio
material of any kind, which are characterized by their emphasis on
the description or depiction of specified anatomical areas or specified
sexual activities; or any business enterprise having a substantial area
of its establishment devoted to the sale and display of such materials.
For purposes of this definition, a “substantial portion” or “substantial
area” shall mean more than 30% of the business is devoted to the sale
and display of adult materials as determined by any of the following:
The number of different titles of printed, visual or audio materials
of any kind which are characterized by their emphasis on the
description or depiction of specified anatomical areas or specified
sexual activities;
(1)
The number of copies of printed, visual or audio materials of any
kind which are characterized by their emphasis on the description
or depiction of specified anatomical areas or specified sexual
activities;
(2)
The amount of floor space devoted to the sale and display of
printed, visual or audio materials of any kind which are
characterized by their emphasis on the description or depiction of
specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities;
(3)
The dollar amount of sales of printed, visual or audio materials
of any kind which are characterized by their emphasis on the
description or depiction of specified anatomical areas or specified
sexual activities; or
(4)
The amount of on-site advertising which can be viewed by
passersby, or the amount or cost of advertising in print or
broadcast media devoted to printed, visual or audio materials of
any kind which are characterized by their emphasis on the
description or depiction of specified anatomical areas or specified
sexual activities.
(5)
B.
Any business enterprise having as a substantial portion of its activity
the presentation, characterized by emphasis on the description or
depiction of specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities,
of live shows; motion-picture films or sound recordings presented to a
common audience in an enclosed common area; visual or audio material
presented by coin- or slug-operated, or electronically or mechanically
controlled, still- or action-picture machines, projectors or other imageproducing
devices to five or fewer persons per machine at any one
time; any business enterprise serving food and beer, wine or liquor
whose entertainers or waiters and waitresses appear in a state that
displays any specified anatomical areas; or any business enterprise that
offers services requiring the client or customer to display any specified
anatomical areas, except medical and health services establishments.
A.
§ 59-2 PALMYRA CODE § 59-2
34:18
BAR and/or LOUNGE — Any place of public assembly in which the business
of, directly or indirectly, selling and/or serving drink to the public is
conducted, with or without incidental musical entertainment; provided,
however, that dancing and live entertainment of any kind are not permitted.
A bar and/or lounge will not constitute a “cabaret” as herein defined.
CABARET8 — Any room, place or space in the Village where, for gain or
profit, live or mechanically reproduced music is provided in connection with
dancing or where, for gain or profit, any musician, group of musicians, floor
show or similar live entertainment is provided. A full-service restaurant
providing full-course meals with waiter and waitress service and which
has, as part of the occupancy and services offered, background music for
the benefit of patrons seated at tables and wherein dancing is prohibited
shall not constitute a cabaret for the purposes of this chapter; provided,
however, that such full-service restaurant shall notify the Village Clerk
before it expects to offer such services to its patrons. This term shall include
establishments known as “dance halls” and “discotheques.”
For purposes of this definition, a “substantial portion” shall mean more
than 30% of its activity is devoted to presentations characterized by
emphasis on description or depiction of specified anatomical areas or
specified sexual activities as determined by any of the following:
The number of presentations characterized by emphasis on the
description or depiction of specified anatomical areas or specified
sexual activities;
(1)
The size of the audiences attending presentations characterized by
emphasis on the description or depiction of specified anatomical
areas or specified sexual activities;
(2)
The amount of floor space devoted to presentations characterized
by emphasis on the description or depiction of specified anatomical
areas or specified sexual activities;
(3)
The amount of time devoted to presentations characterized by
emphasis on the description or depiction of specified anatomical
areas or specified sexual activities;
(4)
The amount of income generated from presentations characterized
by emphasis on the description or depiction of specified anatomical
areas or specified sexual activities; or
(5)
The amount of on-site advertising which can be viewed by
passersby, or the amount or cost of advertising in print or
broadcast media devoted to presentations characterized by
emphasis on the description or depiction of specified anatomical
areas or specified sexual activities.
(6)
B.
8. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 59-2 RECORDS MANAGEMENT § 59-2
34:19
DANCE HALL — Any place of public assembly in which dancing is carried
on and to which the public may gain admittance either with or without the
payment of a fee.
DISCOTHEQUE (and the like) — Any place of public assembly in which
the business of, directly or indirectly, selling and/or serving food, drinks
and/or alcoholic beverages to the public is conducted, in which dancing is
carried on by any musical entertainment and to which the public may gain
admission either with or without the payment of a fee.
PERSON — An individual, partnership, club, association, corporation,
society or any other organized group of persons, and includes officers,
directors, stockholders and trustees of a club, corporation, association or
society.
PLACE OF PUBLIC ASSEMBLY — Any room, place or space which is
occupied or arranged to be occupied for recreational, amusement, social,
sports or similar purposes; or any building, shed or enclosure, whether
indoor or outdoor, coming within the occupancy and other similar
classifications of this chapter as determined by the officer charged with the
enforcement of this chapter. For the purposes of interpretation, the term
“public assembly” where used in this chapter shall include the term “public
assembly” or “assembly” as may be used in other codes, laws, ordinances,
rules or regulations as may be applicable in the Village of Palmyra.
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREA — 9
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITY — 10
§ 59-3. Operation of establishments prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct, maintain, or operate in
the Village of Palmyra an adult bookstore or an adult entertainment
establishment.
§ 59-4. Exposure prohibited.
Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic
region, buttock or female breasts below a point immediately above the
top of the areola; or
A.
B. Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if covered.
The fondling or other erotic touching of covered or uncovered human
genitals, pubic region, buttock or female breast; or
A.
Any actual or simulated act of human masturbation, sexual intercourse
or deviate sexual intercourse.
B.
A. Exposure by individuals. In any cabaret, bar and/or lounge, dance hall
or discotheque establishment or any other place of public assembly
9. Editor’s Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
10.Editor’s Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 59-2 PALMYRA CODE § 59-4
34:20
§ 59-5. Penalties for offenses.
Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor punishable by a fine not exceeding $l,000 or imprisonment for
a period not to exceed 15 days, or both, and each day’s continued violation
shall constitute a separate violation.
Chapter 63
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
§ 63-1. Legislative intent.
It is the intent of the Village of Palmyra as an exercise of its police power
to promote the general health, safety and welfare of the residents of the
Village by enacting this chapter since it is the finding of the Board of
Trustees that the consumption of alcoholic beverages and/or the possession
of open containers of alcoholic beverages by persons on public premises,
except under controlled conditions, is detrimental to the health, safety and
welfare of the residents of the Village and contributes to the development of
unsanitary conditions and the creation of nuisances. It is further the intent
of the Board of Trustees of the Village of Palmyra that this chapter not be
within the Village of Palmyra, it shall be unlawful for a female to expose
that portion of her breast below the top of the areola or to appear
before or come in contact with patrons with the portion of her breast
below the top of the areola not covered with a fully opaque covering,
or for any person, male or female, to show the lower part of the torso
uncovered or so thinly covered or draped as to appear uncovered, or to
appear in any scene, sketch, act or entertainment with breasts (in case
of a female) or the lower part of the torso uncovered or so thinly draped
as to appear uncovered.11
B. Promoting exposure. It shall be unlawful for any person conducting,
maintaining or operating a cabaret, bar and/or lounge, dance hall or
discotheque establishment or any other place of public assembly within
the Village of Palmyra to suffer or permit any waitress, barmaid,
entertainer or other person who comes in contact with or appears
before or is likely to come in contact with or appear before patrons with
breasts uncovered in such a manner that the portion of the breast below
the top of the areola is not covered with a fully opaque covering or the
lower part of the torso uncovered or so thinly covered or draped is to
appear uncovered or to appear in any scene, sketch, act or
entertainment with breasts or the lower part of the torso uncovered or
so thinly draped as to appear uncovered. Reference to breasts in this
section refers to females only. Reference to the lower part of the torso
refers to both male and female.
11.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 59-4 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES § 63-1
63:21
considered as a traffic regulation insofar as it relates to motor vehicles or
the operation thereof.
§ 63-2. Definitions.12
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
INTENT TO CONSUME — Drinking from the container, with alcohol on the
breath of the possessor and/or any circumstances evidencing an intent to
ultimately consume on any public lands.
§ 63-3. Possession or consumption in public places prohibited.13
No person shall have, possess, carry or transport any liquor, wine, beer or
other alcoholic beverage in an open bottle or other open container, with
the intent to consume the same, in or upon any public sidewalk, street,
lane, highway, building, parking lot, park or recreation area, or other public
property, or in any vehicle upon such area, within the Village of Palmyra.
No person shall drink or otherwise consume any liquor, wine, beer or other
alcoholic beverage in or upon any of the aforesaid public areas or property
within the Village of Palmyra.14
§ 63-4. Discarding containers.
No person shall discard alcoholic or other beverage containers upon any
public sidewalk, street, lane, highway, parking lot, park or recreation area,
or other public property within the Village of Palmyra, without express
permission of the Village.
§ 63-5. Penalties for offenses.
The violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall be punishable by a
maximum fine of $250 or by imprisonment for 15 days, or by both such fine
and imprisonment. Each day any violation shall continue shall constitute a
separate violation.
Chapter 67
ANIMALS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Noise — See Ch. 127. Zoning — See Ch. 200.
12.Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
13.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
14.Editor's Note: Original § 1A-3, Exceptions; permit required; issuance, which immediately
followed this section, was deleted at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. I).
§ 63-1 PALMYRA CODE § 63-5
63:22
§ 67-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as "A Local Law for the Control of Dogs and
Other Animals."
§ 67-2. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter shall be to promote the health, safety, morals
or general welfare of the Village of Palmyra, including the protection and
preservation of the property of the Village and its inhabitants, and of the
peace and good order by adopting and enforcing certain regulations and
restrictions on the activities of dogs and other animals that are consistent
with rights and privileges of the owners of dogs and other animals and
the rights and privileges of the residents of the Village of Palmyra and by
imposing restrictions upon the keeping and running at large of dogs and
other animals within the Village of Palmyra.
§ 67-3. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the terms used herein are defined as
follows:
AT LARGE — Off the premises of the owner and not under the control of
the owner or other responsible person by means of a leash, cord, chain or
similar device not over six feet in length.
DOG — Includes both male and female.
FARM ANIMALS — Horses, ponies, livestock, cattle, goats, sheep, pigs,
mules, donkeys, fowl, and any other animals customarily kept on a farm, but
not including common household pets.
HABITUAL — A dog howling, barking, whining, or crying for repeated
intervals of at least 10 minutes with less than two minutes of interruption,
which can be heard by any person, including a law enforcement officer or
Animal Control Officer, from a location outside of the owner's or caretaker's
premises.
OWNER — Any person or group of persons living in the same household as
one family unit, or any firm, association or corporation, owning, harboring,
boarding or otherwise keeping or having in his or its custody a dog or dogs,
horses or other domesticated animal or animals, within the corporate limits
of the Village of Palmyra.
§ 67-4. Enclosures for animals other than domesticated pets;
penalty.
A. All stables, barns and other places wherein horses, cattle or all other
animals other than domesticated pets are kept shall be kept clean and
sanitary. All accumulations of manure shall be stored in such places and
removed with such frequency and in such a manner as to prevent
§ 63-5 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES § 67-4
63:23
§ 67-5. Permit required for kennel; fee; nonapplicability.
offensive or noxious odors. No piles of manure shall be allowed to
accumulate in any position or manner whereby they shall become
breeding places for flies or whereby any draining therefrom may pass
to any stream or watercourse.
B. Minimum acreage for farm animals. No farm animals shall be permitted
on any tract of land within the Village of Palmyra unless such tract of
land consists of a minimum of five acres for the first animal. Additional
farm animals may be kept, provided that the tract of land consists of
one additional acre of land for each additional farm animal.
C. Exceptions.
(1) This chapter shall not apply to properties that are in excess of 1.5
acres, which properties lie along the corporation line between the
Village of Palmyra and the Town of Palmyra, and which properties
were housing farm animals on the effective date of this chapter.
(2) This chapter shall not apply to farm animals temporarily harbored
or maintained at the Palmyra Fairgrounds during the Wayne County
Fair or other scheduled events involving farm animals at the
Fairgrounds.
D. Penalties. Any person violating any provision of this section shall be
punishable, upon conviction, by a fine not exceeding $250 or a term of
imprisonment not exceeding 15 days, or both, for each violation. Each
day any violation shall continue shall constitute a separate violation.
A. No person shall hereafter operate a kennel of three or more dogs over
six months old within the limits of the Village without a permit from the
Board of Trustees. Such permit may be granted for a period of one year
unless it shall appear from the complaints of neighbors, or otherwise,
that the keeping of the animals in question is objectionable or offensive
by reason of noise, smell or other cause. Such permit shall be revocable
at any time by the Board of Trustees. Any use heretofore existing shall
not extend beyond one year from the enactment of this chapter unless a
permit is granted pursuant to this section. Upon the issuing of any
permit in accord with the foregoing, the applicant shall pay to the Clerk
of the Village of Palmyra a sum as set from time to time by resolution by
the Board of Trustees.
B. Subsection A shall have no application to such public pound as may be
established by the Village of Palmyra nor to any animal hospital for the
treatment, care, observation or temporary boarding of dogs or cats if
such hospital shall be operated by a person licensed to practice
veterinary medicine under the provision of the New York State
Education Law.
§ 67-4 PALMYRA CODE § 67-6
63:24
§ 67-6. Running at large.
It shall be unlawful for the owner of any dog to permit or allow such dog to
run at large in the Village of Palmyra.
§ 67-7. Property damage.
No person who owns a dog shall permit or suffer such dog to damage or
destroy property of any kind.
§ 67-8. Maintenance of premises.
No person who owns a dog shall permit the premises, structures or
enclosures in which such dog is kept to be unclean or unsanitary.
§ 67-9. Nuisances.
No person being the owner or the agent of the owner of any dog shall permit
such dog to commit any nuisance within the Village of Palmyra or cause
damage to the person or property of others. The following are declared
to be public nuisances and are set forth herein for explanatory purposes
only and are not to be considered as excluding other types of nuisances;
and the establishment of the fact that the owner of a dog has allowed or
permitted such dog to commit any of the acts hereinafter prohibited shall
be presumptive evidence against the owner or harborer of such dog that he
or she has failed to properly confine or control said dog:
A. Engaging in habitual or continuous loud howling and/or habitual
barking, crying or whining, or so conducting itself in such a manner so
as to unreasonably and habitually disturb the comfort or repose of any
person other than the owner of such dog.
B. Chasing and/or barking at motor vehicles while on a public street or
highway or upon public or private property other than property of the
owner or harborer of said dog.
C. Jumping upon, chasing or otherwise harassing any person in such a
manner as to reasonably cause intimidation or fear or to put such
person in reasonable apprehension of bodily harm or injury.
D. Being found upon the school grounds of any school within the Village of
Palmyra during the time of year when said schools are open, and
between one hour prior to commencement of the school day and one
hour after the end of the school day, or upon a playground within said
Village of Palmyra at any hour during the time of year when playground
activities are conducted.
E. Running together in a pack or in any way forming a pack of dogs. For
the purpose of this chapter, the word "pack" is hereby defined to mean
three or more dogs.
§ 67-6 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES § 67-9
63:25
§ 67-10. Seizure of dogs at large.
Any police officer, peace officer or the Animal Control Officer of the Village
may seize any dog which is not licensed in accordance with Article 7 of the
Agriculture and Markets Law of the State of New York and any dog running
at large in violation of § 67-6 of this chapter.
§ 67-11. Care and redemption of impounded dogs.
§ 67-12. Enforcement.
F. Defecating, urinating, digging or otherwise damaging public property
or private property other than the property of said owner.
A. Every dog seized shall be properly fed and cared for at the expense of
the Village of Palmyra until disposition thereof, as herein provided, and
in accordance with the applicable provisions of the Agriculture and
Markets Law of the State of New York.
B. If the seized dog carries an identification number as provided in Article
7 of the Agriculture and Markets Law of the State of New York, the
owner of record shall be notified by written notice served upon the
owner or an adult member of his or her family that the dog has been
seized and that ownership will be forfeited unless the dog is redeemed
as herein provided. Such dog shall be held for a period of seven days,
excluding the day of notice, during which period of time the dog may be
redeemed by the owner upon producing proof of licensing and upon
payment of the fees prescribed in Subsection E below.
C. Each seized dog which does not carry an identification number shall be
held for a period of five days, excluding the date of seizure, during
which period the dog may be redeemed by the owner upon producing
proof of licensing and identification and upon payment of the fees
prescribed in Subsection E below.
D. If not redeemed, the owner shall forfeit all title to the dog, and the dog
shall be forfeited to the Humane Society of Wayne County by the Animal
Control Officer with all related expenses of such forfeiture being the
responsibility of the dog's owner.
E. Impoundment and boarding fees, which shall be paid to the Village
Clerk or Animal Control Officer, shall be determined by resolution of the
Palmyra Village Board from time to time. Any such resolution so
adopted shall become effective upon the publication of said impounding
and boarding fee schedule in the official newspaper unless otherwise
determined by the Board of Trustees.
A. If shall be the duty of the Animal Control Officer, or other person
authorized by Article 7 of the Agriculture and Markets Law of the State
of New York, to enforce this chapter and the appropriate provisions of
Article 7 of the Agriculture and Markets Law and to bring an action
§ 67-9 PALMYRA CODE § 67-12
63:26
§ 67-13. Offenses.
It shall be a violation, punishable as provided in § 67-14 of this chapter, for
any person to violate any provision of this chapter or of § 119, Subdivision
1, of the Agriculture and Markets Law of the State of New York. Any person
who has been charged with such a violation may proceed as set forth in
Subdivision 3 of § 119 of the Agriculture and Markets Law of the State of
New York.
§ 67-14. Penalties for offenses.
Except as provided in § 67-4D, a violation of this chapter or of § 119,
Subdivision 1, of the Agriculture and Markets Law of the State of New York
shall be punishable by a fine and imprisonment, except that if the person
was found to have committed such a violation within the preceding five
years, the fine may not be more than $50, and if the person was found to
have committed two or more such violations with the preceding five years,
the fine may be not more than $100.
Chapter 72
BINGO
GENERAL REFERENCES
Games of chance — See Ch. 113.
§ 72-1. Conduct authorized.
It shall be lawful for any authorized organization, as defined in § 476 of the
General Municipal Law, upon obtaining the required license, to conduct the
game of bingo within the territorial limits of the Village of Palmyra, subject
to the provisions of this chapter, Article 14-H of the General Municipal Law
and Article 19-B of the Executive Law.
§ 72-2. Sunday games.
Any game of bingo conducted within the Village pursuant to a license issued
in accordance with this chapter and the applicable statutes may be operated
against any person who violates, within the Village of Palmyra, any
provision of this chapter or of § 119, Subdivision 1, of the Agriculture
and Markets Law of the State of New York.
B. The Animal Control Officer, upon seizure of such dog, bitch, or pup,
shall immediately notify the owner of harborer of such dog, bitch or
pup, if the owner or harborer be known or can within reasonable
diligence be ascertained, that such animal has been and is impounded.
§ 67-12 BINGO § 72-2
72:27
by authorized organizations on the first day of the week, commonly known
as “Sunday.”
§ 72-3. Delegation of authority.
The Board of Trustees of the Village of Palmyra hereby delegates its
authority under this chapter in relation to the issuance and receipt of
applications, the issuance of licenses and the collection and transmission of
fees, to the Village Clerk of the Village of Palmyra, New York, and delegates
the authority granted to it in relation to the conduct of investigations and
the supervision of the operation of games of chance, to the Village Clerk of
the Village of Palmyra, New York.
§ 72-4. When effective.
The provisions of Article 14-H of the General Municipal Law and this
chapter shall remain inoperative in the Village of Palmyra unless and until
a proposition therefor is submitted at a special election to be held in the
Village of Palmyra on July 18, 1972, and shall be approved by a vote of the
majority of the qualified electors in the Village of Palmyra voting thereon.15
In the event that this proposition shall be approved, this chapter shall take
effect immediately.
Chapter 76
BUILDING CONSTRUCTION AND FIRE PREVENTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Unsafe buildings — See Ch. 80.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 108.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 167.
Zoning — See Ch. 200.
§ 76-1. Purpose and intent.
This chapter provides for the administration and enforcement of the New
York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code (the Uniform Code)
and the State Energy Conservation Construction Code (the Energy Code) in
this Village. This chapter is adopted pursuant to § 10 of the Municipal Home
Rule Law. Except as otherwise provided in the Uniform Code, other state
law, or other section of this chapter, all buildings, structures, and premises,
regardless of use or occupancy, are subject to the provisions this chapter.
§ 76-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
15.Editor’s Note: So approved by a majority of the qualified electors at the special election
held 7-18-1972.
§ 72-2 PALMYRA CODE § 76-2
72:28
BUILDING PERMIT — A permit issued pursuant to § 76-4 of this chapter.
The term "building permit" shall also include a building permit which is
renewed, amended or extended pursuant to any provision of this chapter.
CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY/CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE — A
certificate issued pursuant to § 76-7B of this chapter.
CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — The Code Enforcement Officer
appointed pursuant to § 76-3B of this chapter.
CODE ENFORCEMENT PERSONNEL — Shall include the Code
Enforcement Officer and all inspectors.
COMPLIANCE ORDER — An order issued by the Code Enforcement Officer
pursuant to § 76-15A of this chapter.
ENERGY CODE — The State Energy Conservation Construction Code, as
currently in effect and as hereafter amended from time to time.
INSPECTOR — An inspector appointed pursuant to § 76-3D of this chapter.
OPERATING PERMIT — A permit issued pursuant to § 76-10 of this chapter.
The term "operating permit" shall also include an operating permit which is
renewed, amended or extended pursuant to any provision of this chapter.
PERMIT HOLDER — The person to whom a building permit has been issued.
PERSON — An individual, corporation, limited liability company,
partnership, limited partnership, business trust, estate, trust, association,
or any other legal or commercial entity of any kind or description.
STOP-WORK ORDER — An order issued pursuant to § 76-6 of this chapter.
TEMPORARY CERTIFICATE — A certificate issued pursuant to § 76-7D of
this chapter.
UNIFORM CODE — The New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and
Building Code, as currently in effect and as hereafter amended from time to
time.
VILLAGE — The Village of Palmyra.
§ 76-3. Code Enforcement Officer and inspectors.
A. The office of Code Enforcement Officer is hereby created. The Code
Enforcement Officer shall administer and enforce all the provisions of
the Uniform Code, the Energy Code and this chapter. The Code
Enforcement Officer shall have the following powers and duties:
(1) To receive, review, and approve or disapprove applications for
building permits, certificates of occupancy/certificates of
compliance, temporary certificates and operating permits, and the
plans, specifications and construction documents submitted with
such applications;
(2) Upon approval of such applications, to issue building permits,
certificates of occupancy/certificates of compliance, temporary
§ 76-2 BINGO § 76-3
72:29
certificates and operating permits, and to include in building
permits, certificates of occupancy/certificates of compliance,
temporary certificates and operating permits such terms and
conditions as the Code Enforcement Officer may determine to be
appropriate;
(3) To conduct construction inspections, inspections to be made prior
to the issuance of certificates of occupancy/certificates of
compliance, temporary certificates and operating permits,
firesafety and property maintenance inspections, inspections
incidental to the investigation of complaints, and all other
inspections required or permitted under any provision of this
chapter;
(4) To issue stop-work orders;
(5) To review and investigate complaints;
(6) To issue orders pursuant to Subsection A of § 76-15 (Violations;
penalties for offenses) of this chapter;
(7) To maintain records;
(8) To collect fees as set by the Village Board of this Village;
(9) To pursue administrative enforcement actions and proceedings;
(10) In consultation with the Village Attorney of this Village, to pursue
such legal actions and proceedings as may be necessary to enforce
the Uniform Code, the Energy Code and this chapter, or to abate or
correct conditions not in compliance with the Uniform Code, the
Energy Code or this chapter; and
(11) To exercise all other powers and fulfill all other duties conferred
upon the Code Enforcement Officer by this chapter.
B. The Code Enforcement Officer shall be appointed by the Village Board
of this Village. The Code Enforcement Officer shall possess background
experience related to building construction or fire prevention and shall,
within the time prescribed by law, obtain such basic training, in-service
training, advanced in-service training and other training as the State of
New York shall require for code enforcement personnel, and the Code
Enforcement Officer shall obtain certification from the State Fire
Administrator pursuant to the Executive Law and the regulations
promulgated thereunder.
C. In the event that the Code Enforcement Officer is unable to serve as
such for any reason, an individual shall be appointed by the Village
Board of this Village to serve as Acting Code Enforcement Officer. The
Acting Code Enforcement Officer shall, during the term of his or her
appointment, exercise all powers and fulfill all duties conferred upon
the Code Enforcement Officer by this chapter.
§ 76-3 PALMYRA CODE § 76-3
72:30
§ 76-4. Building permits.
D. One or more inspectors may be appointed by the Village Board of this
Village to act under the supervision and direction of the Code
Enforcement Officer and to assist the Code Enforcement Officer in the
exercise of the powers and fulfillment of the duties conferred upon the
Code Enforcement Officer by this chapter. Each inspector shall, within
the time prescribed by law, obtain such basic training, in-service
training, advanced in-service training and other training as the State of
New York shall require for code enforcement personnel, and each
inspector shall obtain certification from the State Fire Administrator
pursuant to the Executive Law and the regulations promulgated
thereunder.
E. The compensation for the Code Enforcement Officer and inspectors
shall be fixed from time to time by the Village Board of this Village.
A. Building permits required. Except as otherwise provided in Subsection
B of this section, a building permit shall be required for any work which
must conform to the Uniform Code and/or the Energy Code, including,
but not limited to, the construction, enlargement, alteration,
improvement, removal, relocation or demolition of any building or
structure or any portion thereof, and the installation of a solid-fuelburning
heating appliance, chimney or flue in any dwelling unit. No
person shall commence any work for which a building permit is
required without first having obtained a building permit from the Code
Enforcement Officer.
B. Exemptions. No building permit shall be required for work in any of the
following categories:
(1) Construction or installation of one-story detached structures
associated with one- or two-family dwellings or multiple singlefamily
dwellings (village houses) which are used for tool and
storage sheds, playhouses or similar uses, provided the gross floor
area does not exceed 144 square feet (13.88 square meters);
(2) Installation of swings and other playground equipment associated
with a one- or two-family dwelling or multiple single-family
dwellings (townhouses);
(3) Installation of swimming pools associated with a one- or two-family
dwelling or multiple single-family dwellings (townhouses) where
such pools are designed for a water depth of less than 24 inches
and are installed entirely above the ground;
(4) Installation of fences which are used on active farms for the
controlling of farm animals;
(5) Construction of retaining walls unless such walls support a
surcharge or impound Class I, II or IIIA liquids;
§ 76-3 BINGO § 76-4
72:31
(6) Construction of temporary motion picture, television and theater
stage sets and scenery;
(7) Installation of window awnings supported by an exterior wall of a
one- or two-family dwelling or multiple single-family dwellings
(townhouses);
(8) Installation of partitions or movable cases less than five feet nine
inches in height;
(9) Painting, wallpapering, tiling, carpeting, or other similar finish
work;
(10) Installation of listed portable electrical, plumbing, heating,
ventilation or cooling equipment or appliances;
(11) Replacement of any equipment, provided the replacement does not
alter the equipment's listing or render it inconsistent with the
equipment's original specifications; or
(12) Repairs, provided that such repairs do not involve i) the removal or
cutting away of a load-bearing wall, partition, or portion thereof, or
of any structural beam or load-bearing component; ii) the removal
or change of any required means of egress, or the rearrangement
of parts of a structure in a manner which affects egress; iii) the
enlargement, alteration, replacement or relocation of any building
system; or iv) the removal from service of all or part of a fire
protection system for any period of time.
C. Exemption not deemed authorization to perform noncompliant work.
The exemption from the requirement to obtain a building permit for
work in any category set forth in Subsection B of this section shall not
be deemed an authorization for work to be performed in violation of the
Uniform Code or the Energy Code.
D. Applications for building permits. Applications for a building permit
shall be made in writing on a form provided by or otherwise acceptable
to the Code Enforcement Officer. The application shall be signed by the
owner of the property where the work is to be performed or an
authorized agent of the owner. The application shall include such
information as the Code Enforcement Officer deems sufficient to permit
a determination by the Code Enforcement Officer that the intended
work complies with all applicable requirements of the Uniform Code
and the Energy Code. The application shall include or be accompanied
by the following information and documentation:
(1) A description of the proposed work;
(2) The Tax Map number and the street address of the premises where
the work is to be performed;
(3) The occupancy classification of any affected building or structure;
§ 76-4 PALMYRA CODE § 76-4
72:32
(4) Where applicable, a statement of special inspections prepared in
accordance with the provisions of the Uniform Code; and
(5) At least two sets of construction documents (drawings and/or
specifications) which i) define the scope of the proposed work; ii)
are prepared by a New York State registered architect or licensed
professional engineer where so required by the Education Law; iii)
indicate with sufficient clarity and detail the nature and extent of
the work proposed; iv) substantiate that the proposed work will
comply with the Uniform Code and the Energy Code; and v) where
applicable, include a site plan that shows any existing and
proposed buildings and structures on the site, the location of any
existing or proposed well or septic system, the location of the
intended work, and the distances between the buildings and
structures and the lot lines.
E. Construction documents. Construction documents will not be accepted
as part of an application for a building permit unless they satisfy the
requirements set forth in Subsection D(5) of this section. Construction
documents which are accepted as part of the application for a building
permit shall be marked as accepted by the Code Enforcement Officer in
writing or by stamp. One set of the accepted construction documents
shall be retained by the Code Enforcement Officer, and one set of the
accepted construction documents shall be returned to the applicant to
be kept at the work site so as to be available for use by the Code
Enforcement Personnel. However, the return of a set of accepted
construction documents to the applicant shall not be construed as
authorization to commence work, nor as an indication that a building
permit will be issued. Work shall not be commenced until and unless a
building permit is issued.
F. Issuance of building permits. An application for a building permit shall
be examined to ascertain whether the proposed work is in compliance
with the applicable requirements of the Uniform Code and Energy
Code. The Code Enforcement Officer shall issue a building permit if the
proposed work is in compliance with the applicable requirements of the
Uniform Code and Energy Code.
G. Building permits to be displayed. Building permits shall be visibly
displayed at the work site and shall remain visible until the authorized
work has been completed.
H. Work to be in accordance with construction documents. All work shall
be performed in accordance with the construction documents which
were submitted with and accepted as part of the application for the
building permit. The building permit shall contain such a directive. The
permit holder shall immediately notify the Code Enforcement Officer of
any change occurring during the course of the work. The building
permit shall contain such a directive. If the Code Enforcement Officer
determines that such change warrants a new or amended building
§ 76-4 BINGO § 76-4
72:33
§ 76-5. Construction inspections.
permit, such change shall not be made until and unless a new or
amended building permit reflecting such change is issued.
I. Time limits. Building permits shall become invalid unless the authorized
work is commenced within six months following the date of issuance.
Building permits shall expire 12 months after the date of issuance. A
building permit which has become invalid or which has expired
pursuant to this subsection may be renewed one time and shall be valid
for six months, upon application by the permit holder, payment of the
applicable fee, and approval of the application by the Code
Enforcement Officer.
J. Revocation or suspension of building permits. If the Code Enforcement
Officer determines that a building permit was issued in error because of
incorrect, inaccurate or incomplete information, or that the work for
which a building permit was issued violates the Uniform Code or the
Energy Code, the Code Enforcement Officer shall revoke the building
permit or suspend the building permit until such time as the permit
holder demonstrates that 1) all work then completed is in compliance
with all applicable provisions of the Uniform Code and the Energy Code
and 2) all work then proposed to be performed shall be in compliance
with all applicable provisions of the Uniform Code and the Energy
Code.
K. Fee. The fee specified in or determined in accordance with the
provisions set forth in § 76-16 (Fees) of this chapter must be paid at the
time of submission of an application for a building permit, for an
amended building permit, or for renewal of a building permit.
A. Work to remain accessible and exposed. Work shall remain accessible
and exposed until inspected and accepted by the Code Enforcement
Officer or by an inspector authorized by the Code Enforcement Officer.
The permit holder shall notify the Code Enforcement Officer when any
element of work described in Subsection B of this section is ready for
inspection.
B. Elements of work to be inspected. The following elements of the
construction process shall be inspected, where applicable:
(1) Work site prior to the issuance of a building permit;
(2) Footing and foundation;
(3) Preparation for concrete slab;
(4) Framing;
(5) Building systems, including underground and rough-in;
(6) Fire-resistant construction;
§ 76-4 PALMYRA CODE § 76-5
72:34
§ 76-6. Stop-work orders.
(7) Fire-resistant penetrations;
(8) Solid-fuel-burning heating appliances, chimneys, flues or gas vents;
(9) Energy Code compliance; and
(10) A final inspection after all work authorized by the building permit
has been completed.
C. Inspection results. After inspection, the work or a portion thereof shall
be noted as satisfactory as completed, or the permit holder shall be
notified as to where the work fails to comply with the Uniform Code or
Energy Code. Work not in compliance with any applicable provision of
the Uniform Code or Energy Code shall remain exposed until such work
shall have been brought into compliance with all applicable provisions
of the Uniform Code and the Energy Code, reinspected, and found
satisfactory as completed.
D. Fee. The fee specified in or determined in accordance with the
provisions set forth in § 76-16 (Fees) of this chapter must be paid prior
to or at the time of each inspection performed pursuant to this section.
A. Authority to issue. The Code Enforcement Officer is authorized to issue
stop-work orders pursuant to this section. The Code Enforcement
Officer shall issue a stop-work order to halt:
(1) Any work that is determined by the Code Enforcement Officer to be
contrary to any applicable provision of the Uniform Code or Energy
Code, without regard to whether such work is or is not work for
which a building permit is required, and without regard to whether
a building permit has or has not been issued for such work; or
(2) Any work that is being conducted in a dangerous or unsafe manner
in the opinion of the Code Enforcement Officer, without regard to
whether such work is or is not work for which a building permit is
required, and without regard to whether a building permit has or
has not been issued for such work; or
(3) Any work for which a building permit is required which is being
performed without the required building permit, or under a
building permit that has become invalid, has expired, or has been
suspended or revoked.
B. Content of stop-work orders. Stop-work orders shall 1) be in writing, 2)
be dated and signed by the Code Enforcement Officer, 3) state the
reason or reasons for issuance, and 4) if applicable, state the conditions
which must be satisfied before work will be permitted to resume.
C. Service of stop-work orders. The Code Enforcement Officer shall cause
the stop-work order, or a copy thereof, to be served on the owner of the
affected property (and, if the owner is not the permit holder, on the
§ 76-5 BINGO § 76-6
72:35
§ 76-7. Certificates of occupancy/certificates of compliance.
permit holder) personally or by registered or certified mail. The Code
Enforcement Officer shall be permitted, but not required, to cause
the stop-work order, or a copy thereof, to be served on any builder,
architect, tenant, contractor, subcontractor, construction
superintendent, or their agents, or any other person taking part or
assisting in work affected by the stop-work order, personally or by
registered or certified mail; provided, however, that failure to serve any
person mentioned in this sentence shall not affect the efficacy of the
stop-work order.
D. Effect of stop-work order. Upon the issuance of a stop-work order, the
owner of the affected property, the permit holder and any other person
performing, taking part in or assisting in the work shall immediately
cease all work which is the subject of the stop-work order.
E. Remedy not exclusive. The issuance of a stop-work order shall not be
the exclusive remedy available to address any event described in
Subsection A of this section, and the authority to issue a stop-work
order shall be in addition to, and not in substitution for or limitation of,
the right and authority to pursue any other remedy or impose any other
penalty under § 76-15 (Violations; penalties for offenses) of this chapter
or under any other applicable local law or state law. Any such other
remedy or penalty may be pursued at any time, whether prior to, at the
time of, or after the issuance of a stop-work order.
A. Certificates of occupancy/certificates of compliance required. A
certificate of occupancy/certificate of compliance shall be required for
any work which is the subject of a building permit and for all structures,
buildings, or portions thereof, which are converted from one use or
occupancy classification or subclassification to another. Permission to
use or occupy a building or structure, or portion thereof, for which a
building permit was previously issued shall be granted only by issuance
of a certificate of occupancy/certificate of compliance.
B. Issuance of certificates of occupancy/certificates of compliance. The
Code Enforcement Officer shall issue a certificate of occupancy/
certificate of compliance if the work which was the subject of the
building permit was completed in accordance with all applicable
provisions of the Uniform Code and Energy Code and, if applicable, that
the structure, building or portion thereof that was converted from one
use or occupancy classification or subclassification to another complies
with all applicable provisions of the Uniform Code and Energy Code.
The Code Enforcement Officer or an inspector authorized by the Code
Enforcement Officer shall inspect the building, structure or work prior
to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy/certificate of compliance.
In addition, where applicable, the following documents, prepared in
accordance with the provisions of the Uniform Code by such person or
persons as may be designated by or otherwise acceptable to the Code
Enforcement Officer, at the expense of the applicant for the certificate
§ 76-6 PALMYRA CODE § 76-7
72:36
of occupancy/certificate of compliance, shall be provided to the Code
Enforcement Officer prior to the issuance of the certificate of
occupancy/certificate of compliance:
(1) A written statement of structural observations and/or a final report
of special inspections, and
(2) Flood hazard certifications.
C. Contents of certificates of occupancy/certificates of compliance. A
certificate of occupancy/certificate of compliance shall contain the
following information:
(1) The building permit number, if any;
(2) The date of issuance of the building permit, if any;
(3) The name, address and Tax Map number of the property;
(4) If the certificate of occupancy/certificate of compliance is not
applicable to an entire structure, a description of that portion of the
structure for which the certificate of occupancy/certificate of
compliance is issued;
(5) The use and occupancy classification of the structure;
(6) The type of construction of the structure;
(7) The assembly occupant load of the structure, if any;
(8) If an automatic sprinkler system is provided, a notation as to
whether the sprinkler system is required;
(9) Any special conditions imposed in connection with the issuance of
the building permit; and
(10) The signature of the Code Enforcement Officer issuing the
certificate of occupancy/certificate of compliance and the date of
issuance.
D. Temporary certificate. The Code Enforcement Officer shall be
permitted to issue a temporary certificate allowing the temporary
occupancy of a building or structure, or a portion thereof, prior to
completion of the work which is the subject of a building permit.
However, in no event shall the Code Enforcement Officer issue a
temporary certificate unless the Code Enforcement Officer determines
1) that the building or structure, or the portion thereof covered by the
temporary certificate, may be occupied safely, 2) that any fire- and
smoke-detecting or fire protection equipment which has been installed
is operational, and 3) that all required means of egress from the
building or structure have been provided. The Code Enforcement
Officer may include in a temporary certificate such terms and
conditions as he or she deems necessary or appropriate to ensure safety
or to further the purposes and intent of the Uniform Code. A temporary
§ 76-7 BINGO § 76-7
72:37
§ 76-8. Notification regarding fire or explosion.
The Chief of any fire department providing firefighting services for a
property within this Village shall promptly notify the Code Enforcement
Officer of any fire or explosion involving any structural damage, fuelburning
appliance, chimney or gas vent.
§ 76-9. Unsafe buildings and structures.
Unsafe structures and equipment in this Village shall be identified and
addressed in accordance with the procedures established by Local Law
Number 1 of 1970 as now in effect or as hereafter amended from time to
time.16
§ 76-10. Operating permits.
certificate shall be effective for a period of time, not to exceed six
months, which shall be determined by the Code Enforcement Officer
and specified in the temporary certificate. During the specified period
of effectiveness of the temporary certificate, the permit holder shall
undertake to bring the building or structure into full compliance with
all applicable provisions of the Uniform Code and the Energy Code.
E. Revocation or suspension of certificates. If the Code Enforcement
Officer determines that a certificate of occupancy/certificate of
compliance or a temporary certificate was issued in error because of
incorrect, inaccurate or incomplete information, and if the relevant
deficiencies are not corrected to the satisfaction of the Code
Enforcement Officer within such period of time as shall be specified by
the Code Enforcement Officer, the Code Enforcement Officer shall
revoke or suspend such certificate.
F. Fee. The fee specified in or determined in accordance with the
provisions set forth in § 76-16 (Fees) of this chapter must be paid at the
time of submission of an application for a certificate of occupancy/
certificate of compliance or for a temporary certificate.
A. Operating permits required. Operating permits shall be required for
conducting the activities or using the categories of buildings listed
below:
(1) Manufacturing, storing or handling hazardous materials in
quantities exceeding those listed in Tables 2703.1.1(1),
2703.1.1(2), 2703.1.1(3) or 2703.1.1(4) in the publication entitled
"Fire Code of New York State" and incorporated by reference in 19
NYCRR § 1225.1;
16.Editor's Note: See Ch. 80, Buildings, Unsafe.
§ 76-7 PALMYRA CODE § 76-10
72:38
(2) Hazardous processes and activities, including, but not limited to,
commercial and industrial operations which produce combustible
dust as a by-product, fruit and crop ripening, and waste handling;
(3) Use of pyrotechnic devices in assembly occupancies;
(4) Buildings containing one or more areas of public assembly with an
occupant load of 100 persons or more; and
(5) Buildings whose use or occupancy classification may pose a
substantial potential hazard to public safety, as determined by
resolution adopted by the Village Board of this Village. Any person
who proposes to undertake any activity or to operate any type of
building listed in this Subsection A shall be required to obtain an
operating permit prior to commencing such activity or operation.
B. Applications for operating permits. An application for an operating
permit shall be in writing on a form provided by or otherwise
acceptable to the Code Enforcement Officer. Such application shall
include such information as the Code Enforcement Officer deems
sufficient to permit a determination by the Code Enforcement Officer
that quantities, materials, and activities conform to the requirements of
the Uniform Code. If the Code Enforcement Officer determines that
tests or reports are necessary to verify conformance, such tests or
reports shall be performed or provided by such person or persons as
may be designated by or otherwise acceptable to the Code Enforcement
Officer, at the expense of the applicant.
C. Inspections. The Code Enforcement Officer or an inspector authorized
by the Code Enforcement Officer shall inspect the subject premises
prior to the issuance of an operating permit.
D. Multiple activities. In any circumstance in which more than one activity
listed in Subsection A of this section is to be conducted at a location, the
Code Enforcement Officer may require a separate operating permit for
each such activity, or the Code Enforcement Officer may, in his or her
discretion, issue a single operating permit to apply to all such activities.
E. Duration of operating permits. Operating permits shall be issued for
such period of time, not to exceed one year in the case of any operating
permit issued for an area of public assembly and not to exceed three
years in any other case, as shall be determined by the Code
Enforcement Officer to be consistent with local conditions. The effective
period of each operating permit shall be specified in the operating
permit. An operating permit may be reissued or renewed upon
application to the Code Enforcement Officer, payment of the applicable
fee, and approval of such application by the Code Enforcement Officer.
F. Revocation or suspension of operating permits. If the Code
Enforcement Officer determines that any activity or building for which
an operating permit was issued does not comply with any applicable
§ 76-10 BINGO § 76-10
72:39
§ 76-11. Firesafety and property maintenance inspections.
[Amended 3-20-2017 by L.L. No. 2-2017]
provision of the Uniform Code, such operating permit shall be revoked
or suspended.
G. Fee. The fee specified in or determined in accordance with the
provisions set forth in § 76-16 (Fees) of this chapter must be paid at the
time submission of an application for an operating permit, for an
amended operating permit, or for reissuance or renewal of an operating
permit.
A. Inspections required.
(1) Firesafety and property maintenance inspections of buildings and
structures shall be performed by the Code Enforcement Officer or
an inspector designated by the Code Enforcement Officer at the
following intervals:
(a) Firesafety and property maintenance inspections of buildings
or structures which contain an area of public assembly shall be
performed at least once every 12 months.
(b) Firesafety and property maintenance inspections of buildings
or structures being occupied as dormitories shall be performed
at least once every 12 months.
(c) Firesafety and property maintenance inspections of the
common areas such as halls, foyers, and staircases of all
multiple dwellings consisting of three or more such units not
included in Subsection A(1)(a) or (b) shall be performed once
every three years. [Amended 10-16-2017 by L.L. No.
5-2017]
B. Inspections permitted. In addition to the inspections required by
Subsection A of this section, a firesafety and property maintenance
inspection of any building, structure, use, or occupancy, or of any
dwelling unit, may also be performed by the Code Enforcement Officer
or an inspector designated by the Code Enforcement Officer at any time
upon:
(1) The request of the owner of the property to be inspected or an
authorized agent of such owner;
(2) Receipt by the Code Enforcement Officer of a written statement
alleging that conditions or activities failing to comply with the
Uniform Code or Energy Code exist; or
(3) Receipt by the Code Enforcement Officer of any other information,
reasonably believed by the Code Enforcement Officer to be reliable,
giving rise to reasonable cause to believe that conditions or
activities failing to comply with the Uniform Code or Energy Code
§ 76-10 PALMYRA CODE § 76-11
72:40
§ 76-12. Complaints.
The Code Enforcement Officer shall review and investigate complaints
which allege or assert the existence of conditions or activities that fail
to comply with the Uniform Code, the Energy Code, this chapter, or any
other local law or regulation adopted for administration and enforcement
of the Uniform Code or the Energy Code. The process for responding to a
complaint shall include such of the following steps as the Code Enforcement
Officer may deem to be appropriate:
§ 76-13. Recordkeeping.
exist; provided, however, that nothing in this subsection shall be
construed as permitting an inspection under any circumstances
under which a court order or warrant permitting such inspection
is required, unless such court order or warrant shall have been
obtained.
A. Performing an inspection of the conditions and/or activities alleged to
be in violation and documenting the results of such inspection;
B. If a violation is found to exist, providing the owner of the affected
property and any other person who may be responsible for the violation
with notice of the violation and opportunity to abate, correct or cure the
violation, or otherwise proceeding in the manner described in § 76-15
(Violations; penalties for offenses) of this chapter;
C. If appropriate, issuing a stop-work order;
D. If a violation which was found to exist is abated or corrected,
performing an inspection to ensure that the violation has been abated
or corrected, preparing a final written report reflecting such abatement
or correction, and filing such report with the complaint.
A. The Code Enforcement Officer shall keep permanent official records of
all transactions and activities conducted by all Code Enforcement
personnel, including records of:
(1) All applications received, reviewed and approved or denied;
(2) All plans, specifications and construction documents approved;
(3) All building permits, certificates of occupancy/certificates of
compliance, temporary certificates, stop-work orders, and
operating permits issued;
(4) All inspections and tests performed;
(5) All statements and reports issued;
(6) All complaints received;
(7) All investigations conducted;
§ 76-11 BINGO § 76-13
72:41
§ 76-14. Program review and reporting.
§ 76-15. Violations; penalties for offenses.
(8) All other features and activities specified in or contemplated by
§§ 76-4 through 76-12, inclusive, of this chapter; and
(9) All fees charged and collected.
B. All such records shall be public records open for public inspection
during normal business hours. All plans and records pertaining to
buildings or structures, or appurtenances thereto, shall be retained for
at least the minimum time period so required by state law and
regulation.
A. The Code Enforcement Officer shall annually submit to the Village
Board of this Village a written report and summary of all business
conducted by the Code Enforcement Officer and the inspectors,
including a report and summary of all transactions and activities
described in § 76-13 (Recordkeeping) of this chapter and a report and
summary of all appeals or litigation pending or concluded.
B. The Code Enforcement Officer shall annually submit to the Secretary of
State, on behalf of this Village, on a form prescribed by the Secretary of
State, a report of the activities of this Village relative to administration
and enforcement of the Uniform Code.
C. The Code Enforcement Officer shall, upon request of the New York
State Department of State, provide to the New York State Department
of State, from the records and related materials this Village is required
to maintain, excerpts, summaries, tabulations, statistics and other
information and accounts of the activities of this Village in connection
with administration and enforcement of the Uniform Code.
A. Compliance orders. The Code Enforcement Officer is authorized to
order in writing the remedying of any condition or activity found to exist
in, on or about any building, structure, or premises in violation of the
Uniform Code, the Energy Code, or this chapter. Upon finding that any
such condition or activity exists, the Code Enforcement Officer shall
issue a compliance order. The compliance order shall 1) be in writing; 2)
be dated and signed by the Code Enforcement Officer; 3) specify the
condition or activity that violates the Uniform Code, the Energy Code,
or this chapter; 4) specify the provision or provisions of the Uniform
Code, the Energy Code, or this chapter which is/are violated by the
specified condition or activity; 5) specify the period of time which the
Code Enforcement Officer deems to be reasonably necessary for
achieving compliance; 6) direct that compliance be achieved within the
specified period of time; and 7) state that an action or proceeding to
compel compliance may be instituted if compliance is not achieved
within the specified period of time. The Code Enforcement Officer shall
cause the compliance order, or a copy thereof, to be served on the
§ 76-13 PALMYRA CODE § 76-15
72:42
owner of the affected property personally or by registered or certified
mail. The Code Enforcement Officer shall be permitted, but not
required, to cause the compliance order, or a copy thereof, to be served
on any builder, architect, tenant, contractor, subcontractor,
construction superintendent, or their agents, or any other person
taking part or assisting in work being performed at the affected
property personally or by registered or certified mail; provided,
however, that failure to serve any person mentioned in this sentence
shall not affect the efficacy of the compliance order.
B. Appearance tickets. The Code Enforcement Officer and each inspector
are authorized to issue appearance tickets for any violation of the
Uniform Code.
C. Civil penalties. In addition to those penalties prescribed by state law,
any person who violates any provision of the Uniform Code, the Energy
Code or this chapter, or any term or condition of any building permit,
certificate of occupancy/certificate of compliance, temporary
certificate, stop-work order, operating permit or other notice or order
issued by the Code Enforcement Officer pursuant to any provision of
this chapter, shall be liable to a civil penalty of not more than $200 for
each day or part thereof during which such violation continues. The
civil penalties provided by this subsection shall be recoverable in an
action instituted in the name of this Village.
D. Injunctive relief. An action or proceeding may be instituted in the name
of this Village, in a court of competent jurisdiction, to prevent, restrain,
enjoin, correct, or abate any violation of, or to enforce, any provision of
the Uniform Code, the Energy Code, this chapter, or any term or
condition of any building permit, certificate of occupancy/certificate of
compliance, temporary certificate, stop-work order, operating permit,
compliance order, or other notice or order issued by the Code
Enforcement Officer pursuant to any provision of this chapter. In
particular, but not by way of limitation, where the construction or use of
a building or structure is in violation of any provision of the Uniform
Code, the Energy Code, this chapter, or any stop-work order,
compliance order or other order obtained under the Uniform Code, the
Energy Code or this chapter, an action or proceeding may be
commenced in the name of this Village, in the Supreme Court or in any
other court having the requisite jurisdiction, to obtain an order
directing the removal of the building or structure or an abatement of
the condition in violation of such provisions. No action or proceeding
described in this subsection shall be commenced without the
appropriate authorization from the Village Board of this Village.
E. Remedies not exclusive. No remedy or penalty specified in this section
shall be the exclusive remedy or remedy available to address any
violation described in this section, and each remedy or penalty specified
in this section shall be in addition to, and not in substitution for or
limitation of, the other remedies or penalties specified in this section, in
§ 76-6 (Stop-work orders) of this chapter, in any other section of this
§ 76-15 BINGO § 76-15
72:43
§ 76-16. Fees.
A fee schedule shall be established by resolution of the Village Board of this
Village. Such fee schedule may thereafter be amended from time to time by
like resolution. The fees set forth in, or determined in accordance with, such
fee schedule or amended fee schedule shall be charged and collected for
the submission of applications, the issuance of building permits, amended
building permits, renewed building permits, certificates of occupancy/
certificates of compliance, temporary certificates, operating permits,
firesafety and property maintenance inspections, and other actions of the
Code Enforcement Officer described in or contemplated by this chapter.
§ 76-17. Intermunicipal agreements.
The Village Board of this Village may, by resolution, authorize the Mayor
of this Village to enter into an agreement, in the name of this Village, with
other governments to carry out the terms of this chapter, provided that such
agreement does not violate any provision of the Uniform Code, the Energy
Code, Part 1203 of Title 19 of the NYCRR, or any other applicable law.
Chapter 80
BUILDINGS, UNSAFE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction and fire
prevention — See Ch. 76.
§ 80-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the removal or repair of
any building or buildings in business, industrial and residential sections of
the Village that, from any cause, may now be or shall hereafter become
dangerous or unsafe to the public.
chapter, or in any other applicable law. Any remedy or penalty specified
in this section may be pursued at any time, whether prior to,
simultaneously with, or after the pursuit of any other remedy or penalty
specified in this section, in § 76-6 (Stop-work orders) of this chapter,
in any other section of this chapter, or in any other applicable law.
In particular, but not by way of limitation, each remedy and penalty
specified in this section shall be in addition to, and not in substitution
for or limitation of, the penalties specified in Subdivision 2 of § 381 of
the Executive Law, and any remedy or penalty specified in this section
may be pursued at any time, whether prior to, simultaneously with, or
after the pursuit of any penalty specified in Subdivision 2 of § 381 of the
Executive Law.
§ 76-15 PALMYRA CODE § 80-2
80:44
§ 80-2. Inspection and report by Code Enforcement Officer.
Upon direction of the Board of Trustees, the Code Enforcement Officer shall
inspect any building designated by the Board as being possibly dangerous
or unsafe to the public and the Code Enforcement Officer shall file with the
Village Clerk a report of his inspection within 30 days after such inspection.
§ 80-3. Notice to owner.
§ 80-4. Duty of person served.
Within 30 days of the serving or mailing and posting of said notice, the
person so served therewith is to commence the securing or removal of such
building or structure and is to continue therewith with due diligence.
§ 80-5. Refusal to comply; subsequent procedures.
A. If such report indicates that such building or structure so inspected is
dangerous or unsafe to the public, the Village Clerk shall cause a notice
to be served on the owner of such building or structure or on some one
of the owner’s executors, legal representatives, agents, lessees or any
other person having a vested or contingent interest in the same, either
personally or by registered mail addressed to the last known address, if
any, of the owner or some one of the owner’s executors, legal
representatives, agents, lessees or other person having a vested or
contingent interest in the same, as shown by the records of the receiver
of taxes, which notice shall contain:
(1) A description of the premises.
(2) A statement of the particulars in which the building or structure is
unsafe or dangerous.
(3) An order requiring the same to be made safe and secure or
removed.
(4) A statement that, in the event of the neglect or refusal to comply
with such order, a survey will thereafter be made of the premises
pursuant to this chapter and that in the event that the building or
other structure shall be reported unsafe or dangerous to the public
under such survey, that an application will be made by the Village
at a special term of the Supreme Court in the judicial district in
which the property is located not less than five nor more than 10
days after the filing of such survey report with the Village Clerk for
an order determining the building or other structure to be a public
nuisance and directing that it shall be repaired and secured or
taken down and removed.
(5) A copy of this chapter.
B. If such service is made by registered mail, a copy of such notice is to be
posted on the premises on the day of mailing.
§ 80-2 BUILDINGS, UNSAFE § 80-5
80:45
§ 80-6. Assessment of costs and expenses.
All costs and expenses incurred by the Village in connection with the
proceedings to remove or secure, including the cost of actually removing
said building or structure, shall be assessed against and be a lien upon the
land on which said buildings or structures are located and shall be added to
the Village assessment and tax roll.
A. In the event of the neglect or refusal of the person so served with said
notice to comply with the same, the Board of Trustees is to cause a
survey of said premises to be made, the same to be made by the:
(1) Code Enforcement Officer.
(2) A practical builder, engineer or architect to be named by the Board
of Trustees for such purpose.
(3) A practical builder, engineer or architect to be appointed by the
person upon whom the notice was served as above, but in the event
of the refusal or neglect of the person so served with such notice to
appoint such third surveyor, the two surveyors named by the Board
of Trustees shall make the survey and file a report thereof with the
Village Clerk who will thereupon cause to be posted a signed copy
of said survey report on the building or structure that is the subject
of such survey report.
B. Notice to appoint surveyor. Before the Board of Trustees directs such
survey to be made, as herein provided, the Village Clerk shall cause to
be served upon the person who was previously served with the notice
under § 80-3 herein another notice, either personally or by registered
mail, which notice shall state that unless the person so served makes an
appointment of a practical builder, engineer, or architect to serve on
said survey board as herein provided within 20 days after the service of
such notice, the two surveyors to be named by the Board of Trustees
shall thereupon make the survey and report.
C. Survey report: application to Supreme Court. In the event that, under
such survey report, the building or other structure shall be reported
unsafe or dangerous to the public, the Village of Palmyra, acting by its
Board of Trustees, will make application not less than five nor more
than 10 days after the filing of such survey with the Village Clerk at a
special term of the Supreme Court within the judicial district in which
the premises are located for an order determining such building or
other structure to be a public nuisance and directing that it shall be
repaired or secured or taken down and removed.
D. Compensation of surveyors. The compensation of said surveyors shall
be set and paid by the Board of Trustees.
§ 80-5 PALMYRA CODE § 80-7
80:46
§ 80-7. Alternate or additional procedures.
Pursuant to the authority and powers granted in the Statute of Local
Governments, particularly Subdivision 5 thereof, the following alternate or
additional procedures may be followed:
§ 80-8. Penalties for offenses.
Any person who shall fail to obey the order of the Code Enforcement Officer
as hereinabove provided shall be guilty of a violation which shall constitute
A. Upon the making of a survey report that the building or other structure
is reported unsafe or dangerous to the public, the Board of Trustees
may direct the Code Enforcement Officer to serve a notice upon the
owner and all other persons having an interest in such property or
structure, either personally or by registered mail, addressed to his last
known address as shown by the records of the Village Assessors and/or
in the office of the County Clerk, containing a description of the
premises, a statement of the particulars in which the building or
structure is unsafe or dangerous and an order of the Code Enforcement
Officer requiring the same to be repaired or removed; and if such
service is made by registered mail, for the posting of such notice on the
premises.
B. Such owner so served shall commence the repair or removal of such
building or structure within two weeks after service of said notice.
C. A hearing shall be held before the Code Enforcement Officer at a time
and place specified in the notice to repair or demolish not sooner than
one week nor later than the date given to commence repair or removal,
if the owner requests the same at least three days before the scheduled
date for the hearing. If no hearing is requested, the order so served
shall take effect as provided in the notice.
D. At the hearing, the owner, the Village and any other interested parties
may present witnesses and any other proof relating to the matter and
all parties may appear in person or with their attorneys.
E. At the conclusion of the hearing, the Code Enforcement Officer shall
make a determination in writing and a copy of the same shall be served
either personally or by registered mail on all parties who appeared
therein.
F. The determination shall state whether the original survey report is
sustained, modified or reversed. If reversed, no further proceedings
shall be had.
G. If the original survey is sustained, in whole or in part, the Code
Enforcement Officer shall also include an order directing the owner to
proceed in accordance therewith and shall further specify that unless
the work is commenced within 10 days after service, the penalties
hereinafter provided shall be invoked.
§ 80-7 BUILDINGS, UNSAFE § 80-8
80:47
disorderly conduct and any person violating the same shall be a disorderly
person. The penalty for each and every violation shall be and hereby is fixed
at a sum not to exceed $250. Each day that such violation is permitted to
exist shall constitute a separate violation.
Chapter 84
CURFEW
GENERAL REFERENCES
Parks and recreation areas — See Ch. 132.
Noise — See Ch. 127.
Nuisance abatement — See Ch. 130.
§ 84-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Curfew Law of the Village of Palmyra."
§ 84-2. Policy; purpose; findings.
A. Policy. It is hereby declared to be the policy of the Village of Palmyra
(the "Village") to minimize nocturnal crime, juvenile delinquency and
vandalism and to prevent the damage and destruction of both public
and private property.
B. Purpose. It is the purpose of the Village to promote the health, safety
and general welfare of the residents of the Town/Village and to maintain
rule and order by prescribing, in accordance with prevailing community
standards, regulations concerning the presence of minors on streets,
roads, highways, public parks or other public areas of the Village at
night, to reduce juvenile crime and vandalism to protect the children
and minors of the Village and to further family responsibility.
C. Findings. The Board of Trustees of the Village hereby finds that:
(1) There has been a significant breakdown in the supervision normally
provided by certain parents and guidance for minors resulting in
minors being involved in a wide range of unacceptable conduct,
including vandalism, noisy, rowdy and disturbing behavior,
breaking and entering, public drinking, littering and harassment of
Village residents.
(2) Significant numbers of minors have been congregating in the
Village after dark causing disturbances of residents.
(3) Offensive activities of minors are not easily controlled by existing
laws.
(4) The sense of the community is that there is a proper time for the
cessation of outdoor activities of minors.
§ 80-8 PALMYRA CODE § 84-2
80:48
§ 84-3. Definitions; word usage.
(5) There is a need for a curfew for minors to achieve, under local
conditions, the policy and purposes herein stated.
(6) Curfew regulations will meet special needs, will enable the
community to better control streets and public places, will be a
significant factor in minimizing juvenile delinquency and will
enable the police to act reasonably and fairly to prevent the
violation of the laws by minors.
(7) The curfew hours declared by this chapter take into consideration
the danger hours for nocturnal crime and for accumulations of
minors with the potential risks incident to immaturity.
(8) Curfew regulations in other communities have been a significant
factor in reducing juvenile delinquency.
(9) Parental responsibility for the whereabouts and conduct of minors
should be the norm; as parental control increases, the likelihood of
juvenile delinquency decreases.
A. As used in this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and their
derivations shall have the meanings indicated:
KNOWINGLY — Includes knowledge of information which a parent
should reasonably be expected to have concerning the whereabouts
of a minor in that parent's legal custody. It is intended to include
and require neglectful or careless parents to maintain a reasonable
community standard of parental responsibility through an objective
test. It shall be no defense that a parent was indifferent to the activities,
conduct or whereabouts of such minor.
MINOR — Any person under the age of 18 years of age or, in equivalent
phrasing sometimes employed herein, any person 17 or less years of
age.
PARENT — Any person having legal custody of a minor as a natural or
adoptive parent, as a legal guardian, as a person who stands in loco
parentis or as a person to whom legal custody has been given by court
order.
PUBLIC PLACE — Any place to which the public has access, whether
privately or publically owned, including but not limited to public
streets, roads, thoroughfares, sidewalks, bridges, alleys, plazas, parks,
recreation or shopping areas, stores, cafes, restaurants, eating
establishments, public transportation facilities, vehicles used for public
transportation, parking lots or any other public building, structure or
area.
REMAIN or LOITER — To stay behind, to tarry or to stay in or upon a
public place.
§ 84-2 BUILDINGS, UNSAFE § 84-3
80:49
§ 84-4. Curfew established for minors.
It shall be unlawful and a violation of this chapter for a minor to be or
loiter or remain in, on or upon a public place within the Village between the
following hours (the "curfew hours"):
§ 84-5. Exceptions and exemptions.
A minor in a public place during the curfew hours shall not be considered in
violation of this chapter under the following circumstances:
TIME OF NIGHT — Based upon the prevailing standard of time,
whether Eastern standard time or Eastern daylight saving time,
generally observed at the hour by the public in the Village.
YEARS OF AGE — Years of age continues from one birthday to, but
not including, the day of the next so that 17 or less years of age is
equivalent to under 18 years of age.
B. The word "shall" is mandatory; the word "may" is permissive. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include
the future, words in the plural number include the singular, and words
in the singular number include the plural.
A. Beginning at 11:00 p.m. on Friday and Saturday nights and extended
until 5:00 a.m. on the following day.
B. Beginning at 10:00 p.m. on all other nights and extended until 5:00 a.m.
on the following day.
A. When the minor is accompanied by a parent of such minor.
B. When the minor is accompanied by an adult authorized by a parent of
such minor to take said parent's place in accompanying said minor for a
designated period of time and purpose within a specified area.
C. When the minor is exercising First Amendment rights protected by the
United States Constitution, such as the free exercise of religion,
freedom of speech and the right to such exercise, provided that the
minor has in his possession a writing, signed by the minor and by a
parent of the minor, with their home address and telephone number,
specifying when, where and in what manner the minor will be in a
public place during curfew hours in the exercise of a First Amendment
right specified in such writing.
D. When the minor is, with parental consent, in or on a public place in a
case of reasonable necessity.
E. When the minor is on the sidewalk or property where the minor resides
or on either side of or across the street from the place where the minor
resides and the adult owner or resident of that property has given
permission for the minor to be there.
§ 84-3 PALMYRA CODE § 84-5
80:50
§ 84-6. Parental responsibility.
It shall be unlawful and a violation of this chapter for a parent knowingly to
permit, or by inefficient control to allow, a minor to be or loiter or remain
in or on or upon a public place in the Town/Village during curfew hours
under circumstances not constituting an exception to or an exemption from
or otherwise beyond the scope of this chapter.
§ 84-7. Enforcement procedures.
F. When the minor is, with parental consent, returning home from and
within one hour after the termination of a school or Village-sponsored
activity or an activity of a religious, voluntary, cultural or community
organization.
G. When the minor is, with parental consent, in a motor vehicle engaged in
normal travel. When the minor is engaged in bona fide interstate
movements along major routes through the Town/Village and interstate
travel beginning or ending in the Village.
H. When the minor is engaged in or traveling to or from a place of
employment.
I. When the minor is engaged on an errand involving a medical
emergency or other emergency involving an immediate and significant
threat to life or property.
J. When the minor is 17 years of age and has parental consent for the use
by such minor of generally designated public places for generally
designated periods of time.
K. When the minor is authorized by a special permit from the Village
Board carried on the person of the minor thus authorized, as follows:
When necessary nighttime activities of a minor are inadequately
provided for by the provisions of this chapter, recourse may be had to
the Village Board for a special permit as circumstances warrant. Upon
the Village Board's findings of necessity for the use of a public place or
places, and with written parental consent, the Village Board may grant
a special permit, in writing, for use by such minor of a specified public
place or places, for specified periods of time as in the Village Board's
judgment may be necessary. Such special permit may be revoked by the
Village Board for good cause shown following a hearing.
A. If a police officer reasonably believes that a person is in a public place
in violation of this chapter, the officer shall notify the person of such
violation and shall require the person to provide his or her name,
address, telephone number and how to contact his or her parents. In
determining the age of the person, and in the absence of convincing
evidence, such as a birth certificate or driver's license, the officer shall
use his or her best judgment in determining age.
§ 84-5 BUILDINGS, UNSAFE § 84-7
80:51
§ 84-8. Penalties for offenses.
B. If the officer determines or has reason to believe that a person is in
violation of this chapter, he or she shall, if practicable, take the person
to police headquarters and procure the person, whereupon the parent
shall be questioned to ascertain, within constitutional limits, the
relevant facts.
C. The officer shall file a written report.
D. The officer shall issue an appearance ticket or tickets as the
circumstances require.
E. The minor shall be released to the custody of a parent.
F. If a parent cannot be located or fails to take charge of the minor, the
minor may temporarily be entrusted to a relative, neighbor or other
person who will assume responsibility of caring for the minor pending
availability of a parent.
G. In circumstances where the procedures in Subsections B, E and F of
this section are impracticable, the officer shall comply with or cause
compliance with the procedures in Subsections A, C, and H of this
section.
H. In the case of a first violation by a minor, the Chief of Police shall by
certified mail, return receipt requested, send to a parent written notice
of the violation, with a warning that any subsequent violation will result
in full enforcement of the curfew law, including enforcement of parental
responsibility and of applicable penalties.
A. Any minor under the age of 16 years of age violating the provisions of
this chapter shall be dealt with in accordance with the procedures
contained in § 84-7 herein and on each violation shall be treated as a
first violator.
B. Any minor between the ages of 16 and 18 years of age convicted for
violating any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a violation
punishable by a fine of not more than $50 for the first conviction, $100
for the second conviction and $250 thereafter or by a term of
imprisonment not to exceed 15 days or be required to perform
community service, or any combination thereof.
C. Any parent convicted for violating any provision of this chapter shall be
guilty of a violation punishable by a fine of not more than $50 for the
first conviction, $100 for the second conviction and $250 thereafter or
by a term of imprisonment not to exceed 15 days or be required to
perform community service, or any combination thereof.
§ 84-7 PALMYRA CODE § 84-9
80:52
§ 84-9. Notice of regulations.
Notice of the existence of this chapter and the curfew regulations
established by it shall be posted, for time to time, in, on or at such public
or quasi-public places as may be determined by the Chief of Police in order
that the public may be informed of the existence of this chapter and its
regulations.
Chapter 88
DUMPING, TRESPASSING AND OPEN FIRES
§ 88-1. Trespassing prohibited.
Trespassing upon public and/or private property within this Village is
hereby prohibited.
§ 88-2. Dumping restricted on public property.
The placing, dumping or leaving of any glass, nails or other destructive
matter, garbage, rubbish, filth, any inflammable or explosive matter, or
any petroleum product, except as petroleum products shall be applied
for road building or improvement purposes under the direction of the
Superintendent of Highways of said Village, or any other waste or rubbish
of any kind, on any street, square, sidewalk, crosswalk, lane, alley, property
owned by or public place within the limits of this Village, is hereby
prohibited; provided, however, that this prohibition shall not apply to the
dumping of ashes or nonoffensive, noninflammable waste products upon
property owned by the Village, provided such act shall be pursuant to
the permission duly granted by resolution duly adopted by the Board of
Trustees of this Village.
§ 88-3. Dumping on private property.
The placing, dumping or leaving of any garbage, rubbish, filth, any
inflammable or explosive matter or any petroleum product, or any other
waste or rubbish of any kind, upon property within this Village, other than
public property, except as same is produced upon the premises where same
is so placed, is hereby prohibited.
§ 88-4. Bonfires prohibited.
Willfully setting fire to, or permitting or assisting another to set fire to, any
leaves, brush or rubbish of any kind within the bounds of this Village, either
upon his own land or lands of another, whereby the property of another is
injured or endangered, is hereby prohibited.
§ 88-5. Dumping grounds to be approved.
No public dump or dumping ground shall be maintained within the
corporate limits of the Village of Palmyra, except and unless same shall
§ 84-9 DUMPING, TRESPASSING AND OPEN FIRES § 88-5
88:53
be authorized by resolution duly adopted by the Board of Trustees of this
Village.
§ 88-6. Penalties for offenses.17
Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall be
punishable, upon conviction, by a fine not exceeding $250 or a term of
imprisonment not exceeding 15 days, or both, for each violation. Each day
that such violation is permitted to exist shall constitute a separate violation.
Chapter 94
ELECTRICAL INSPECTIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction and fire
prevention — See Ch. 76.
Unsafe buildings — See Ch. 80.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 108.
§ 94-1. Purpose.
The Village of Palmyra, being responsible for the enforcement of the New
York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code (“Uniform Code”)
and recognizing that the Uniform Code in Parts 850 and 1030.1 provides
minimum standards for the design, installation and location of electrical
wiring, systems and equipment operating on 50 volts or more, wishes to
more fully implement these provisions and facilitate their enforcement.
§ 94-2. Board to designate approved electrical inspection firms;
criteria.
A. The Village Board of the Village of Palmyra may from time to time
approve independent electrical inspection firms to see that the
properties and construction in the Village of Palmyra conform to the
Uniform Code and the local laws, rules and regulations, as the Village of
Palmyra shall make applicable.
B. The approved independent electrical inspection firms shall be those:
(1) That file with and keep in force a $1,000,000 liability policy issued
by a company licensed to do business in New York State. The
liability policy shall name the Village of Palmyra as an additional
insured and shall by its terms protect the Village of Palmyra from
any and all liability, active or passive, or claims or causes of action
for personal injury or property damage which arise out of the
actions of a member or representative of the approved electrical
inspection firm performing electrical inspection in the Village of
17.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 88-5 PALMYRA CODE § 94-2
94:54
§ 94-3. Inspectors to act as Village agents.
The chief or supervising inspector and each of the duly appointed inspectors
of any approved electrical inspection firm are hereby authorized and
deputized as agents of the Village to make inspections and reinspections
of all electrical installations hereinafter described, and to approve or
disapprove the same. In no event, however, will the cost or expense of such
inspections and reinspections be charged against the Village. The name of
each deputy inspector who may perform service in Palmyra shall be filed
with the Code Enforcement Officer in the Village of Palmyra, together with
his name and address. Such filing shall be kept current at all times by the
approved electrical inspection firm. The list shall include an address and
telephone number for each deputy inspector, and shall be furnished and
signed by an officer of the firm.
§ 94-4. Duties of inspector.
Palmyra for or on behalf of the Village of Palmyra, or to enforce
code compliance with the Uniform Code and the applicable
standards of this code or any other code.
(2) That have the approval of the utilities serving the Village of
Palmyra, Wayne County, New York State.
(3) That, in the sole opinion of the Village Board, maintain a suitable
office and ample, trained staff to service the Village of Palmyra and
its residents.
(4) That, in the sole opinion of the Village Board, has performed
satisfactorily in services rendered in the Village of Palmyra.
(5) That has an accreditation as an approved electrical inspection firm.
(6) That maintains a current list of employees on file with the Village of
Palmyra.
(7) That as of July 1 annually registers with the Village Clerk and pays
an annual registration fee in the amount as set from time to time by
resolution of the Board of Trustees.
A. It shall be the duty of the inspector to report to the Village Code
Enforcement Officer all violations of or deviations from or omissions of
the electrical provisions of the Uniform Code and the local laws,
ordinances, rules and regulations of the Village of Palmyra. The
inspector shall make inspections and reinspections of electrical
installations in and on properties in the Village upon the written request
of the property owner or Village Code Enforcement Officer or Fire Chief
or as herein provided.
B. The inspector is authorized to make inspections and reinspections of
electrical wiring installations, devices, appliances and equipment in
§ 94-2 ELECTRICAL INSPECTIONS § 94-4
94:55
§ 94-5. Schedule of rates.
The schedule of rates charged for inspection shall be filed with the Village
Clerk and the Code Enforcement Officer. In no event may a fee be charged
in excess of the rates on file at the time the inspection or reinspection is
performed.
§ 94-6. No waiver or assumption of liability.
This chapter shall not be construed to relieve from or lessen the
responsibility of any person owning, operating, controlling or installing
any electrical wiring, devices, appliances, or equipment for loss of life or
damage to person or property caused by any defect therein, nor shall the
Village of Palmyra, its Code Enforcement Officer, or the deputized electrical
inspector be deemed to have assumed any such liability by reason of any
inspection made pursuant to this chapter.
§ 94-7. Penalties for offenses.18
Any installation or alteration of an electrical system or electrical wiring
that is covered and regulated by the provisions of the New York State
Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code, the National Electrical Code,
or the Code of the Village of Palmyra without the issuance of a certificate
of compliance as hereinabove provided shall be a violation of this chapter.
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate the provisions of this
chapter shall be guilty of an offense and shall, upon conviction thereof,
be subject to a fine of not more than $250 or imprisonment for a term of
not more than 15 days. Each day such violation continues shall constitute
and on properties within the Village where he deems it necessary for
the protection of life and property.
C. In the event of an emergency, it is the duty of the inspector to make
electrical inspections upon the oral request of an official or officer of
the Village.
D. It shall be the duty of the inspector to furnish written reports to the
proper officials of the Village and owners and/or lessees of property
where defective electrical installations and equipment are found upon
inspection.
E. The inspector shall authorize the issuing of a certificate of compliance
when electrical installations and equipment are in conformity with the
Uniform Code or with the local laws, ordinances, rules and regulations
of the Village of Palmyra and he shall direct that a copy of the certificate
of compliance be sent to the Code Enforcement Officer.
F. Any and all fees shall be payable by only the owner of the facilities
inspected.
18.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 94-4 PALMYRA CODE § 94-7
94:56
a separate violation. The imposition of such penalty shall not be held to
prohibit the enforced removal of prohibited conditions by any appropriate
remedy, including immediate application for an injunction.
§ 94-8. Provisions not applicable in certain cases.
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to the electrical installations
in mines, ships, railway cars, automotive equipment, or the installations
or equipment employed by railway, electrical or communication utilities
in the exercise of their function as utilities, and located outdoors or in
buildings used exclusively for that purpose. This chapter shall not apply to
any work involved in the manufacture, assembly, test or repair of electrical
machinery, apparatus, materials and equipment by a person, firm or
corporation engaged in electrical manufacturing as its principal business.
Chapter 99
FAIR HOUSING
§ 99-1. Preamble.
Through the Civil Rights Act of 1866, Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964,
Title VIII of the Civil Rights Act of 1968, as amended, and Executive Order
11063, individuals are guarded against discrimination in the sale or rental
of housing. The Village of Palmyra recognizes the importance of these legal
safeguards and wishes to provide for local enforcement of both federal and
state fair housing laws through this chapter.
§ 99-2. Purpose and intent.
This chapter establishes a local procedure for enforcement of federal and
state fair housing laws including but not limited to the Civil Rights Act of
1866, Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, and Title VIII of the Civil
Rights Act of 1968, as amended.
§ 99-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
DISCRIMINATORY HOUSING PRACTICE — An act that is unlawful under
§§ 804, 805 and/or 806 of Title VIII.
PERSON — Includes one or more individuals, corporations, partnerships,
associations, labor organizations, legal representatives, mutual companies,
joint-stock companies, trusts, unincorporated organizations, trustees,
receivers and fiduciaries.
TITLE VIII — Title VIII of the Civil Rights Act of 1968, Public Law 90-284,
42 U.S.C. §§ 3601 to 3619.
§ 94-7 FAIR HOUSING § 99-3
99:57
TO RENT — Includes to lease, to sublease, to let, and otherwise to grant for
consideration the right to occupy premises not owned by the occupant.
§ 99-4. Complaint of violation; procedure.
A. Any persons wishing to file a complaint concerning discrimination in
the sale or rental of housing must present information concerning the
alleged violation(s) to the local designated fair housing officer.
(1) Each complaint shall be filed on a housing discrimination complaint
form (see Attachment A19) and contain substantially the following
information:
(a) The name and address of the person aggrieved (complainant).
(b) The name and address of the person against whom the
complaint is filed (respondent).
(c) A description and address of the dwelling, which involves the
alleged discriminatory housing practice.
(d) A concise statement of the facts, including dates, constituting
the alleged discriminatory housing practice.
(2) The complaint must be filed no later than 180 days after the alleged
discriminatory housing practice occurred.
B. Upon the filing of a complaint and upon any amendment of such a
complaint, the designated fair housing officer will notify the respondent
of the complaint by certified mail.
C. A hearing will be held before the fair housing officer for the purpose of
resolving the complaint. The complainant and respondent shall receive
notification of hearing date by certified mail. The hearing must be held
within 10 days of the mailing of the notification to both parties. At the
hearing, the fair housing officer will explain the complaint and relevant
law which has allegedly been violated to the respondent. The
respondent will have the right to be represented by counsel. If the
allegations of the complaint are proven by a preponderance of
evidence, the fair housing officer shall describe to the respondent
appropriate prescribed action to be taken by the respondent.
D. The respondent will be notified by certified mail of the prescribed
action. He will have 14 days in which to comply with the prescribed
action. The fair housing officer at all times will encourage voluntary
cooperation, but will resort to the compulsory processes authorized by
§ 811 of Title VIII. Further court action will only be done on the request
of the complainant. The Assistant Secretary for Equal Opportunity in
the Department of Housing and Urban Development will be forwarded a
copy of the complaint and all relevant materials at this time.
19.Editor’s Note: Said form is on file in the office of the Village Clerk.
§ 99-3 PALMYRA CODE § 99-4
99:58
Chapter 104
FIREARMS AND AIR GUNS
§ 104-1. Use of air, B.B. and pellet guns prohibited.
No person under the age of 16 years shall use, discharge or carry loaded
within the boundaries of the Village of Palmyra a gun commonly known as
a “pellet,” “B.B.” or “air” gun, a gun from which a shot or pellet may be
discharged by a spring of air.
§ 104-2. Use of shell or cartridge guns restricted. [Amended
2-11-196420]
No person shall discharge a gun loaded with shell or cartridge, or any air
gun, spring gun, or other instrument or weapon in which the propelling
force is a spring or air, except a duly authorized peace officer or a member
of a duly organized rifle, gun or pistol club while such member is engaged in
practice or competition on a range approved by the Chief of Police or officer
in charge of the Palmyra Police Department. No person shall carry loaded
within the boundaries of the Village of Palmyra a gun loaded with shell
or cartridge except a duly authorized peace officer or a person authorized
under the provisions of § 265.35 of the Penal Law of the State of New York.
§ 104-3. Penalties for offenses.21
Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter, and any person
who aids, abets or assists therein, shall be punishable, upon conviction,
by a fine not exceeding $250 or a term of imprisonment not exceeding 15
days, or both, for each violation, and if any person who shall violate any
provisions of this chapter be under the age of 16 years, any police officer
shall confiscate any gun owned or possessed by said person.
Chapter 108
FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction— See Ch. 76.
Unsafe buildings — See Ch. 80.
Electrical inspections — See Ch. 94.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 167.
Zoning — See Ch. 200.
20.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
21.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 99-4 FIREARMS AND AIR GUNS § 108-1
104:59
§ 108-1. Findings.
The Board of Trustees of the Village Palmyra finds that the potential and/
or actual damages from flooding and erosion may be a problem to the
residents of the Village of Palmyra and that such damages may include
destruction or loss of private and public housing; damage to public facilities,
both publicly and privately owned; and injury to and loss of human life. In
order to minimize the threat of such damages and to achieve the purposes
and objectives hereinafter set forth, this chapter is adopted.
§ 108-2. Statement of purpose.
It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety, and
general welfare, and to minimize public and private losses due to flood
conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to:
§ 108-3. Objectives.
The objectives of this chapter are:
A. Regulate uses which are dangerous to health, safety and property due
to water or erosion hazards, or which result in damaging increases in
erosion or in flood heights or velocities;
B. Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve
such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial
construction;
C. Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and
natural protective barriers which are involved in the accommodation of
floodwaters;
D. Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may
increase erosion or flood damages;
E. Regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert
floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands; and
F. Qualify for and maintain participation in the National Flood Insurance
Program.
A. To protect human life and health;
B. To minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control
projects;
C. To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with
flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;
D. To minimize prolonged business interruptions;
E. To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and
gas mains, electric, telephone, and sewer lines, streets and bridges
located in areas of special flood hazard;
§ 108-1 PALMYRA CODE § 108-3
108:60
§ 108-4. Definitions and word usage.
F. To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and
development of areas of special flood hazard so as to minimize future
flood blight areas;
G. To provide that developers are notified that property is in an area of
special flood hazard; and
H. To ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard
assume responsibility for their actions.
A. Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter
shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in
common usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application.
B. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
APPEAL — A request for a review of the local administrator’s
interpretation of any provision of this chapter or a request for a
variance.
AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING — A designated AO, AH or VO Zone
on a community’s Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) with a one-percent
or greater annual chance of flooding to an average annual depth of
one to three feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where
the path of flooding is unpredictable and where velocity flow may be
evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow.
AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD — The land in the floodplain
within a community subject to a one-percent or greater chance of
flooding in any given year. This area may be designated as Zone A, AE,
AH, AO, A1-A30, A99, V, VO, VE, or V1-V30. It is also commonly referred
to as the “base floodplain” or “one-hundred-year floodplain.”
BASE FLOOD — The flood having a one-percent chance of being
equaled or exceeded in any given year.
BASEMENT — That portion of a building having its floor subgrade
(below ground level) on all sides.
BREAKAWAY WALL — A wall that is not part of the structural support
of the building and is intended through its design and construction to
collapse under specific lateral loading forces without causing damage
to the elevated portion of the building or the supporting foundation
system.
BUILDING — See “structure.”
CELLAR — Has the same meaning as “basement.”
COASTAL HIGH HAZARD AREA — An area of special flood hazard
extending from offshore to the inland limit of a primary frontal dune
along an open coast and any other area subject to high velocity wave
§ 108-3 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION § 108-4
108:61
action from storms or seismic sources. The area is designated on a
FIRM as Zone V1-V30, VE, VO or V.
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved
real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures,
mining, dredging, filling, paving, excavation or drilling operations or
storage of equipment or materials.
ELEVATED BUILDING — A nonbasement building built, in the case of
a building in Zones A1-A30, AE, A, A99, AO, AH, B, C, X, or D, to have
the top of the elevated floor, or, in the case of a building in Zones
V1-30, VE, or V, to have the bottom of the lowest horizontal structure
member of the elevated floor elevated above the ground level by means
of pilings, columns (posts and piers), or shear walls parallel to the flow
of the water; and adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural
integrity of the building during a flood of up to the magnitude of the
base flood. In the case of Zones A1-A30, AE, A, A99, AO, AH, B, C, X,
or D, “elevated building” also includes a building elevated by means
of fill or solid foundation perimeter walls with openings sufficient to
facilitate the unimpeded movement of floodwaters. In the case of Zones
V1-V30, VE, or V, “elevated building” also includes a building otherwise
meeting the definition of “elevated building,” even though the lower
area is enclosed by means of breakaway walls that meet the federal
standards.
EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A
manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of
facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are
to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the
construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of
concrete pads) is complete before the effective date of the floodplain
management regulations adopted by the community.
EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR
SUBDIVISION — The preparation of additional sites by the construction
of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are
to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of
streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
FEDERAL EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY — The federal
agency that administers the National Flood Insurance Program.
FLOOD BOUNDARY AND FLOODWAY MAP (FBFM) — An official map
of the community published by the Federal Emergency Management
Agency as part of a riverine community’s Flood Insurance Study. The
FBFM delineates a regulatory floodway along watercourses studied in
detail in the Flood Insurance Study.
FLOOD ELEVATION STUDY — An examination, evaluation and
determination of the flood hazards and, if appropriate, corresponding
water surface elevations, or an examination, evaluation and
determination of flood-related erosion hazards.
§ 108-4 PALMYRA CODE § 108-4
108:62
FLOOD HAZARD BOUNDARY MAP (FHBM) — An official map of a
community, issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency,
where the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard have been
designated as Zone A but no flood elevations are provided.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM) — An official map of a
community on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency has
delineated both the areas of special flood hazard and the risk premium
zones applicable to the community.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY — see “Flood Elevation Study.”
FLOOD or FLOODING —
FLOODPLAIN or FLOOD-PRONE AREA — Any land area susceptible to
being inundated by water from any source (see definition of “flooding”).
FLOODPROOFING — Any combination of structural and nonstructural
additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or
eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water
and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents.
FLOODWAY — Has the same meaning as “regulatory floodway.”
FUNCTIONALLY DEPENDENT USE — A use which cannot perform its
intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity
to water such as a docking or port facility necessary for the loading
and unloading of cargo or passengers, shipbuilding, and ship repair
facilities. The term does not include long-term storage, manufacturing,
sales, or service facilities.
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE — The highest natural elevation of the
ground surface, prior to construction, next to the proposed walls of a
structure.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE — Any structure that is:
A general and temporary condition of partial or complete
inundation of normally dry land areas from:
(a) The overflow of inland or tidal waters;
The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface
waters from any source.
(b)
(1)
“Flood” or “flooding” also means the collapse or subsidence of
land along the shore of a lake or other body of water as a result
of erosion or undermining caused by waves or currents of water
exceeding anticipated cyclical levels or suddenly caused by an
unusually high water level in a natural body of water, accompanied
by a severe storm, or by an unanticipated force of nature, such as a
flash flood or an abnormal tidal surge, or by some similarly unusual
and unforeseeable event which results in flooding as defined in
Subsection (1) above.
(2)
§ 108-4 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION § 108-4
108:63
LOCAL ADMINISTRATOR — The person appointed by the community
to administer and implement this chapter by granting or denying
development permits in accordance with its provisions. This person is
often the code enforcement officer, building inspector or employee of
an engineering department.
LOWEST FLOOR — Lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement or cellar). An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, usable
solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or storage, in an area
other than a basement area is not considered a building’s lowest floor;
provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure
in violation of the applicable nonelevation design requirements of this
chapter.
MANUFACTURED HOME — A structure, transportable in one or more
sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be
used with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the
required utilities. The term does not include a “recreational vehicle.”
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A parcel (or
contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured
home lots for rent or sale.
MEAN SEA LEVEL — For purposes of the National Flood Insurance
Program, the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929, or
other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a community’s
Flood Insurance Rate Map are referenced.
MOBILE HOME — Has the same meaning as “manufactured home.”
Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a
listing maintained by the Department of the Interior) or
preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as
meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National
Register;
(1)
Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the
Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered
historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the
Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district;
(2)
Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states
with historic preservation programs which have been approved by
the Secretary of the Interior; or
(3)
Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in
communities with historic preservation programs that have been
certified either:
By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary
of the Interior; or
(a)
Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without
approved programs.
(b)
(4)
§ 108-4 PALMYRA CODE § 108-4
108:64
NATIONAL GEODETIC VERTICAL DATUM (NGVD) — As corrected in
1929, a vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying
elevations within the floodplain.
NEW CONSTRUCTION — Structures for which the start of construction
commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain management
regulation adopted by the community and includes any subsequent
improvements to such structure.
NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A
manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of
facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are
to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the
construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of
concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective date of floodplain
management regulations adopted by a community.
ONE-HUNDRED-YEAR FLOOD — Has the same meaning as “base
flood.”
PRIMARY FRONTAL DUNE — A continuous or nearly continuous
mound or ridge of sand with relatively steep seaward and landward
slopes immediately landward and adjacent to the beach and subject
to erosion and overtopping from high tides and waves during major
coastal storms. The inland limit of the primary frontal dune occurs at
the point where there is a distinct change from a relatively steep slope
to a relatively mild slope.
PRINCIPALLY ABOVE GROUND — At least 51% of the actual cash value
of the structure, excluding land value, is above ground.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — A vehicle which is:
REGULATORY FLOODWAY — The channel of a river or other
watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order
to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water
surface elevation more than a designated height as determined by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency in a flood insurance study or
by other agencies as provided in § 108-13B of this chapter.
SAND DUNES — Naturally occurring accumulations of sand in ridges
or mounds landward of the beach.
(1) Built on a single chassis;
Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest
horizontal projections;
(2)
Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a lightduty
truck; and
(3)
Not designed primarily for use as a permanent dwelling but as
temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or
seasonal use.
(4)
§ 108-4 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION § 108-4
108:65
§ 108-5. Lands to which this chapter applies.
This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the
jurisdiction of the Village of Palmyra.
§ 108-6. Basis for establishing areas of special flood hazard.
START OF CONSTRUCTION — Includes substantial improvement and
means the initiation, excluding planning and design, of any phase of
a project or physical alteration of the property, and shall include land
preparation, such as clearing, grading, and filling; installation of streets
and/or walkways; excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or
foundations or the erection of temporary forms. It also includes the
placement and/or installation on the property of accessory buildings
(garages, sheds), storage trailers, and building materials. For
manufactured homes the “actual start” means affixing of the
manufactured home to its permanent site.
STRUCTURE — A walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid
storage tank, that is principally above ground, as well as a
manufactured home.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE — Damage of any origin sustained by a
structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its beforedamaged
condition would equal or exceed 50% of the market value of
the structure before the damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Any reconstruction, rehabilitation,
addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals
or exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure before the start of
construction of the improvement. The term includes structures which
have incurred substantial damage, regardless of the actual repair work
performed. The term does not, however, include either:
VARIANCE — A grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter
which permits construction or use in a manner that would otherwise be
prohibited by this chapter.
Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing
violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code
specifications which have been identified by the local code
enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to
assure safe living conditions; or
(1)
Any alteration of a historic structure, provided that the alteration
will not preclude the structure’s continued designation as a historic
structure.
(2)
A. The areas of special flood hazard are identified and defined on the
following documents prepared by the Federal Emergency Management
Agency:
§ 108-4 PALMYRA CODE § 108-6
108:66
§ 108-7. Interpretation and conflict with other laws.
§ 108-8. Penalties for offenses.
No structure in an area of special flood hazard shall hereafter be
constructed, located, extended, converted, or altered and no land shall be
excavated or filled without full compliance with the terms of this chapter
and any other applicable regulations. Any infraction of the provisions of
this chapter by failure to comply with any of its requirements, including
infractions of conditions and safeguards established in connection with
conditions of the permit, shall constitute a violation. Any person who
violates this chapter or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall,
upon conviction thereof, be fined no more than $250 or imprisoned for not
more than 15 days, or both. Each day of noncompliance shall be considered
a separate offense. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the Village
of Palmyra from taking such other lawful action as necessary to prevent
or remedy an infraction. Any structure found not compliant with the
requirements of this chapter for which the developer and/or owner has
not applied for and received an approved variance under §§ 108-19 and
108-20 will be declared noncompliant and notification sent to the Federal
Emergency Management Agency.
§ 108-9. Warning and disclaimer of liability.
The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and
engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare
(1) Flood Insurance Rate Map (single panel) No. 360896-0001C, whose
effective date is July 15, 1988.
(2) A scientific and engineering report entitled “Flood Insurance Study,
Village of Palmyra, New York, Wayne County,” dated July 15, 1988.
(3) Flood Boundary and Floodway Map (single panel) Index No.
360896-0001C, whose effective date is July 15, 1988.
B. The above documents are hereby adopted and declared to be a part of
this chapter. The Flood Insurance Study and/or maps are on file at:
Village Clerk’s Office, 144 East Main Street, Palmyra, NY 14522.
A. This chapter includes all revisions to the National Flood Insurance
Program through November 1, 1989, and shall supersede all previous
laws adopted for the purpose of flood damage prevention.
B. In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter
shall be held to be minimum requirements, adopted for the promotion
of the public health, safety, and welfare. Whenever the requirements of
this chapter are at variance with the requirements of any other lawfully
adopted rules, regulations, or ordinances, the most restrictive, or that
imposing the higher standards, shall govern.
§ 108-6 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION § 108-9
108:67
occasions. Flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes.
This chapter does not imply that land outside the area of special flood
hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding
or flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of
the Village of Palmyra, any officer or employee thereof, or the Federal
Emergency Management Agency, for any flood damages that result from
reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made
thereunder.
§ 108-10. Designation of local administrator.
The Code Enforcement Officer is hereby appointed local administrator to
administer and implement this chapter by granting or denying floodplain
development permits in accordance with its provisions.
§ 108-11. Floodplain development permit required; fees.
§ 108-12. Application for permit.
The applicant shall provide at least the following information, where
applicable. Additional information may be required on the permit
application form.
A. Purpose. A floodplain development permit is hereby established for all
construction and other development to be undertaken in areas of
special flood hazard in this community for the purpose of protecting its
citizens from increased flood hazards and insuring that new
development is constructed in a manner that minimizes its exposure to
flooding. It shall be unlawful to undertake any development in an area
of special flood hazard, as shown on the Flood Insurance Rate Map
enumerated in § 108-6 without a valid floodplain development permit.
Application for a permit shall be made on forms furnished by the local
administrator and may include, but not be limited to, plans, in
duplicate, drawn to scale and showing the nature, location, dimensions,
and elevations of the area in question, and existing or proposed
structures, fill, storage of materials, drainage facilities, and the location
of the foregoing.
B. Fees. All applications for a floodplain development permit shall be
accompanied by an application fee in an amount as set from time to
time by resolution of the Board of Trustees. In addition, the applicant
shall be responsible for reimbursing the Village of Palmyra for any
additional costs necessary for review, inspection and approval of this
project. The local administrator may require a deposit of no more than
$500 to cover these additional costs.
A. The proposed elevation, in relation to mean sea level, of the lowest floor
(including basement or cellar) of any new or substantially improved
structure to be located in Zones A1-A30, AE or AH, or Zone A if base
flood elevation data are available. Upon completion of the lowest floor,
§ 108-9 PALMYRA CODE § 108-12
108:68
the permittee shall submit to the local administrator the as-built
elevation, certified by a licensed professional engineer or surveyor.
B. The proposed elevation, in relation to mean sea level, of the bottom of
the lowest structural member of the lowest floor (excluding pilings and
columns) of any new or substantially improved structure to be located
in Zones V1-V30 or VE, or Zone V if base flood elevation data are
available. Upon completion of the lowest floor, the permittee shall
submit to the local administrator the as-built elevation, certified by a
licensed professional engineer or surveyor.
C. The proposed elevation, in relation to mean sea level, to which any new
or substantially improved nonresidential structure will be floodproofed.
Upon completion of the floodproofed portion of the structure, the
permittee shall submit to the local administrator the as-built
floodproofed elevation, certified by a professional engineer or surveyor.
D. A certificate from a licensed professional engineer or architect that any
utility floodproofing will meet the criteria in § 108-15C, Utilities.
E. A certificate from a licensed professional engineer or architect that any
nonresidential floodproofed structure will meet the floodproofing
criteria in § 108-17, Standards for nonresidential structures.
F. A description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or
relocated as a result of proposed development. Computations by a
licensed professional engineer must be submitted that demonstrate
that the altered or relocated segment will provide equal or greater
conveyance than the original stream segment. The applicant must
submit any maps, computations or other material required by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) to revise the
documents enumerated in § 108-6, when notified by the local
administrator, and must pay any fees or other costs assessed by FEMA
for this purpose. The applicant must also provide assurances that the
conveyance capacity of the altered or relocated stream segment will be
maintained.
G. A technical analysis by a licensed professional engineer, if required by
the local administrator, which shows whether proposed development to
be located in an area of special flood hazard may result in physical
damage to any other property.
H. In Zone A, when no base flood elevation data are available from other
sources, base flood elevation data shall be provided by the permit
applicant for subdivision proposals and other proposed developments
(including proposals for manufactured home and recreational vehicle
parks and subdivisions) that are greater than either 50 lots or five
acres.
§ 108-12 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION § 108-13
108:69
§ 108-13. Duties and responsibilities of local administrator.
Duties of the local administrator shall include, but not be limited to, the
following:
A. Permit application review. The local administrator shall conduct the
following permit application review before issuing a floodplain
development permit:
(1) Review all applications for completeness, particularly with the
requirements of § 108-12, Application for permit, and for
compliance with the provisions and standards of this chapter.
(2) Review subdivision and other proposed new development,
including manufactured home parks, to determine whether
proposed building sites will be reasonably safe from flooding. If a
proposed building site is located in an area of special flood hazard,
all new construction and substantial improvements shall meet the
applicable standards of §§ 108-14 through 108-18 and, in
particular, § 108-14A, Subdivision proposals.
(3) Determine whether any proposed development in an area of special
flood hazard may result in physical damage to any other property
(e.g., stream bank erosion and increased flood velocities). The local
administrator may require the applicant to submit additional
technical analyses and data necessary to complete the
determination. If the proposed development may result in physical
damage to any other property or fails to meet the requirements of
§§ 108-14 through 108-18, no permit shall be issued. The applicant
may revise the application to include measures that mitigate or
eliminate the adverse effects and resubmit the application.
(4) Determine that all necessary permits have been received from
those governmental agencies from which approval is required by
state or federal law.
B. Use of other flood data.
(1) When the Federal Emergency Management Agency has designated
areas of special flood hazard on the community’s Flood Insurance
Rate map (FIRM) but has neither produced water surface elevation
data (these areas are designated Zone A or V on the FIRM) nor
identified a floodway, the local administrator shall obtain, review
and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data
available from a federal, state or other source, including data
developed pursuant to § 108-12H, as criteria for requiring that new
construction, substantial improvements or other proposed
development meet the requirements of this chapter.
(2) When base flood elevation data are not available, the local
administrator may use flood information from any other
authoritative source, such as historical data, to establish flood
§ 108-13 PALMYRA CODE § 108-13
108:70
elevations within the areas of special flood hazard, for the purposes
of this chapter.
C. Alteration of watercourses.
(1) Notification to adjacent communities and the New York State
Department of Environmental Conservation prior to permitting any
alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submittal of evidence
of such notification to the Regional Director, Region II, Federal
Emergency Management Agency.
(2) Determine that the permit holder has provided for maintenance
within the altered or relocated portion of said watercourse so that
the flood-carrying capacity is not diminished.
D. Construction stage.
(1) In Zones A1-A30, AE and AH, and also Zone A if base flood
elevation data are available, upon placement of the lowest floor or
completion of floodproofing of a new or substantially improved
structure, obtain from the permit holder a certification of the asbuilt
elevation of the lowest floor or floodproofed elevation, in
relation to mean sea level. The certificate shall be prepared by or
under the direct supervision of a licensed land surveyor or
professional engineer and certified by same. For manufactured
homes, the permit holder shall submit the certificate of elevation
upon placement of the structure on the site. A certificate of
elevation must also be submitted for a recreational vehicle if it
remains on a site for 180 consecutive days or longer (unless it is
fully licensed and ready for highway use).
(2) Any further work undertaken prior to submission and approval of
the certification shall be at the permit holder’s risk. The local
administrator shall review all data submitted. Deficiencies detected
shall be cause to issue a stop-work order for the project unless
immediately corrected.
E. Inspections. The local administrator and/or the developer’s engineer or
architect shall make periodic inspections at appropriate times
throughout the period of construction in order to monitor compliance
with permit conditions and enable said inspector to certify, if requested,
that the development is in compliance with the requirements of the
floodplain development permit and/or any variance provisions.
F. Stop-work orders.
(1) The local administrator shall issue, or cause to be issued, a stopwork
order for any floodplain development found ongoing without a
development permit. Disregard of a stop-work order shall subject
the violator to the penalties described in § 108-8 of this chapter.
§ 108-13 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION § 108-13
108:71
§ 108-14. General construction standards.
The following standards apply to new development, including new and
substantially improved structures, in the areas of special flood hazard
shown on the Flood Insurance Rate Map designated in § 108-6:
(2) The local administrator shall issue, or cause to be issued, a stopwork
order for any floodplain development found noncompliant
with the provisions of this chapter and/or the conditions of the
development permit. Disregard of a stop-work order shall subject
the violator to the penalties described in § 108-8 of this chapter.
G. Certificate of compliance.
(1) In areas of special flood hazard, as determined by documents
enumerated in § 108-6, it shall be unlawful to occupy or to permit
the use or occupancy of any building or premises, or both, or part
thereof hereafter created, erected, changed, converted or wholly or
partly altered or enlarged in its use or structure, until a certificate
of compliance has been issued by the local administrator stating
that the building or land conforms to the requirements of this
chapter.
(2) A certificate of compliance shall be issued by the local
administrator upon satisfactory completion of all development in
areas of special flood hazard.
(3) Issuance of the certificate shall be based upon the inspections
conducted as prescribed in Subsection E, Inspections, and/or any
certified elevations, hydraulic data, floodproofing, anchoring
requirements or encroachment analyses which may have been
required as a condition of the approved permit.
H. Information to be retained. The local administrator shall retain and
make available for inspection copies of the following:
(1) Floodplain development permits and certificates of compliance;
(2) Certifications of as-built lowest floor elevations of structures,
required pursuant to Subsection D(1) and (2) of this section, and
whether or not the structures contain a basement;
(3) Floodproofing certificates required pursuant to Subsection D(1) of
this section, and whether or not the structures contain a basement;
(4) Variances issued pursuant to §§ 108-19 and 108-20; and
(5) Notices required under Subsection C, Alteration of watercourses.
A. Subdivision proposals. The following standards apply to all new
subdivision proposals and other proposed development in areas of
special flood hazard (including proposals for manufactured home and
recreational vehicle parks and subdivisions):
§ 108-13 PALMYRA CODE § 108-14
108:72
§ 108-15. Standards for all structures.
(1) Proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood
damage;
(2) Public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and
water systems shall be located and constructed so as to minimize
flood damage; and
(3) Adequate drainage shall be provided to reduce exposure to flood
damage.
B. Encroachments.
(1) Within Zones A1-A30 and AE, on streams without a regulatory
floodway, no new construction, substantial improvements or other
development (including fill) shall be permitted unless:
(a) The applicant demonstrates that the cumulative effect of the
proposed development, when combined with all other existing
and anticipated development, will not increase the water
surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any
location; or
(b) The Village of Palmyra agrees to apply to the Federal
Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) for a conditional
FIRM revision, FEMA approval is received and the applicant
provides all necessary data, analyses and mapping and
reimburses the Village of Palmyra for all fees and other costs in
relation to the application. The applicant must also provide all
data, analyses and mapping and reimburse the Village of
Palmyra for all costs related to the final map revision.
(2) On streams with a regulatory floodway, as shown on the Flood
Boundary and Floodway Map or the Flood Insurance Rate Map
adopted in § 108-6, no new construction, substantial improvements
or other development (including fill) shall be permitted unless:
(a) A technical evaluation by a licensed professional engineer
shows that such an encroachment shall not result in any
increase in flood levels during occurrence of the base flood; or
(b) The Village of Palmyra agrees to apply to the Federal
Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) for a conditional
FIRM and floodway revision, FEMA approval is received and
the applicant provides all necessary data, analyses and
mapping and reimburses the Village of Palmyra for all fees and
other costs in relation to the application. The applicant must
also provide all data, analyses and mapping and reimburse the
Village of Palmyra for all costs related to the final map
revisions.
§ 108-14 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION § 108-15
108:73
A. Anchoring. New structures and substantial improvement to structures
in areas of special flood hazard shall be anchored to prevent flotation,
collapse, or lateral movement during the base flood. This requirement is
in addition to applicable state and local anchoring requirements for
resisting wind forces.
B. Construction materials and methods.
(1) New construction and substantial improvements to structures shall
be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to
flood damage.
(2) New construction and substantial improvements to structures shall
be constructed using methods and practices that minimize flood
damage.
(3) Areas below lowest floor.
(a) For enclosed areas below the lowest floor of a structure within
Zones A1-A30, AE or AH, and also Zone A if base flood
elevation data are available, new and substantially improved
structures shall have fully enclosed areas below the lowest
floor that are usable solely for parking of vehicles, building
access or storage in an area other than a basement and which
are subject to flooding, designed to automatically equalize
hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the
entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this
requirement must either be certified by a licensed professional
engineer or architect or meet or exceed the following minimum
criteria:
[1] A minimum of two openings having a total net area of not
less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed
area subject to flooding; and
[2] The bottom of all such openings no higher than one foot
above the lowest adjacent finished grade.
(b) Openings may be equipped with louvers, valves, screens or
other coverings or devices provided they permit the automatic
entry and exit of floodwaters. Enclosed areas subgrade on all
sides are considered basements and are not permitted.
C. Utilities.
(1) Machinery and equipment servicing a building must either be
elevated to or above the base flood level or designed to prevent
water from entering or accumulating within the components during
a flood. This includes heating, ventilating, and air-conditioning
equipment, hot-water heaters, appliances, elevator lift machinery,
and electrical junction and circuit breaker boxes. When located
§ 108-15 PALMYRA CODE § 108-15
108:74
§ 108-16. Standards for residential structures.
§ 108-17. Standards for nonresidential structures.
The following standards apply to new and substantially improved
commercial, industrial and other nonresidential structures, in addition to
the requirements in § 108-14A, Subdivision proposals, and § 108-14B,
Encroachments, and § 108-15, Standards for all structures:
below the base flood elevation, a professional engineer’s or
architect’s certification of the design is required.
(2) New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system.
(3) New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed
to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters. Sanitary sewer
and storm drainage systems for buildings that have openings below
the base flood elevation shall be provided with automatic backflow
valves or other automatic backflow devices that are installed in
each discharge line passing through a building’s exterior wall.
(4) On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid
impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding.
A. Elevation. The following standards, in addition to the standards in
§ 108-14A, Subdivision proposals, and § 108-14B, Encroachments, and
§ 108-15, Standards for all structures, apply to structures located in
areas of special flood hazard as indicated:
(1) Within Zones A1-A30, AE and AH and also Zone A if base flood
elevation data are available, new construction and substantial
improvements shall have the lowest floor (including basement)
elevated to or above the base flood level.
(2) Within Zone A, when no base flood elevation data are available,
new and substantially improved structures shall have the lowest
floor (including basement) elevated at least three feet above the
highest adjacent grade.
(3) Within Zone AO, new and substantially improved structures shall
have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated above the
highest adjacent grade at least as high as the depth number
specified in feet on the community’s Flood Insurance Rate Map
enumerated in § 108-6 (at least two feet if no depth number is
specified).
(4) Within Zones AH and AO, adequate drainage paths are required to
guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures on
slopes.
§ 108-15 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION § 108-17
108:75
§ 108-18. Manufactured homes and recreational vehicles.
The following standards in addition to the standards in § 108-14, General
construction standards, and § 108-15, Standards for all structures, apply in
areas of special flood hazard to manufactured homes and to recreational
vehicles which are located in areas of special flood hazard:
A. Within Zones A1-A30, AE and AH, and also Zone A if base flood
elevation data are available, new construction and substantial
improvements of any nonresidential structure, together with attendant
utility and sanitary facilities, shall either:
(1) Have the lowest floor, including basement or cellar, elevated to or
above the base flood elevation; or
(2) Be floodproofed so that the structure is watertight below the base
flood level with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of
water. All structural components located below the base flood level
must be capable of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads
and the effects of buoyancy.
B. Within Zone AO, new construction and substantial improvements of
nonresidential structures shall:
(1) Have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated above the
highest adjacent grade at least as high as the depth number
specified in feet on the community’s FIRM (at least two feet if no
depth number is specified); or
(2) Together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, be
completely floodproofed to that level to meet the floodproofing
standard specified in Subsection A(2).
C. If the structure is to be floodproofed, a licensed professional engineer
or architect shall develop and/or review structural design,
specifications, and plans for construction. A floodproofing certificate or
other certification shall be provided to the local administrator that
certifies the design and methods of construction are in accordance with
accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions of Subsection
A(2), including the specific elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to
which the structure is to be floodproofed.
D. Within Zones AH and AO, adequate drainage paths are required to
guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures on
slopes.
E. Within Zone A, when no base flood elevation data are available, the
lowest floor (including basement) shall be elevated at least three feet
above the highest adjacent grade.
A. Recreational vehicles.
§ 108-17 PALMYRA CODE § 108-18
108:76
(1) Recreational vehicles placed on sites within Zones A1-A30, AE, AH,
V1-V30, V and VE shall either:
(a) Be on site fewer than 180 consecutive days;
(b) Be fully licensed and ready for highway use; or
(c) Meet the requirements for manufactured homes in Subsections
B, D and E.
(2) A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels
or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick-disconnecttype
utilities and security devices and has no permanently attached
additions.
B. A manufactured home that is placed or substantially improved in Zones
A1-A30, AE, AH, V1-V30 or VE that is on a site either outside of an
existing manufactured home park or subdivision; in a new
manufactured home park or subdivision as herein defined; in an
expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision as
herein defined; or in an existing manufactured home park or
subdivision as herein defined on which a manufactured home has
incurred substantial damage as the result of a flood, shall, within Zones
A1-A30, AE and AH, be elevated on a permanent foundation such that
the lowest floor is elevated to or above the base flood elevation and is
securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to
resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement; or, within Zones V1-V30
and VE, be elevated on a pile foundation such that the bottom of the
lowest structural member of the lowest floor (excluding pilings and
columns) is elevated to or above the base flood elevation and securely
anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist
flotation, collapse and lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may
include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to
ground anchors.
C. A manufactured home to be placed or substantially improved in Zone
A1-A30, AE, AH, V1-V30, or VE in an existing manufactured home park
or subdivision that is not to be placed on a site on which a manufactured
home has incurred substantial damage shall be:
(1) Elevated in a manner such as required in Subsection B; or
(2) Elevated such that the manufactured home chassis is supported by
reinforced piers or other foundation elements of at least equivalent
strength that are no less than 36 inches in height above grade and
are securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation
system to resist flotation, collapse or lateral movement.
D. Within Zones A or V, when no base flood elevation data are available,
new and substantially improved manufactured homes shall have the
floor elevated at least three feet above the highest adjacent grade.
§ 108-18 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION § 108-18
108:77
§ 108-19. Appeals Board.
E. Within Zone AO, the floor shall be elevated above the highest adjacent
grade at least as high as the depth number specified on the Flood
Insurance Rate Map enumerated in § 108-6 (at least two feet if no depth
number is specified).
A. The Zoning Board of Appeals as established by the Village of Palmyra
shall hear and decide appeals and requests for variances from the
requirements of this chapter.
B. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall hear and decide appeals when it is
alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision, or determination
made by the local administrator in the enforcement or administration of
this chapter.
C. Those aggrieved by the decision of the Zoning Board of Appeals may
appeal such decision to the Supreme Court pursuant to Article 78 of the
Civil Practice Law and Rules.
D. In passing upon such applications, the Zoning Board of Appeals, shall
consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, standards
specified in other sections of this chapter and:
(1) The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the
injury of others;
(2) The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;
(3) The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood
damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner;
(4) The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to
the community;
(5) The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where
applicable;
(6) The availability of alternative locations for the proposed use which
are not subject to flooding or erosion damage;
(7) The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated
development;
(8) The relationship of the proposed use to the Comprehensive Plan
and floodplain management program of that area;
(9) The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary
and emergency vehicles;
(10) The costs to local governments and the dangers associated with
conducting search and rescue operations during periods of
flooding;
§ 108-18 PALMYRA CODE § 108-19
108:78
§ 108-20. Conditions for variances.
(11) The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment
transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if
applicable, expected at the site; and
(12) The costs of providing governmental services during and after
flood conditions, including search and rescue operations,
maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as
sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems and streets and bridges.
E. Upon consideration of the factors of Subsection D and the purposes of
this chapter, the Zoning Board of Appeals may attach such conditions to
the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes
of this chapter.
F. The local administrator shall maintain the records of all appeal actions
including technical information and report any variances to the Federal
Emergency Management Agency upon request.
A. Generally, variances may be issued for new construction and
substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of 1/2 acre or less in
size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures
constructed below the base flood level, providing § 108-19D(1) through
(12) have been fully considered. As the lot size increases beyond the 1/2
acre, the technical justification required for issuing the variance
increases.
B. Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic
structures upon determination that:
(1) The proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the
structure’s continued designation as a historic structure.
(2) The variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic
character and design of the structure.
C. Variances may be issued by a community for new construction and
substantial improvements and for other development necessary for the
conduct of a functionally dependent use provided that:
(1) The criteria of Subsections A, D, E, and F of this section are met;
(2) The structure or other development is protected by methods that
minimize flood damages during the base flood and create no
additional threat to public safety.
D. Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any
increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result.
E. Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is
the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief.
§ 108-19 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION § 108-20
108:79
Chapter 113
GAMES OF CHANCE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Bingo — See Ch. 72.
§ 113-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the “Games of Chance Law.”
§ 113-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AUTHORIZED ORGANIZATION — An authorized organization as defined in
Subdivision 4 of § 186 of the General Municipal Law.
CHIEF LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — The Police Chief of the Palmyra
Police Department or, in his absence or inability to act, the officer-in-charge
of the Department.
GAMES Of CHANCE — A “game of chance” as defined in Subdivision 3 of
§ 186 of the General Municipal Law.
VILLAGE — Village of Palmyra.
§ 113-3. Games of chance authorized; license required.
Authorized organizations may, upon the obtainment of a license from the
Clerk of the Village of Palmyra, conduct games of chance within the Village
F. Variances shall only be issued upon receiving written justification of:
(1) A showing of good and sufficient cause;
(2) A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in
exceptional hardship to the applicant; and
(3) A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in
increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety,
extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or
victimization of the public or conflict with existing local laws or
ordinances.
G. Any applicant to whom a variance is granted for a building with the
lowest floor below the base flood elevation shall be given written notice
over the signature of a community official that the cost of flood
insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from
lowest floor elevation.
§ 108-20 PALMYRA CODE § 113-3
113:80
of Palmyra as provided in Article 9-A of the General Municipal Law and as
provided further in this chapter. Such games of chance shall be conducted
in accordance with the general state law and with the rules and regulations
of the New York State Racing and Wagering Board and this chapter.
§ 113-4. Restrictions.
In addition to the other restrictions as may be provided in general state law
and in the rules and regulations of the New York State Racing and Wagering
Board, the Board of Trustees of the Village may, from time to time, adopt by
resolution other restrictions governing the conduct of games of chance in
the Village.
§ 113-5. Sunday games.
Games of chance on the first day of the week, commonly known as “Sunday,”
may be conducted pursuant to this chapter and appropriate statutes and
regulations.
§ 113-6. Enforcement.
The chief law enforcement officer shall exercise control over and
supervision of all games of chance conducted under an appropriately issued
license. Such officer shall have all those powers and duties set forth in
Article 9-A of the General Municipal Law.
§ 113-7. When effective.
This chapter shall take effect immediately upon filing with the Secretary of
State’s office, following its approval at referendum by a majority of qualified
voters voting thereon at a general election held pursuant to the provisions
of § 187 of the General Municipal Law.22
Chapter 116
HISTORIC PRESERVATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction and fire
prevention — See Ch. 76.
Zoning — See Ch. 200.
§ 116-1. Purpose.
It is hereby declared as a matter of public policy that the protection,
enhancement and perpetuation of landmarks and historic districts are
necessary to promote the economic, cultural, educational, and general
22.Editor's Note: This local law was approved by voters at a special election held 12-6-1988.
§ 113-3 GAMES OF CHANCE § 116-1
113:81
welfare of the public. Inasmuch as the identity of a people is founded
on its past and inasmuch as the Village of Palmyra has many significant
historic, architectural and cultural resources which constitute its heritage,
this chapter is intended to:
§ 116-2. Historic Preservation Commission.
There is hereby created a commission to be known as the Village of Palmyra
Historic Preservation Commission.
A. Protect and enhance the landmarks and historic districts, which
represent distinctive elements of the Village of Palmyra's historic,
architectural, and cultural heritage;
B. Foster civic pride in the accomplishments of the past;
C. Protect and enhance the Village of Palmyra's attractiveness to visitors
and the support and stimulus to the economy thereby provided; and
D. Insure the harmonious, orderly, and efficient growth and development
of the Village.
A. The Commission shall consist of five members and up to two alternates
to be appointed by the Palmyra Village Mayor. Members shall be
residents of the Village of Palmyra who shall have a known interest in
historic preservation and architectural development within the Village.
B. Commission members shall serve for a term of four years, with the
exception of the initial term of one of the five members, which shall be
one year; two, which shall be two years; and two, which shall be three
years.
C. The Chairman and Vice Chairman of the Commission shall be elected by
and from among the members of the Commission.
D. The powers of the Commission shall include:
(1) Employment of staff and professional consultants as necessary to
carry out the duties of the Commission;
(2) Promulgation of rules and regulations as necessary to carry out the
duties of the Commission;
(3) Adoption of criteria for the identification of significant historic,
architectural, and cultural landmarks and for the delineation of
historic districts;
(4) Conducting of surveys of significant historic, architectural, and
cultural landmarks and historic districts within the Village;
(5) Designation of identified structures or resources as landmarks and
historic districts;
§ 116-1 PALMYRA CODE § 116-2
113:82
§ 116-3. Designation of landmarks or historic districts.
(6) Acceptance on behalf of the Village government of the donation of
facade easements and development rights and the making of
recommendations to the Village government concerning the
acquisition of facade easements or other interests in real property
as necessary to carry out the purposes of this chapter;
(7) Increasing public awareness of the value of historic, cultural and
architectural preservation by developing and participating in
public education programs;
(8) Making recommendations to Village government concerning the
utilization of state, federal or private funds to promote the
preservation of landmarks and historic districts within the Village;
(9) Recommending acquisition of a landmark structure by the Village
government where its preservation is essential to the purposes of
this chapter and where private preservation is not feasible; and
(10) Approval or disapproval of applications for certificates of
appropriateness pursuant to this chapter.
E. The Commission shall meet at least quarterly, but meetings may be held
at any time on the written request of any two of the Commission
members or on the call of the Chairman or the Mayor.
F. A quorum for the transaction of business shall consist of three of the
Commission's members, but not less than a majority of the fullauthorized
membership may grant or deny a certificate of
appropriateness.
G. The Mayor shall have the power to remove any member of the
Commission who fails to attend 75% of the meetings in a calendar year
or who fails to attend annual New-York-State-mandated training
sessions equivalent to those required of members of the Village
Planning Board and the Village Zoning Board of Appeals.
A. The Commission may designate an individual property as a landmark if
it:
(1) Possesses special character or historic or aesthetic interest or
value as part of the cultural, political, economic or social history of
the locality, region, state or nation; or
(2) Is identified with historic personages; or
(3) Embodies the distinguishing characteristics of an architectural
style; or
(4) Is the work of a designer whose work has significantly influenced
an age; or
§ 116-2 GAMES OF CHANCE § 116-3
113:83
§ 116-4. Certificate of appropriateness for alteration, demolition or
new construction affecting landmarks in historic districts.
No person shall carry out any exterior alteration, restoration,
reconstruction, demolition, new construction, or moving of a landmark
(5) Because of unique location or singular physical characteristic,
represents an established and familiar visual feature of the
neighborhood.
B. Designation as historic district.
(1) The Commission may designate a group of properties as an historic
district if it:
(a) Contains properties which meet one or more of the criteria for
designation of a landmark; and
(b) By reason of possessing such qualities, it constitutes a distinct
section of the Village of Palmyra.
(2) The boundaries of each historic district designated henceforth shall
be specified in detail and shall be filed, in writing, in the Village
Clerk's office for public inspection.
C. The fact that a property, or group of properties, has been accepted and
listed in the State and National Registers of Historic Places, or has been
determined eligible for such a listing, shall conclusively satisfy the
criteria in Subsections A and B above.
D. Notice of a proposed designation shall be sent by certified mail, return
receipt requested, to the owner of the property proposed for
designation, describing the property and announcing a public hearing
by the Commission to consider the designation. Where the proposed
designation involves so many owners that individual notice is infeasible,
notice may instead be published at least once in a newspaper of general
circulation at least 10 days prior to the date of the public hearing. Once
the Commission has issued notice of a proposed designation, no
building permits shall be issued by the Building Inspector until the
Commission has made its decision.
E. The Commission shall hold a public hearing prior to designation of any
landmark or historic district. The Commission, owners and any
interested parties may present testimony or documentary evidence at
the hearing which will become part of a record regarding the historic,
architectural, or cultural importance of the proposed landmark or
historic district. The record may also contain staff reports, public
comments, or other evidence offered outside of the hearing.
F. The Commission shall forward notice of each property designated as a
landmark and the boundaries of each designated historic district to be
recorded in the office of the Wayne County Clerk.
§ 116-3 PALMYRA CODE § 116-4
113:84
or property within an historic district, nor shall any person make any
material change in the appearance of such property, its light fixtures,
signs, sidewalks, fences, steps, paving or other exterior elements which
affect the appearance and cohesiveness of the landmark or historic district,
without first obtaining a certificate of appropriateness from the Historic
Preservation Commission.
§ 116-5. Criteria for approval of a certificate of appropriateness.
§ 116-6. Application procedure for certificate of appropriateness.
A. In passing upon an application for a certificate of appropriateness, the
Historic Preservation Commission shall not consider changes to interior
spaces, unless they are open to the public. The Commission's decision
shall be based on the following principles:
(1) Properties which contribute to the character of the historic district
shall be retained, with their historic features altered as little as
possible;
(2) Any alteration of existing properties shall be compatible with their
historic character, as well as with the surrounding district; and
(3) New construction shall be compatible with the district in which it is
located.
B. In applying the principle of compatibility, the Commission shall
consider the following factors:
(1) The general design, character and appropriateness to the property
of the proposed alteration or new construction;
(2) The scale of proposed alteration or new construction in relation to
the property itself, surrounding properties, and the neighborhood;
(3) Texture, materials, and color and their relation to similar features
of other properties in the neighborhood;
(4) Visual compatibility with surrounding properties, including
proportion of the property's front facade, proportion and
arrangement of windows and other openings within the facade,
roof shape, and the rhythm of spacing of properties on streets,
including setback; and
(5) The importance of historic, architectural or other features to the
significance of the property.
A. Prior to the commencement of any work requiring a certificate of
appropriateness, the owner shall file an application for such a
certificate with the Historic Preservation Commission. The application
shall contain:
(1) Name, address and telephone number of applicant;
§ 116-4 GAMES OF CHANCE § 116-6
113:85
§ 116-7. Hardship criteria for demolition.
An applicant whose certificate of appropriateness for a proposed demolition
has been denied may apply to the Commission for relief on the ground of
(2) Location and photographs of property;
(3) Elevation drawings of proposed changes;
(4) Perspective drawings, including relationship to adjacent
properties;
(5) Samples of color or materials to be used;
(6) Where the proposal includes signs or lettering, a scale drawing
showing the type of lettering to be used, all dimensions and colors,
a description of materials to be used, method of illumination, and a
plan showing the sign's location on the property; and
(7) Any other information which the Commission may deem necessary
in order to visualize the proposed work.
B. No building permit shall be issued for such proposed work until a
certificate of appropriateness has first been issued by the Historic
Preservation Commission. The certificate of appropriateness required
by this chapter shall be in addition to and not in lieu of any building
permit that may be required by any other ordinance of the Village of
Palmyra. Before acting on or forwarding to the appropriate board any
application for a variance, special use permit, site plan, building permit,
demolition permit, sign permit or subdivision, the Code Enforcement
Officer shall first consult a current list of all properties designated as
individual landmarks or as contained within historic districts to
determine the requesting property's status.
C. The Commission shall hold a public hearing on the application, at which
an opportunity will be provided for proponents and opponents of the
application to present their views. The Commission shall approve, deny
or approve the permit with modifications within 62 business days
following the public hearing.
D. All decisions of the Commission shall be in writing. A copy shall be sent
to the applicant by certified mail, return receipt requested, and a copy
filed with the Village Clerk's office for public inspection. The
Commission's decision shall state the reasons for denying or modifying
any application. The original documents will be housed in the Town of
Palmyra Code Enforcement Office. Official copies will also be held in the
Palmyra Village Office.
E. Certificates of appropriateness shall be valid for six months, after which
the owner must reapply if he or she still wishes to start work on the
property. The work must be completed in 12 months.
§ 116-6 PALMYRA CODE § 116-7
113:86
hardship. In order to prove the existence of hardship, the applicant shall
establish that:
§ 116-8. Hardship criteria for alteration.
An applicant whose certificate of appropriateness for a proposed alteration
has been denied may apply for relief on the ground of hardship. In order
to prove the existence of hardship, the applicant shall establish that the
property is incapable of earning a reasonable return, regardless of whether
that return represents the most profitable return possible.
§ 116-9. Application procedure for hardship.
A. The applicant cannot afford to maintain or rehabilitate the property,
i.e.:
(1) In the case of a single-family or two-family owner-occupied house,
an inability to preserve the structure without financial hardship; or
(2) In the case of a rental or commercial property, an inability to earn a
reasonable return on property if the structure is preserved; or
(3) In the case of a property owned and used by a nonprofit
organization, an inability to preserve the structure without
financial hardship interfering with the applicant's charitable
purpose;
B. The property cannot be renovated or adapted by the owner, or by a
purchaser, for any use that would result in a reasonable return;
C. The owner has sought financial assistance under established programs
for historic preservation and has failed to obtain sufficient assistance to
enable him or her economically to preserve the structure;
D. Reasonable efforts to find a purchaser interested in acquiring the
property and preserving it have failed;
E. Reasonable efforts to consider relocation of the landmark have been
undertaken and determined to be not feasible economically; and
F. The hardship is the result of the application of this chapter and is not
the result of any act or omission by the applicant.
A. After receiving written notification from the Commission of the denial of
a certificate of appropriateness, an applicant may commence the
hardship process. No building permit or demolition permit shall be
issued unless the Commission makes a finding that a hardship exists.
B. The Commission shall hold a public hearing on the hardship application
at which an opportunity will be provided for proponents and opponents
of the application to present their views.
§ 116-7 GAMES OF CHANCE § 116-9
113:87
§ 116-10. Enforcement.
All work performed pursuant to a certificate of appropriateness issued
under this chapter shall conform to any requirements included therein.
It shall be the duty of the Building Code Enforcement Officer to inspect
periodically any such work to assure compliance. In the event work is
found that is not being performed in accordance with the certificate of
appropriateness, or upon notification of such fact by the Historic
Preservation Commission, the Building Code Enforcement Officer shall
issue a stop-work order, and all work shall immediately cease. No further
work shall be undertaken on the project as long as a stop-work order is in
effect.
§ 116-11. Maintenance and repair required.
C. The applicant shall consult in good faith with the Commission, local
preservation groups and interested parties in a diligent effort to seek an
alternative that will result in preservation of the property.
D. All decisions of the Commission shall be in writing. A copy shall be sent
to the applicant by certified mail, return receipt requested, and a copy
filed with the Village Clerk's office for public inspection. The
Commission's decision shall state the reasons for granting or denying
the hardship application. If the application is granted, the Commission
shall approve only such work as is necessary to alleviate the hardship.
A. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prevent the ordinary
maintenance and repair of any exterior architectural feature of a
landmark or property within an historic district which does not involve
a change in design, material, color or outward appearance.
B. No owner or person with an interest in real property designated as a
landmark or included within an historic district shall permit the
property to fall into a serious state of disrepair so as to result in the
deterioration of any exterior architectural feature which would, in the
judgment of the Historic Preservation Commission, produce a
detrimental effect upon the character of the historic district as a whole
or the life and character of the property itself.
C. Examples of such deterioration include:
(1) Deterioration of exterior walls or other vertical support;
(2) Deterioration of roofs or other horizontal members;
(3) Deterioration of exterior chimneys;
(4) Deterioration or crumbling of exterior stucco or mortar;
(5) Ineffective waterproofing of exterior walls, roofs or foundations,
including broken windows or doors;
§ 116-9 PALMYRA CODE § 116-11
113:88
§ 116-12. Violations; penalties for offenses.
§ 116-13. Appeals.
Any person aggrieved by a decision of the Historic Preservation Commission
relating to hardship or a certificate of appropriateness may, within 15 days
of the decision, file a written application with the Palmyra Village Board
for review of the decision. Reviews shall be conducted based on the same
record that was before the Commission and using the same criteria.
Chapter 121
MOBILE HOMES AND MOBILE HOME COURTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction and fire
prevention — See Ch. 76.
Sewer use — See Ch. 147.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 167.
Zoning — See Ch. 200.
(6) Deterioration of any feature so as to create a hazardous condition
which could lead to the claim that demolition is necessary for the
public safety.
A. Failure to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter shall be
deemed a violation, and the violator shall be liable to a fine as per a
schedule to be determined by resolution by the Palmyra Village Board
for each day the violation continues.
B. Any person who demolishes, alters, constructs, or permits a designated
property to fall into a serious state of disrepair in violation of this
chapter shall be required to restore the property and its site to its
appearance prior to the violation. Any action to enforce this subsection
shall be brought by the Village Attorney. This civil remedy shall be in
addition to and not in lieu of any criminal prosecution and penalty.
§ 116-11 MOBILE HOMES AND MOBILE HOME § 116-13
121:89

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 121-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as "Housing Standards Applicable to Mobile
Homes and Mobile Home Courts."
§ 121-2. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to provide basic and uniform standards,
in terms of performance objectives implemented by specific requirements,
governing the construction, occupancy and maintenance of mobile homes
and mobile home courts, and establishing reasonable safeguards for the
safety, health and welfare of the occupants and users thereof.
§ 121-3. Effective date.
This chapter shall take effect on the fifth day of December 1967.
§ 121-4. Scope.
This chapter shall apply to mobile homes used, or intended to be used, for
year-round dwelling accommodations in fixed locations and to mobile home
courts.
§ 121-5. Application.
§ 121-6. Conformance with State Building Code and other laws.
A. The provisions of this chapter shall supersede local laws, ordinances,
codes or regulations to the extent that such laws, ordinances, codes or
regulations are inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter,
provided that nothing herein contained shall be construed to prevent
the adoption and enforcement of a law, ordinance or regulation which is
more restrictive or establishes a higher standard than those provided in
this chapter, and such more restrictive requirement or higher standard
shall govern during the period in which it is in effect.
B. In a case where a provision of this chapter is found to be in conflict with
a provision of a zoning, building, electrical, plumbing, fire, safety,
health, water supply or sewage disposal law or ordinance, or regulation
adopted pursuant thereto, or other local law, ordinance, code or
regulation, the provision or requirement which is the more restrictive
or which establishes the higher standard shall prevail.
A. Installations, alterations and repairs to mobile homes and mobile home
courts, and materials, assemblies and equipment utilized in connection
therewith, shall be reasonably safe to persons and property and shall
comply with applicable statutes of the State of New York and orders,
rules and regulations issued by authority thereof.
§ 121-1 MOBILE HOMES AND MOBILE HOME § 121-6
121:91
§ 121-7. Severability.
If a term, part, provision, section, subdivision or paragraph of this chapter
shall be held unconstitutional, invalid or ineffective, in whole or in part,
such determination shall not be deemed to invalidate the remaining terms,
parts, provisions, sections, subdivisions and paragraphs.
§ 121-8. Permit.
No person shall maintain or operate a mobile home court which falls within
the purview of Chapter VII of the New York State Sanitary Code without
first having obtained a permit from the State, County or City Health
Department office having jurisdiction.
§ 121-9. Definitions.
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation of this chapter:
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE — A structure, the use of which is incidental to
that of the mobile home, and which is attached thereto or located on the
same mobile home lot. "Accessory structures" include but are not limited
to portable, demountable or permanent enclosures, shade structures and
carports.
APPROVED — Approved by the administration officer under the regulations
of this chapter or approved by an authority designated by law or this
chapter.
COMMUNITY AREA — An area or space within a mobile home court,
including fences, walls and other minor constructions, which is designed for
joint use of occupants or restricted to nonresidential use.
COMMUNITY STRUCTURE — A structure within a mobile home court
providing laundry, toilet, recreation, parking or other common facilities,
including the management office and storage buildings.
GENERALLY ACCEPTED STANDARD — A specification, code, rule, guide
or procedure in the field of construction of mobile homes or mobile home
courts, or related thereto, recognized and accepted as authoritative.
HABITABLE SPACE — Space used for living, sleeping, eating or cooking
purposes, excluding kitchenettes, bathrooms, toilet rooms, storage spaces
and enclosures for equipment installations.
B. Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, conformity of
installations, alterations and repairs of mobile home court buildings
and their accessory structures, and of materials, assemblies and
equipment utilized in connection with such buildings and structures,
with the applicable requirements of the New York State Building
Construction Code shall be prima facie evidence that such work,
material, assembly or equipment is reasonably safe to persons and
property.
§ 121-6 PALMYRA CODE § 121-9
121:92
MECHANICAL SYSTEMS AND EQUIPMENT — Mobile home electrical,
plumbing, heating, ventilating, air conditioning systems and equipment
used for living purposes, including cooking and refrigeration equipment.
MOBILE HOME — A movable living unit equipped with a chassis and
provided with the following mechanical systems and equipment: plumbing,
heating, electrical, cooking and refrigeration. See "trailer."
MOBILE HOME COURT — A parcel of land which has been planned and
improved for the placement of two or more mobile homes.
MOBILE HOME LOT — A designated site within a mobile home court for
the exclusive use of the occupants of a single mobile home.
MOBILE HOME STAND — That part of an individual mobile home lot which
has been reserved for the placement of the mobile home.
PATIO — A paved outdoor living space designed to supplement the mobile
home living area.
STORAGE LOCKER — An enclosed space designed to provide auxiliary
general storage space for an individual mobile home.
TRAILER, TRAVEL OR VACATION — A movable living unit equipped with a
chassis but lacking any of the following mechanical systems and equipment;
plumbing, heating, electrical, cooking and refrigeration. See "mobile home."
§ 121-9 MOBILE HOMES AND MOBILE HOME § 121-9
121:93

ARTICLE II
Mobile Homes
§ 121-10. General requirements.
§ 121-11. Design and construction.
Mobile homes shall be structurally sound, effectively insulated and capable
of sustaining dynamic loading.
A. Mobile home design and construction shall conform to generally
accepted standards of the mobile home industry.
B. Materials, assemblies and equipment shall conform to generally
accepted standards with respect to strength, durability, corrosion and
fire resistance, and other qualities recognized under such standards.
C. Habitable and nonhabitable space shall be arranged, located, lighted
and ventilated so as to be appropriate for the intended use.
D. Mechanical systems and equipment shall be designed, installed and
located so that under normal conditions of use such systems and
equipment shall be capable of functioning safely and efficiently without
being forced to operate beyond the designed capacity.
E. Equipment requiring operation, inspection or maintenance shall be
located so that easy access to it is provided.
F. Plumbing, heating and electrical systems shall be properly connected to
approved sources of supply when a mobile home is in a fixed location
and occupied for living purposes.
G. Mobile home units, including mechanical systems and equipment, shall
be maintained and operated so as to be free of conditions conducive to
personal injury or detrimental to health or welfare.
A. Body and body framing.
(1) Body frames shall be designed and constructed as complete units.
Wall and floor surfaces shall be firmly attached to body framing
members. Doors and windows shall be securely framed in place.
Framing and exterior skin shall be surface treated or painted to
prevent deterioration.
(2) Roofs shall be pitched for proper drainage and shall be
weathertight. Roof decks shall be of metal or noncombustible
materials.
(3) Wood body framing shall be of seasoned lumber and shall provide
adequate support and rigidity. Members shall be joined so as to
ensure permanent attachment to each other.
§ 121-10 MOBILE HOMES AND MOBILE HOME § 121-11
121:95
§ 121-12. Space requirements.
(4) Metal body framing shall be of structural formed sections riveted,
bolted or welded together. Where different metals are joined,
precaution shall be taken to prevent electrolytic action.
(5) Insulation of floors, roof and exterior walls shall consist of
noncombustible materials.
(6) Ventilation shall be provided to minimize deterioration of structural
members from condensation or other causes.
B. Chassis.
(1) The chassis shall extend substantially the length of the body and
shall be capable of supporting the live and dead loads to which
subjected.
(2) The tongue or drawbar shall be secured to the chassis and shall be
capable of supporting the weight of the forward end of the mobile
home. If designed to support gas cylinders, the tongue shall be of
sufficient strength and shall permit secure attachment.
(3) The hitch shall be securely attached to the tongue so as to become
an integral part of the tongue.
(4) Axles, spring assemblies and wheels shall be capable of supporting
the calculated loads.
C. Placement. Placement of mobile homes on mobile home stands by jacks
or supports shall be such as to ensure the retention of the mobile home
in a fixed position.
A. Maximum occupancy. The maximum number of occupants of a mobile
home shall be limited to the number determined on the basis of the
square feet of floor area of habitable space, exclusive of habitable space
used for cooking purposes, in accordance with the following: 150
square feet for one or two occupants; 250 square feet for three
occupants; and 80 square feet additional for each occupant thereafter.
B. Height of habitable space. Habitable space shall have a minimum
ceiling height of seven feet over 50% of the floor area, and the floor
area where the ceiling height is less than five feet shall not be
considered in computing gross floor area.
C. Bathrooms and toilet rooms. Bathrooms and toilet rooms shall have
provisions for privacy and shall be provided with floors of moistureresistant
material.
D. Prohibited uses. Bathrooms, toilet rooms, kitchens and kitchenettes
shall not be used for sleeping rooms.
§ 121-11 PALMYRA CODE § 121-12
121:96
§ 121-13. Light and ventilation.
§ 121-14. Mechanical systems and equipment.
E. Exits. A mobile home shall have a safe and unobstructed primary exit
and an emergency exit located remote from the primary exit.
A. Habitable space. A mobile home shall be provided with natural light and
ventilation adequate for the intended use of each habitable space in
accordance with the following:
(1) Window area shall equal at least 10% of the floor area of each
habitable space.
(2) Openable area of windows and other openings used for natural
ventilation of each habitable space shall equal at least 45% of the
required window area, or mechanical ventilation shall be provided
as set forth in § 12-56B(16).
B. Nonhabitable space. A mobile home shall be provided with light and
ventilation adequate for the intended use of nonhabitable space in
accordance with the following:
(1) Kitchenettes, bathrooms and toilet rooms shall be provided with
light of sufficient intensity and so distributed as to permit the
maintenance of sanitary conditions and the safe use of the space,
appliances, equipment and fixtures.
(2) Kitchenettes, bathrooms and toilet rooms shall be provided with
natural ventilation consisting of openable areas of not less than 1 1/
2 square feet for bathrooms and toilet rooms, and not less than
three square feet for kitchenettes, or mechanical ventilation shall
be provided as set forth in § 12-56B(16).
A. Plumbing.
(1) A mobile home shall contain a kitchen sink, flush-type water closet,
bathtub or shower and lavatory.
(2) Hot and cold water supply shall be provided at the kitchen sink,
bathtub or shower and lavatory. Cold water shall be supplied to the
water closet.
(3) The plumbing system shall be designed and arranged so as to
facilitate connecting to approved exterior water supply and sewage
disposal systems, provide adequate water supply to all plumbing
fixtures and dispose of all liquid wastes therefrom.
B. Heating, ventilating and air conditioning.
(1) A mobile home shall contain space-heating equipment and waterheating
equipment.
§ 121-12 MOBILE HOMES AND MOBILE HOME § 121-14
121:97
(2) Areas allocated for installation of space-heating and water-heating
equipment shall provide adequate clearance so that the surface of
adjacent combustible materials will not exceed a safe temperature.
Curtains and draperies shall not be used in such areas.
(3) Space- and water-heating units shall be of an approved type for
installation in a mobile home. Fuel-burning water heaters and
furnaces, other than those having a sealed combustion space, shall
not be located in sleeping rooms, bathrooms and toilet rooms.
(4) Space-heating units shall have sufficient capacity to maintain a
minimum inside temperature of 70° F., based on the average of the
recorded annual minimum outside temperatures for the locality
and shall be provided with manual or automatic temperature
control devices.
(5) Water-heating units shall have sufficient capacity to deliver at each
hot water outlet an ample supply of water at a minimum
temperature range of 130° to 140° F., and such units shall be
provided with safety devices arranged to relieve hazardous
pressures and excessive temperatures.
(6) Electrical space- and water-heating equipment shall be of an
approved type and shall have adequate circuit protection devices.
(7) Gas- and liquid-fuel-burning equipment shall be specifically
designed for the type of fuel used. Flues and vents shall be suitable
for the type of fuel used and shall be installed so that the surface of
adjacent combustible material will not exceed a safe temperature.
(8) Automatically operated heat-producing equipment using utility gas
shall have a valve that will automatically shut off the flow of gas to
the main burner when the pilot flame is extinguished.
(9) Automatically operated heat-producing equipment using a liquefied
petroleum gas shall have a valve that will automatically shut off the
flow of gas to the pilot light and main burner when the pilot flame is
extinguished.
(10) Fuel-burning space- and water-heating units shall be vented. Other
fuel-burning equipment shall be vented where the discharge of
products of combustion into the space where the equipment is
installed would be unsafe.
(11) Liquid-fuel-burning equipment shall be vented and shall be
provided with means to prevent spilling of fuel.
(12) Fuel storage containers and gas cylinders shall be mounted outside
the mobile home or in a space that is vented to the outside and is
vaportight to the inside.
(13)Warm air supply ducts and fittings shall be of noncombustible
material.
§ 121-14 PALMYRA CODE § 121-14
121:98
(14) Return air ducts shall be of noncombustible material where
exposed to temperatures which are unsafe for combustible
materials.
(15) Return air grilles in doors and partitions shall be of a permanent
nonclosable type. Openings for return air shall not be located in
bathrooms, toilet rooms or kitchenettes.
(16) Mechanical ventilation, where required, shall exhaust air at rates
not less than the following:
(a) For habitable space, two air changes per hour.
(b) For bathrooms and toilet rooms, 25 cubic feet per minute.
(c) For kitchenettes, 100 cubic feet per minute.
(17) Air conditioning for habitable apace provided in lieu of mechanical
ventilation shall supply an amount of air not less than that set forth
in § 12-56B(16), with at least 25% of the required quantity taken
from the outside.
C. Electrical requirements.
(1) A mobile home shall contain an electrical wiring system and service
equipment.
(2) Electrical wiring shall have adequate capacity for designed lighting
and appliance equipment. Individual circuits shall contain overload
protection devices.
(3) At least one receptacle outlet shall be provided for each multiple of
12 linear feet of wall space or major fraction thereof in each
habitable space and kitchenette. Bathrooms and toilet rooms shall
have permanently installed lighting fixtures and switches located
so as not to be an electrical hazard.
(4) Exterior equipment shall be weatherproofed to ensure protection
of equipment from the elements. Service equipment shall have a
means for quick disconnection from the source of supply.
(5) Provisions shall be made for grounding non-current-carrying
metallic parts of the electrical system. Such grounding shall be
common to one (1) external supply point. Provision shall be made
for exterior source grounding of the electrical system.
D. Cooking and refrigeration.
(1) A mobile home shall contain cooking equipment and refrigeration
equipment.
(2) Electrical cooking and refrigeration equipment shall be of an
approved type for installation in a mobile home and shall have
adequate circuit protection devices.
§ 121-14 MOBILE HOMES AND MOBILE HOME § 121-14
121:99
§ 121-15. Maintenance.
A mobile home shall be maintained in a safe and sanitary condition.
(3) Gas-burning cooking and refrigeration equipment shall be of an
approved type for mobile home installation, and connections to
rigid pipe shall be made with approved flexible metal gas appliance
connectors.
(4) Fuel storage shall conform to the requirements of fuel storage for
heating.
A. Interior. Floors, walls, ceilings, furnishings and fixtures shall be
maintained in a clean and sanitary condition. Exits shall be maintained
free of obstructions.
B. Garbage and refuse. Suitable containers shall be provided for the
temporary storage of garbage and refuse within the mobile home.
C. Screening. From May 1 to October 1, entrances to the mobile home
shall be provided with self-closing-type devices or screens, and
windows and other openings used for ventilation shall be appropriately
screened.
D. Extermination. Mobile homes shall be maintained free of insects,
vermin and rodents. Extermination shall be effected in conformance
with generally accepted practice.
E. Flammable materials. Flammable cleaning liquids and other flammable
materials shall be stored in a safe approved manner.
§ 121-14 PALMYRA CODE § 121-15
121:100
ARTICLE III
Mobile Home Courts
§ 121-16. General requirements.
§ 121-17. Utilities.
A. Design and construction.
(1) The design and construction of mobile home courts shall conform
to applicable zoning and building regulations and generally
accepted standards for mobile home courts.
(2) Open areas shall be adequate to assure privacy, natural light and
ventilation for each mobile home and sufficient for essential
outdoor use.
B. Storm sewer drainage.
(1) Mobile home courts shall have adequate facilities for drainage of
surface and subsurface water.
(2) Grading of the entire property shall be such as to facilitate the safe
and efficient drainage of surface water.
(3) Gutters, culverts, catch basins, drain inlets, stormwater sewers,
approved combined storm and sanitary sewers or other satisfactory
drainage systems shall be utilized where deemed necessary.
C. Surfacing. Walks, driveways and parking spaces shall be provided with
paved and durable surfacing so as to provide safe and easy access
under normal use and weather conditions.
D. Overhead wires. Wires installed above driveways and parking spaces
shall have a clearance of not less than 18 feet.
E. Exterior lighting. Artificial lighting shall be provided to illuminate
walks, driveways and parking spaces for the safe movement of
pedestrians and vehicles at night.
F. Maintenance. Mobile home courts shall be properly maintained so as to
assure the desirable residential character of the property.
G. Travel or vacation trailers. No occupied travel or vacation trailer or
other form of temporary-type living units shall be permitted in a mobile
home court.
A. Water, sewage, gas and electricity.
(1) A mobile home court shall be provided with the following utilities:
water supply system, sewage disposal system and electrical
system.
§ 121-16 MOBILE HOMES AND MOBILE HOME § 121-17
121:101
§ 121-18. Mobile home lots.
(2) Utilities, including a gas-piping system where provided, shall have
sufficient capacity to supply the requirements of the mobile home
court and for the maximum number of connected mobile homes.
B. Water supply system. Water supply systems shall be designed to provide
a sufficient supply of potable water under adequate pressure to outlets
servicing mobile homes, community structures, drinking fountains,
hose connections, hydrants, etc.
C. Private water system. Where a public water supply system is not
available, an adequate private water supply system, approved by the
State, County or City Health Department having jurisdiction, shall be
provided.
D. Sewage disposal system.
(1) The sewage disposal system shall provide each mobile home and
community structures containing plumbing fixtures with an
adequate and safe method of sewage disposal.
(2) No sewage from a plumbing system shall be disposed of into the
waters of the State of New York, except where specially approved
by the authority having jurisdiction, in accordance with Article 12
of the New York State Public Health Law.23
E. Private sewage disposal system. Where a public sewage disposal
system is not available, an adequate private sewage disposal system,
approved by the State, County or City Health Department having
jurisdiction, shall be provided.
F. Gas piping system. The gas piping system shall be designed to provide a
supply of gas sufficient to meet the maximum demand without undue
loss of pressure at the connection to the mobile home furthest from the
source of supply.
G. Electrical system. The electrical system shall be designed to provide
adequate capacity to supply the connected load without exceeding the
allowable current-carrying capacity of the conductors.
A. Mobile home stand.
(1) A mobile home lot shall contain a mobile home stand capable of
retaining the mobile home in a fixed position.
(2) Mobile home stands shall be adequately compacted and at such
elevation, distance and angle, in relation to the accessway, as to
facilitate the safe and efficient placement and removal of the
mobile home.
23.Editor's Note: See now Art. 17 of the Environmental Conservation Law.
§ 121-17 PALMYRA CODE § 121-18
121:102
§ 121-19. Community areas.
§ 121-20. Community structures.
Community structures shall be structurally sound and appropriate for the
intended use and location.
B. Accessory structures. Accessory structures shall be of durable
construction and appropriate for the intended use and location.
C. Patios. Patios shall be located so as to provide safe and easy access from
the mobile home.
D. Storage lockers. Storage lockers shall be designed to provide adequate
storage facilities convenient to the mobile home.
E. Utility connections.
(1) A mobile home lot shall be provided with the following utility
connections; water supply connection, sanitary drainage
connection and electrical receptacle.
(2) Utility connections, including gas connection where provided, shall
be readily accessible at the mobile home stand and shall have a
means for safe and efficient hookup to the mobile home.
(3) The water supply connection shall be located a safe distance from a
sanitary drainage connection and shall not be subject to surface
drainage. Means shall be provided for a suitable watertight
connection, without cross-connection and danger of freezing.
(4) The sanitary drainage connection shall be at a proper location
relative to the mobile home and piping shall have a continuous
grade to the point of disposal. Drainage connection shall be
provided with suitable fittings to permit a watertight junction to be
made with the mobile home outlet.
(5) The gas connection shall provide a suitable gastight connection to
the mobile home.
(6) The electric system connection receptacle or terminal box shall be
of an approved weatherproof type. Such receptacle shall have
provisions for an equipment ground.
A. Community areas, including community facilities, shall be appropriate
for the intended use and location.
B. Fences, walls and other minor construction shall be capable of
sustaining anticipated loads.
C. Swimming pools, playground equipment, etc. shall be designed so as
not to be a potential hazard.
§ 121-18 MOBILE HOMES AND MOBILE HOME § 121-21
121:103
§ 121-21. Community fuel storage.
A mobile home court shall be provided with facilities for the safe and
efficient storage of required fuels.
§ 121-22. Property maintenance.
A. Liquefied petroleum gas. Liquefied petroleum gas storage containers
having a capacity exceeding 125 gallons shall be located not less than
25 feet from the nearest mobile home, structure, building and lot line
and shall not be subject to damage from moving vehicles.
B. Fuel oil. Fuel oil and other flammable materials shall be stored so as not
to be a fire hazard.
A. General. A mobile home court shall be maintained in a safe, sanitary
and orderly condition.
B. Premises. Premises shall be kept clean and free of physical hazards.
C. Brush and weed control. Open area shall be maintained free of heavy
undergrowths. Accumulations of plant growth which are noxious or
detrimental to health shall be eliminated.
D. Infestation. Grounds and structures shall be maintained free of insect,
vermin and rodent harborage and infestation. Methods used for
purposes of extermination shall conform with generally accepted
practice.
E. Structures. Exterior wood surfaces of structures that are not inherently
resistant to deterioration shall be periodically treated with a protective
coating of paint or other suitable preservatives.
F. Garbage and refuse. Adequate sanitary facilities and methods shall be
used for the collection, storage, handling and disposal of garbage and
refuse.
G. Domestic animals and pets. Domestic animals and pets shall be kept in
an appropriate manner and shall not be permitted to run at large.
§ 121-21 PALMYRA CODE § 121-22
121:104
Chapter 127
NOISE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Noisy animals — See Ch. 67.
Building construction — See Ch. 76.
Curfew — See Ch. 84.
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 139.
§ 127-1. Declaration of policy; construal.
§ 127-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AUDIBLE — Capable of being heard by a person of average hearing ability.
BOUNDARY LINE — The line marking the confines or line of division
between lots or parcels of real property and any street and lots or parcels
of real property.
HEAR (HEARD) — To perceive sound.
MOTORCYCLE — An unenclosed motor vehicle having a saddle for the
use of the operator and two or three wheels in contact with the ground,
including but not limited to motor scooters and minibikes.
MOTOR VEHICLE — Every vehicle which is self-propelled.
PERSON — Includes the singular and plural and also any natural person,
firm, corporation, political subdivision, government, agency, association,
club, partnership, society or any other form of association or organization of
A. It is the declared policy of this chapter to promote and assure an
environment free from noise that threatens or affects the well-being of
the people; to protect, promote and preserve the public health, safety
and welfare by reducing and regulating sound and noise levels that are
audible beyond the property boundaries from which they emanate; to
promote the use and enjoyment of property; to protect the value of
property; to protect the enjoyment of sleep and repose; and to protect
and improve the quality of life.
B. It is the further purpose of this chapter to allow all residents and
businesses of the Village to coexist harmoniously and in a manner
which is mutually respectful of the interest, rights and obligations of all
persons.
C. The necessity for legislature intervention by the enactment of the
provisions of this chapter is hereby declared as a matter of legislative
determination, and this chapter should be construed liberally to effect
its purpose.
§ 121-22 MOBILE HOMES AND MOBILE HOME § 127-2
121:105
any legal entity whatsoever. “Person” shall also include the owner, manager,
proprietor or person in charge of a bar, tavern or restaurant.
UNNECESSARY NOISE — Any sound that:
§ 127-3. Prohibited acts. [Amended 10-15-2007 by L.L. No. 3-2007]
The following acts are prohibited:
A. Endangers or injures the safety or health of humans or animals.
B. Is not required by the usual circumstances.
Is excessive or unusually loud or any sound that either annoys, disturbs,
injures or endangers the comfort, repose, peace or safety of a
reasonable person of normal sensitivities, or which unreasonably
interferes with the sleep, comfort or repose of others, or which causes
disturbance or injury to animal life, or which causes damage to property
or business.
C.
A. Sound reproduction devices.
(1) No person shall operate, play or permit the operation or playing of
any radio, television, phonograph, drum, musical instrument,
sound amplifier, CD player, tape recorder or similar device which
produces, reproduces or amplifies sound:
(a) In such a manner as to create unnecessary noise across a real
property boundary, except for activities open to the public and
for which a permit has been issued by the Village Clerk
pursuant to rules and regulations promulgated by him or her.
(b) From within a motor vehicle so that the sound is plainly audible
at a distance of 50 or more feet from the vehicle or, in the case
of a motor vehicle or motorcycle on private property, beyond
the property line. For the purpose of this subsection, “plainly
audible” means any sound which clearly can be heard by
unimpaired auditory senses based on a direct line of sight of 50
or more feet; however, words or phrases need not be
discernible and said sound shall include bass reverberation.
Prohibitions contained in this section shall not be applicable to
emergency or public safety vehicles, vehicles owned and
operated by the Village government or any utility company, for
sound emitted unavoidably during job-related operation, or any
motor vehicle used in an authorized public activity for which a
permit has been granted by the appropriate agency of the
Village government.
(c) In such a manner as to create unnecessary noise to any person
other than the operator of the device, when operated by any
passenger on a common carrier.
§ 127-2 PALMYRA CODE § 127-3
121:106
§ 127-4. Exceptions.
(2) This subsection shall not apply to noncommercial spoken language
covered under Subsection B of this section.
B. Loudspeakers; public address systems. Using or operating for any
noncommercial purpose any loudspeaker, public address system or
similar device between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. the
following day, such that the sound therefrom can be heard a distance of
50 feet beyond the boundary line of the real property from which such
sound emanates.
C. Motor vehicle repairs and testing. Repairing, rebuilding, modifying or
testing any motor vehicle or motorcycle or motorboat in such a manner
as to cause sound from such repairing, rebuilding or modifying or
testing to be heard in excess of 50 feet beyond the boundary line of the
real property from which said sound emanates.
D. Burglar alarms. Sounding or permitting the sounding of any exterior
burglar alarm on any building, motor vehicle or boat, unless such
burglar alarm shall terminate its operation within 15 minutes of its
being activated. Any vehicle or boat upon which a burglar alarm has
been installed shall permanently display the telephone number at which
communication may be made with the owner of such motor vehicle or
boat.
E. Refuse-compacting vehicles. The operating or permitting to be
operated of any motor vehicle which can compact refuse between the
hours of 8:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. the following day in residential areas.
F. Heavy construction equipment. The operating or permitting to be
operated of any motor vehicle which is considered to be heavy
construction equipment between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.
the following day in residential areas. Examples of heavy construction
equipment include but are not limited to dump trucks, pay loaders,
graders, cranes and backhoes.
G. Engine braking. Except in an emergency situation, no person may slow
a vehicle by the practice known as engine braking, also referred to as
"Jake® braking" or "dynamic braking" whereby rapid downshifting of a
vehicle’s engine is used in lieu of applying a vehicle’s brakes, causing
loud noises to emit from the vehicle’s engine and exhaust system.
H. The use and operation of all terrain vehicles, dirt bikes and off-road
motorcycles on private property in such a manner as to cause sound
from such vehicle or motorcycle to be heard in excess of 50 feet beyond
the boundary line of real property from which sound emanates.
A. Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed to prevent the
production of music, the ringing of bells or carillons, sounding of gongs
or blowing of any whistle, horn or signaling devices in connection with
any military, civic or authorized parade, funeral procession or religious
§ 127-3 MOBILE HOMES AND MOBILE HOME § 127-4
121:107
§ 127-5. Penalties for offenses.
If any person shall violate the provisions of this chapter, said person shall
be punished by a fine of up to $100 for a first offense; a fine up to $250 for
a second offense; a fine of up to $500 for a third offense; a fine of $1,000
for a fourth offense; and a fine of $2,000 for a fifth offense. In addition to
specified fines, violators are subject to imprisonment for up to 15 days.
§ 127-6. Enforcement.
This chapter shall be enforceable by state, county and local police officers
and/or by the Village Code Enforcement Officer, who are authorized to issue
appearance tickets for violations of this chapter in accordance with the
Criminal Procedure Law of the State of New York.
ceremony, nor to prevent any musical performance conducted by
consent of the Village Board.
B. The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to the sounding of bells,
horns, sirens or any other instrument by a fire apparatus or station,
police or any other vehicle or person in the event of an emergency
situation.
C. The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to the creation of sounds
by public utilities in carrying out the operation of their franchises,
including required emergency repairs.
D. The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to the creation of sounds
connected with sporting events of any public or private school.
E. The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to the creation of sounds
connected with an authorized carnival, fair, exhibition, parade, etc.,
allowed by permit of the Board of Trustees, which permit shall specify
the dates and times during which such event is authorized.
§ 127-4 PALMYRA CODE § 127-6
121:108
Chapter 130
NUISANCE ABATEMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Adult uses — See Ch. 59.
Alcoholic beverages — See 63.
Animals — See Ch. 67.
Building construction and fire
prevention — See Ch. 76.
Unsafe buildings — See Ch. 80.
Curfew — See Ch. 84.
Dumping, trespassing and open fires — See
Ch. 88.
Electrical inspections — See Ch. 94.
Firearms and air guns — See Ch. 104.
Games of chance — See Ch. 113.
Noise — See Ch. 127.
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 139.
Spitting — See Ch. 159.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 163.
Yard and property maintenance — See Ch.
194.
§ 130-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Nuisance Abatement Law of the Village
of Palmyra."
§ 130-2. Findings; purpose.
The Board of Trustees finds that public nuisances exist in the Village of
Palmyra in the operation of certain establishments and the use of property,
including residential premises, in violation of the Penal Law of the State
of New York, the New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building
Code and the Code of the Village of Palmyra, which nuisances substantially
and seriously interfere with the interest of the public in the quality of life
and total community environment, commerce in the Village, property values
and the public health, safety, peace, comfort, conveniences or welfare.
The Board of Trustees further finds that the continued occurrence of such
activities and violations is detrimental to the health, safety and welfare of
the people of the Village of Palmyra and the businesses thereof and the
visitors thereto. It is the purpose of this chapter to authorize the Village
to impose sanctions and penalties for such public nuisances and remediate
the same, and such powers may be exercised either in conjunction with,
or apart from the powers contained in other laws without prejudice to the
use of procedures and remedies available under other such laws. The Board
of Trustees further finds that the sanctions and penalties and remedial
measures authorized herein constitute an additional and appropriate
method of law enforcement in response to the proliferation of public
nuisances. The sanctions, penalties and remedial measures are reasonable
and necessary in order to protect the health and safety of the people of the
Village and to promote the general welfare.
§ 127-6 MOBILE HOMES AND MOBILE HOME § 130-3
121:109
§ 130-3. Public nuisance defined.
A. A public nuisance is declared to exist where behavior in the use of or on
the premises unreasonably interferes with the health, safety, peace,
comfort or convenience of the general community occurring within a
period of six months of such frequency or duration that the continued
occupancy of the premises presumes continuation of such unreasonable
interference regardless of whether or not any person has been
convicted for violation of any provisions of the Penal Law of the State of
New York, the New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building
Code or the Code of the Village of Palmyra; or
B. A public nuisance is declared to exist whenever, through violations of
any of the following provisions resulting from separate incidents at a
building, structure or place, 12 or more points are accumulated within a
period of six months or 18 or more points within a period of 12 months,
in accordance with the following point system. Where more than one
violation occurs during a single incident, the total points for the
incident shall be the highest point value assigned to any single
violation.
(1) The following violations shall be assigned a point value of six
points:
(a) Article 220 of the Penal Law – Controlled Substances Offenses.
(b) Article 221 of the Penal Law – Offenses Involving Marihuana.
(c) Article 225 of the Penal Law – Gambling Offenses.
(d) Article 230 of the Penal Law – Prostitution Offenses.
(e) Sections 165.40, 165.45, 165.50, 165.52 and 165.54 of the
Penal Law – Criminal possession of stolen property.
(f) The Alcoholic Beverage Control Law.
(g) Article 265 of the Penal Law – Firearms and Other Dangerous
Weapons.
(h) Sections 260.20 and 260.21 of the Penal Law – Unlawfully
dealing with a child.
(i) Article 263 of the Penal Law – Sexual Performance by a Child.
(j) Section 415-a of the Vehicle and Traffic Law – Vehicle
dismantlers.
(k) Section 175.10 of the Penal Law – Falsifying business records.
(l) Sections 170.65 and 170.70 of the Penal Law – Forgery of and
illegal possession of a vehicle identification number.
§ 130-3 PALMYRA CODE § 130-3
121:110
(m) Possession, use, sale or offer for sale of any alcoholic beverage
in violation of Article 18 of the Tax Law, or of any cigarette or
tobacco products in violation of Article 20 of the Tax Law.
(n) Article 158 of the Penal Law – Welfare Fraud.
(2) The following violations shall be assigned a point value of three
points:
(a) Chapter 59 of the Village Code – Adult Uses.
(b) Chapter 63 of the Village Code – Alcoholic Beverages.
(c) Chapter 67 of the Village Code – Animals.
(d) Chapter 76 of the Village Code – Building Construction and
Fire Prevention.
(e) Chapter 80 of the Village Code – Buildings, Unsafe.
(f) Chapter 88 of the Village Code – Dumping, Trespassing and
Open Fires.
(g) Chapter 94 of the Village Code – Electrical Inspections.
(h) Chapter 104 of the Village Code – Firearms and Air Guns.
(i) Chapter 113 of the Village Code – Games of Chance.
(j) Chapter 127 of the Village Code – Noise.
(k) Chapter 139 of the Village Code – Peddling and Soliciting.
(l) Chapter 159 of the Village Code – Spitting.
(m) Chapter 163 of the Village Code – Streets and Sidewalks.
(n) Chapter 194 of the Village Code – Weeds and Growth,
Noxious.24
(o) 9 NYCRR Subtitle S, Chapter I – New York State Uniform Fire
Prevention and Building Code.
(3) For purpose of this section, where a violation is continuous, each
week a violation continues shall be deemed a separate violation. A
conviction for a violation shall not be required, and such violation
shall be established by a preponderance of the evidence. However,
a conviction as defined in accordance with the provisions of § 1.20
of the Criminal Procedures Law shall constitute conclusive proof of
a violation. Conviction of an attempt to commit a violation of any of
the specified provisions shall be considered a conviction for a
violation of the specified provision.
24.Editor's Note: See now Ch. 194, Yard and Property Maintenance.
§ 130-3 MOBILE HOMES AND MOBILE HOME § 130-4
121:111
§ 130-4. Powers of Board of Trustees.
In addition to the enforcement procedures established elsewhere, the Board
of Trustees or the Board of Trustees' designee, after notice and opportunity
for a hearing with respect to a public nuisance, shall be authorized:
§ 130-5. Service of notice.
Prior to the issuance of orders by the Board of Trustees or the Board of
Trustees' designee pursuant to this section, the Board of Trustees or the
Board of Trustees' designee shall give notice and opportunity for a hearing
to the owner, lessor, lessee and mortgagee of a building, structure or place
wherein the public nuisance is being conducted, maintained or permitted.
Such notice shall be served upon an owner pursuant to Article 3 of the
Civil Practice Law and Rules, upon a lessor or lessee pursuant to § 735 of
the Real Property Actions and Proceedings Law and upon a mortgagee by
means of certified mail, return receipt requested, sent to the mortgagee's
last known address, provided that any service other than delivery to the
person to be served shall be complete immediately upon delivery, mailing or
posting without the necessity of filing proof of service with the clerk of any
court before the hearing. The person in whose name the real estate affected
by the orders of the Board of Trustees or the Board of Trustees' designee
is recorded in the office of the County Clerk shall be presumed to be the
owner thereof. Proceedings shall be commenced by service of the notice and
opportunity of a hearing within 60 days after the occurrence of the most
recent violation cited in the notice.
§ 130-6. Lack of knowledge no defense.
The lack of knowledge of, acquiescence or participation in or responsibility
for a public nuisance on the part of the owners, lessors, lessees, mortgagees
and all those persons in possession or having charges of as agent or
otherwise, or having any interest in the property, real or personal, used in
conducting or maintaining the public nuisance, shall not be a defense by
such owners, lessors and lessees, mortgagees and such other persons.
A. To order the closing of the building, structure or place to the extent
necessary to abate the nuisance; or
B. To suspend for a period not to exceed six months or revoke for a period
of one year a certificate of occupancy issued for such premises, and to
prevent the operator from obtaining a new certificate of occupancy for
another location for the period of suspension or revocation; or
C. To suspend for a period not to exceed six months or revoke for a period
of one year any occupational license or permit issued by the Village
related to the conduct of a business or trade at the premises, which
suspension or revocation shall also apply to any other locations
operated by the holder for which the license or permit is required; or
D. Any combination of the above.
§ 130-4 PALMYRA CODE § 130-7
121:112
§ 130-7. Enforcement.
Five business days after the posting of an order issued pursuant to this
chapter and upon the written directive of the Board of Trustees or the
Board of Trustees' designee, officers of the Palmyra Police Department are
authorized to act upon and enforce such orders.
§ 130-8. Orders to close premises.
Where the Board of Trustees or the Board of Trustees' designee closed a
building, structure or place pursuant to this chapter, such closing shall be
for such period as the Board of Trustees or the Board of Trustees' designee
may direct, but in no event shall the closing be for a period of more than one
year from the posting of the order pursuant to this chapter. If the owner,
lessor or lessee shall file a bond in an amount determined by the Board of
Trustees or the Board of Trustees' designee, but which may not exceed the
value of the property ordered to be closed, and submit proof satisfactory to
the Board of Trustees or the Board of Trustees' designee that the nuisance
has been abated and will not be created, maintained or permitted for such
period of time as the building, structure or place has been directed to be
closed by the order of the Board of Trustees or the Board of Trustees'
designee, then the Board of Trustees or the Board of Trustees' designee may
vacate the provisions of the order that directs the closing of the building,
structure or place.
§ 130-9. Closing not possession by Village.
A closing directed by the Board of Trustees or the Board of Trustees'
designee pursuant to this chapter shall not constitute an act of possession,
ownership or control by the Village of the closed premises.
§ 130-10. Penalties for offenses.
A. It shall be a misdemeanor for any person to use or occupy or to permit
any other person to use or occupy any building, structure or place, or
portion thereof, ordered closed by the Board of Trustees or the Board of
Trustees' designee. Mutilation or removal of a posted order by the
Board of Trustees or the Board of Trustees' designee shall be
punishable by a fine of not more than $250 or by imprisonment not
exceeding 15 days, or both, provided such orders contain therein a
notice of such penalty.
B. Intentional disobedience or resistance to any provision of the orders
issued by the Board of Trustees or the Board of Trustees' designee
pursuant to this chapter, in addition to any other punishment
prescribed by law, shall be punishable by a fine of not more than $1,000
or by imprisonment not to exceed six months, or both.
§ 130-7 MOBILE HOMES AND MOBILE HOME § 130-11
121:113
§ 130-11. Rules and regulations.
The Board of Trustees or the Board of Trustees' designee may promulgate
rules and regulations to carry out and give full effect provisions of this
chapter.
Chapter 132
PARKS AND RECREATION AREAS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 183.
§ 130-11 PALMYRA CODE § 130-11
121:114
ARTICLE I
Use of Parks and Cemeteries
[Adopted 10-15-2007 by L.L. No. 2-200725]
§ 132-1. Definitions.
The words and terms used in this article, unless otherwise expressly stated,
or unless the context or subject matter otherwise requires, shall have the
same meaning as defined in the Vehicles and Traffic Law and Conservation
Law of the State of New York.
§ 132-2. Certain vehicles prohibited.
No person shall operate, stand or park any motorcycle, all-terrain vehicle,
minibike or snowmobile at any time upon any portion of the Village property
commonly known as "Prospect Hill Park."
§ 132-3. Hours of parks and cemeteries.
All parks and cemeteries in the Village of Palmyra shall be closed and not
open to the public each day between sunset and sunrise.
§ 132-4. Repealer.
All other ordinances or parts of ordinances of the Village of Palmyra
inconsistent with the provisions of this article are hereby repealed;
provided, however, that such repeal shall be only to the extent of such
inconsistency and in all other respects this article shall be in addition to the
other ordinances regulating and governing the subject matter covered by
this article.
§ 132-5. Penalties for offenses.
If any person shall violate the provisions of this article, said person shall be
punished by a fine of up to $100 for a first offense; a fine of up to $250 for
a second offense; a fine of up to $500 for a third offense; a fine of $1,000
for a fourth offense; and a fine of $2,000 for a fifth offense. In addition to
specified fines, violators are subject to imprisonment for up to 15 days.
25.Editor's Note: This local law also superseded former Art. I, Recreational Vehicles in
Prospect Hill Park, adopted 7-19-1971 (Ch. 13, Art. 11, of the 1974 Code), as amended.
§ 132-1 MOBILE HOMES AND MOBILE HOME § 132-5
121:115
Chapter 139
PEDDLING AND SOLICITING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Trespassing — See Ch. 88.
Noise — See Ch. 127.
Streets and sidewalks— See Ch. 163.
Zoning — See Ch. 200.
§ 132-5 PALMYRA CODE § 132-5
121:116
ARTICLE I
Licensing of Peddlers
§ 139-1. Title.
This article may be cited as the “Peddlers Law” of the Village of Palmyra,
Wayne County.
§ 139-2. Definitions and word usage. [Amended 12-2-2013 by L.L.
No. 5-2013]
A. The following definitions shall govern the interpretation of this article
unless otherwise expressly defined herein:
PEDDLER — Includes any person, whether a resident of the Village
of Palmyra or not, traveling by foot, wagon, automotive vehicle or any
other type of conveyance from place to place, from house to house or
from street to street and offering for sale goods, wares, merchandise
or provisions of any kind or description, offering and exposing the
same for sale or making sales and delivering articles to purchasers,
or who shall sell or offer the same for sale, and further provided that
one who solicits orders and as a separate transaction makes deliveries
to purchasers as part of a scheme or design to evade the provisions
of this article shall be deemed a peddler subject to the provisions of
this article. The word "peddler" shall include the words "hawker" and
"solicitor."
PERSON — Any natural person, partnership, association, corporation,
or legal entity.[Amended 10-16-2017 by L.L. No. 4-2017]
REGISTER — To supply to the Clerk of the Village of Palmyra the name
and address of said person and affiliated organization, together with
the dates said organization will engage in peddling and/or soliciting
activities within the Village of Palmyra.[Amended 10-16-2017 by L.L.
No. 4-2017]
SOLICITOR — Any person who goes upon the premises of any private
property, not his or her own, for the purpose of taking or seeking
or attempting to take orders or make contacts for the sale of goods,
merchandise, wares, or other personal property of any nature for future
delivery, or for services to be performed in the future, including the
sale and/or delivery of natural gas and electricity. This includes any
person who, without invitation, goes upon private property to request
subscriptions or contributions of funds or anything of value.[Amended
10-16-2017 by L.L. No. 4-2017]
VILLAGE — Includes all areas within the Village of Palmyra.
B. Words used in the singular shall include the plural and vice versa. The
word "shall" is always mandatory.
§ 139-1 MOBILE HOMES AND MOBILE HOME § 139-3
121:117
§ 139-3. License required.
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of peddler as
defined in § 139-2 of this article within the corporate limits of the Village of
Palmyra without first obtaining a license therefor as provided herein.
§ 139-4. Application for license; fees. [Amended 12-2-2013 by L.L.
No. 5-2013; 10-16-2017 by L.L. No. 4-2017]
§ 139-5. Refusal to issue license; record of licenses issued.
A. Applicants for a license under this article must file with the Village
Clerk a sworn application, in writing, on a form to be furnished by the
Village Clerk, which application shall give the following information:
(1) Name of the applicant.
(2) Present address of the applicant.
(3) The applicant's place of residence for the last five years.
(4) The applicant's business address for the last five years.
(5) The applicant's driver's license or other suitable picture ID.
(6) Whether or not the applicant has ever been convicted of a felony,
misdemeanor or violation of any municipal local law, except with
relation to illegal parking, and, if so, in what court, when, where,
and upon what charges, and the sentence of the court.
(7) Whether the applicant has been previously licensed in any
occupation and, if so, when, where, and for what period and, if such
previous license was ever revoked, the date of the revocation, and
the reason therefor.
(8) A description of any vehicle, together with the license number or
other means of identification, to be used by the applicant in the
Village of Palmyra.
B. The applicant shall be charged a fee in the amount as set from time to
time by resolution of the Board of Trustees for a full search and return
from the Division of Criminal Justice Services, said fee to be made
payable to the Village Clerk of the Village of Palmyra.
A. If the application should disclose that the applicant has been convicted
of a felony and/or misdemeanor, which felony and/or misdemeanor, in
the judgment of the Village Clerk, renders the applicant unfit or
undesirable, the Village Clerk shall notify the applicant that his
application is disapproved, and no license will be issued on said
application.
B. If the application should disclose that the applicant has ever violated
duly enacted Village or town local laws and has been convicted of same
§ 139-3 PALMYRA CODE § 139-5
121:118
§ 139-6. Fees.
§ 139-7. Display of license. [Amended 10-16-2017 by L.L. No.
4-2017]
Every peddler licensed under this article shall have his license in his
immediate possession at all times when peddling and shall display the same
upon demand of any person, along with an acceptable picture ID.
§ 139-8. Transfer of license.
No license issued under the provisions of this article may be transferred
from one person to another person. Each peddler shall have his or her
separate license, notwithstanding he or she may be employed by, or
associated with, a licensed peddler.
§ 139-9. Use of streets. [Amended 11-17-2003 by L.L. No. 2-2003;
10-16-2017 by L.L. No. 4-2017]
Except as provided in Article II, Stationary Sidewalk Vendors, of this
chapter, no peddler, including those otherwise exempt from this article, may
remain in a stationary location in the public streets, nor shall any peddler
be permitted to operate in any congested area where his operation might
impede or inconvenience the public. For the purpose of this article, the
judgment of any police officer, exercised in good faith, shall be deemed
conclusive as to whether the area is congested or the public impeded or
inconvenienced.
§ 139-10. Prohibitions. [Amended 10-16-2017 by L.L. No. 4-2017]
on more than one occasion and, in the judgment of the Village Clerk,
this renders an applicant unsatisfactory or undesirable, the Village
Clerk shall refuse issuance of the license.
C. The Village Clerk shall keep a record of all licenses issued and all
licenses revoked. [Amended 10-16-2017 by L.L. No. 4-2017]
A. For each person proposing to peddle, whether on foot or from a licensed
vehicle: an amount as set from time to time by resolution of the Board of
Trustees. In the event the Village Clerk disapproves the application,
said fee shall be refunded in full.
B. The annual fee herein provided for shall be assessed on a calendar-year
basis, and all licenses shall expire on the 31st day of December
immediately following the date of issuance. There shall be no reduction
in fees for fractional parts of the year.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to enter upon private or public
property for the purpose of peddling before the hour of 10:00 a.m. of
any day or after the hour of 7:00 p.m. of any day, except upon the
invitation of the householder or occupant.
§ 139-5 MOBILE HOMES AND MOBILE HOME § 139-10
121:119
§ 139-11. Exemptions. [Amended 11-17-2003 by L.L. No. 2-2003]
The provisions of this article, except the necessity to obtain a license from
the Village of Palmyra, shall not apply to the following:
§ 139-12. Enforcement.
It shall be the duty of any police officer of the Village of Palmyra to require
any person who is engaged in peddling to produce his peddler’s license
and to enforce the provisions of this article against any person found to be
violating same.
§ 139-13. Report of violations; suspension of permit.
B. No peddler shall peddle, vend or sell his goods or wares within 200 feet
of any church or place of worship or any place occupied exclusively as a
public or private school or for school purposes.
C. No peddler, nor any person in his behalf, shall shout, cry out, or blow a
horn upon any of the streets, alleys, parks, or other public places of said
Village or upon any private premises or any other place in the said
Village.
A. Charitable or religious organizations. However, for the purposes of this
article, said charitable or religious organizations must register with the
Clerk of the Village of Palmyra before engaging in any peddling
activities.
B. Persons maintaining a regular delivery route in the Village of Palmyra.
C. Commercial salesmen or deliverymen calling exclusively upon retail or
wholesale establishments or other business firms within the Village of
Palmyra.
D. Girl Scouts, Boy Scouts and/or school-age children doing any
fundraising. [Added 10-16-2017 by L.L. No. 4-2017]
A. The Palmyra Village Police Department shall report to the Village Clerk
all convictions for violation of this article, and the Village Clerk shall
record the reports of such violations.
B. Whenever it shall be shown, or whenever the Board of Trustees of the
Village of Palmyra or the Palmyra Village Police have knowledge, that
any person to whom a permit has been issued under this article has
violated any of the provisions of this article or that any promoter, agent
or solicitor of a permittee has misrepresented the purpose of the
solicitation, the Board of Trustees or the Palmyra Village Police shall
immediately suspend the permit and give the permittee written notice,
by certified mail, of a hearing to be held within five days of such
suspension to determine whether or not the permit should or should not
be revoked.
§ 139-10 PALMYRA CODE § 139-14
121:120
§ 139-14. Revocation of license.
§ 139-15. Suspension of provisions.
The Village Board is hereby authorized, by resolution, to suspend any of
the provisions of this article in connection with any holiday celebration or
upon any occasion of special public interest, for such time and upon such
conditions as shall be prescribed by the Village Board.
§ 139-16. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 11-17-2003 by L.L. No.
2-2003]
Any person, firm, association or corporation violating any of the provisions
of this article shall be guilty of an offense punishable by a fine of not more
than $1,000 or imprisonment for not more than one year, or both; however,
for the purpose of conferring jurisdiction upon courts and judicial officers,
such violations shall be deemed to be misdemeanors and, for such purposes
only, all provisions of law relating to misdemeanors shall apply to such
violations. Notwithstanding the foregoing, any person, firm, association or
corporation violating any provisions of this article shall be subject to a
penalty in a minimum sum of $250 for the first such violation, $500 for
the second such violation, and $1,000 for any subsequent violations, said
penalties to be recoverable in a civil action in the name of the Village of
Palmyra.
A. Licenses issued under the provisions of this article may be revoked by
the Board of Trustees of the Village of Palmyra after notice and hearing
for any of the following causes:
(1) Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement contained in the
application for license.
(2) Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement made in the course of
carrying on his business as a peddler. [Amended 10-16-2017 by
L.L. No. 4-2017]
(3) Any violation of this article.
(4) Conviction of a felony or a misdemeanor, which misdemeanor, in
the judgment of the Village Board, renders the applicant unfit or
undesirable.
(5) Conducting the business of peddling in an unlawful manner or in
such a manner as to constitute a breach of the peace or to
constitute a menace to the health, safety or general welfare of the
public.
B. Notice of the hearing for revocation of a license shall be given in
writing, setting forth specifically the grounds of complaint and the time
and place of hearing. Such notice shall be mailed, postage prepaid, to
the licensee at his last known address at least five days prior to the date
set forth for hearing.
§ 139-14 MOBILE HOMES AND MOBILE HOME § 139-16
121:121

ARTICLE II
Stationary Sidewalk Vendors
[Added 6-5-2000 by L.L. No. 1-2000]
§ 139-17. Findings and purposes.
It is found and declared by the Board of Trustees of the Village of Palmyra
that:
§ 139-18. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
SIDEWALK — That portion of a street or public right-of-way between the
curbline or roadway and the adjacent property line, whether improved or
unimproved.
SPECIAL EVENT — Any occasion including, but not limited to, fairs, shows,
exhibitions, events, celebrations, festivals, etc., within a specifically defined
area of the Village of Palmyra for a specific period of time recognized as
such by the Board of Trustees of the Village of Palmyra.
STAND — Any newsstand, table, bench, booth, rack, handcart, pushcart, or
any other fixture or device used for the display, storage, transportation of
articles or services offered for a vendor or used in connection therewith.
VENDOR — Any individual, including an employee or agent of a group
of individuals, partnerships, or corporation, who sells or offers food,
beverages, goods, merchandise, or services on any sidewalk from a stand or
from a stationary location on any sidewalk.
§ 139-19. License required.
It shall be unlawful for any vendor to sell, display, or offer any food,
beverage, goods, merchandise, or services on any sidewalk in the Village
of Palmyra without first obtaining a license from the Village Clerk of the
Village of Palmyra.
A. The primary purpose of the public streets, sidewalks, and other public
ways is for use by vehicular and pedestrian traffic;
B. Vending on such public ways promotes the public interest by
contributing to an active and attractive pedestrian environment;
C. Reasonable regulations of vending on public ways is necessary to
protect the public health, safety, and welfare; and
D. This article shall be in addition to, and not in lieu of, the provisions of
Article I, and shall govern to the extent inconsistent therewith.
§ 139-17 MOBILE HOMES AND MOBILE HOME § 139-20
121:123
§ 139-20. Exemptions. [Amended 10-16-2017 by L.L. No. 4-2017]
The provisions of this article shall not apply to residents of property
abutting sidewalks in the Residential (R-1) Districts established under
Chapter 200, Zoning, of the Palmyra Village Code vending food, beverages,
goods, merchandise, or services on the sidewalk abutting such property on
a temporary basis not exceeding three days.
§ 139-21. Application for license.
The application for a vendor’s license shall contain all information relevant
and necessary to determine whether a particular license may be issued as
set forth in Article I of this chapter, or otherwise established by resolution
of the Board of Trustees of the Village of Palmyra.
§ 139-22. Rules and regulations.26
The Board of Trustees of the Village of Palmyra may by resolution
promulgate and enforce rules and regulations relating to the issuance of
licenses authorized under this article, including applications requirements,
fees therefor, location and duration of licensed activity, method of assigning
license by location, dispensing or modification of requirements during
special events, restrictions regarding stands, hours of operation, conditions
or restrictions upon licenses, and such other rules and regulations
appropriate to further the purposes of this article, protect the public safety,
and welfare, and the appropriate use of the sidewalks in the Village.
§ 139-23. Enforcement.
Any person, partnership, corporation, or entity who or which violates any
provision of this article, any rule or regulation promulgated hereunder, any
condition or restriction imposed upon any license issued pursuant thereto,
or any lawful order of any police officer pertaining thereto, shall be guilty of
an offense punishable as provided in § 139-16 of this chapter.
26.Editor’s Note: The “Rules and Regulations for Stationary Vendors for Special Events” is on
file in the office of the Village Clerk.
§ 139-20 PALMYRA CODE § 139-23
121:124
Chapter 141
PROTESTS AND DEMONSTRATIONS
§ 139-23 MOBILE HOMES AND MOBILE HOME § 139-23
121:125

ARTICLE I
Funeral-Related Events
[Adopted 9-19-2011 by L.L. No. 3-2011]
§ 141-1. Title.
This article shall be known as the law "Restricting Disruptive Protesting
Activities at Funeral-Related Events."
§ 141-2. Legislative intent.
The Board of Trustees finds that:
§ 141-3. Purpose.
The purposes of this article are to:
§ 141-4. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
DEMONSTRATION — Picketing and other protest conduct directed at a
funeral-related event, including, but not limited to, oration and speech with
or without the use of sound amplification equipment or devices and display
of signs with or without verbal accompaniment.
A. It is generally recognized that families have a substantial interest in
organizing and attending funerals for deceased relatives.
B. The interests of families in privately and peacefully mourning the loss of
deceased relatives are violated when funerals are targeted for picketing
and other public demonstrations.
C. Full opportunity exists under the terms and provisions of this article for
the exercise of freedom of speech and other constitutional rights at
times other than within one hour prior to the commencement of any
funeral, during any funeral, or until one hour following the completion
of any funeral; and at locations other than within 750 feet of a funeral.
A. Protect the privacy of grieving families within one hour prior to the
commencement of any funeral, during any funeral, or until one hour
following the completion of any funeral;
B. Preserve the peaceful character of cemeteries, mortuaries and
churches within one hour prior to the commencement of any funeral,
during any funeral or until one hour following the completion of any
funeral; and
C. Protect the First Amendment rights of individuals by placing only
restrictions that are content neutral and contain a reasonable time and
place limitation.
§ 141-1 MOBILE HOMES AND MOBILE HOME § 141-4
121:127
FUNERAL-RELATED EVENT — Ceremonies, wakes, funerals, burials,
Shiva, and other memorial services held in connection with a deceased
person.
§ 141-5. Prohibition.
No person shall knowingly engage in a demonstration within 750 feet of
any church, synagogue or other place of worship, mortuary, funeral home,
cemetery or other location at which a funeral-related event is being held
within one hour prior to the commencement of any funeral-related event,
during any funeral-related event, or until one hour following the completion
of any funeral-related event.
§ 141-6. Enforcement; penalties for offenses.
A violation of any provision of this article shall constitute an offense and be
punishable as follows:
A. Any person violating the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine
not to exceed $1,000 and/or by imprisonment of up to one year. Each
such violation shall constitute a separate and distinct offense.
B. This article shall be enforced by any law enforcement agency having
jurisdiction.
§ 141-4 PALMYRA CODE § 141-6
121:128
Chapter 144
SEWER RENTS AND CHARGES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 76.
Sewer use — See Ch. 147.
Water — See Ch. 189.
§ 144-1. Authority to establish rents.
Pursuant to the authority of the Sewer Rent Law of the State of New
York (Chapter 765 of the Laws of 1951)27 and any and all amendments
thereto, there is hereby established and imposed sewer rents as a means
of producing revenue for the sewer system of the Village of Palmyra, New
York.
§ 144-2. Nature and use of sewer rents.
Sewer rents shall constitute charges established and imposed pursuant to
this chapter and any and all amendments thereto for the use of the sewer
system operated and maintained by the Village of Palmyra, New York, or any
part or parts thereof.
§ 144-3. Scope of sewer system.
The sewer system shall be deemed to include all sewer pipes and other
appurtenances which are used or useful in whole or in part in connection
with the collection, treatment or disposal of sewage, industrial waste and
other wastes, and which are owned, operated, or maintained by the Village
of Palmyra, New York, including sewage pumping stations and sewage
treatment and disposal works.
§ 144-4. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
INDUSTRIAL WASTE — Includes any liquid, gaseous, solid or other waste
substance, or a combination thereof, resulting from any process of industry,
manufacturing, trade or business or from the development or recovery of
any natural resources.
OTHER WASTES — Includes garbage, refuse, decayed wood, sawdust,
shavings, bark, sand, lime, cinders, ashes, offal, oil, tar, dye stuffs, acids,
chemicals and all other discarded matter in sewage or industrial waste.
27.Editor's Note: See General Municipal Law § 452.
§ 141-6 MOBILE HOMES AND MOBILE HOME § 144-4
121:129
PART — Includes all lateral sewers, or all branch sewers, or all interceptor
sewers, or all trunk sewers, and any sewage treatment and disposal works,
each part with necessary appurtenances including sewage pumping
stations, and also including all channels, streams or watercourses into
which is introduced stormwater.
SEWAGE — As used herein, includes all water-carried human or animal
wastes or body wastes, normal culinary, laundry, and washing wastes and
the like, from residences, buildings, industrial establishments or other
places. The admixture, with sewage as above defined, of industrial waste or
other wastes as hereafter defined, also shall be considered sewage within
the meaning of this chapter.
§ 144-5. Rents to be paid by all owners.
The sewer rents established herein shall be imposed on the owners of all
premises located within the corporate limits of the Village of Palmyra, New
York, connected with or required to be served by the sewer system.
§ 144-6. Payment dates. [Amended 2-15-1999 by L.L. No. 2-1999;
2-15-2010 by L.L. No. 2-2010]
Sewer rents for the use of the water system shall be paid quarterly in
advance for sewer quarters, commencing on September 1, December 1,
March 1 and June 1 in each year. Sewer rents shall be due and payable
on the first day of each month of the aforesaid quarters, and shall be paid
within 45 days after each quarterly due date. In the event that payment is
not made within the forty-five-day period, then 10% shall be added to said
sewer rent.
§ 144-7. Charges and consumption. [Amended 11-1-1976 by L.L. No.
4-1976; 5-3-1982 by L.L. No. 1-1982; 10-1-1990 by L.L. No. 2-1990;
10-20-1997 by L.L. No. 2-1997]
A. Sewer charges shall be levied on the owners of all premises connected
to the sewer system based upon the water consumption metered by the
Village in the immediately preceding quarter and will be the same
quantity as used for water billing. The sewer rent shall consist of two
components: a minimum quarterly bill and a quantity usage charge. The
minimum quarterly bill shall be at least sufficient to cover the
administrative costs incurred to process each quarter billing.
B. Exceptions to the water quantity billed may be considered by the Board
of Trustees in circumstances where the consumption claimed not to
have been returned to the sewer system can be clearly quantified and
confirmed by the Village Water Superintendent or Public Works
Superintendent. Each exception must be requested in writing and will
be considered on a case-by-case basis. The request must be signed by
the property owner and also contain the signature of the appropriate
superintendent confirming the quantity to be exempt from billing.
§ 144-4 PALMYRA CODE § 144-8
121:130
§ 144-8. Rates. [Amended 10-20-1997 by L.L. No. 2-1997; 5-4-1998
by L.L. No. 1-1998; 4-21-2003 by L.L. No. 1-2003]
A. Quarterly usage charge.
(1) Except as provided in Subsection B below, the minimum quarterly
bill for all buildings, structures, and apartments connected to the
sewer system and also serviced by a Village water meter shall be
established by the Board of Trustees at a specified rate per quarter,
which rate shall be $35 per unit per quarter beginning June 1,
2003.
(2) The quarterly usage charge shall be established by the Board of
Trustees at a specified rate per quarter per hundred cubic feet of
metered water consumed in the current quarter, which rate shall
be $1.50 per hundred cubic feet of metered water beginning June
1, 2003.
B. Where a building or structure serviced by one meter is so arranged as
to contain private and separate quarters, the following rates apply:
(1) Where a building or structure, other than those described in
Subsection B(2) below, contains one or more separate apartments,
the total water consumption shall be divided by the number of
apartments into which the building or structure is separated. The
water consumption thus attributable to each of the separate
apartments shall be applied at the minimum quarterly rate per
quarter, plus usage as set forth in this chapter. The total amount to
be charged for such apartments in the building or structure shall
be charged to the property owner. An “apartment” is defined as a
portion of a house, building or other structure consisting of a group
of rooms containing sleeping, cooking and eating facilities and
arranged to be occupied by the members of a family.
(2) Where a building or structure contains a commercial establishment
on the ground floor, including but not limited to retail stores,
barbershops, beauty salons, garages, banks, or other types of
businesses not hereinbefore provided for, and additional floors
above the main floor are wholly or partly devoted to separate
commercial uses, including offices, the said premises shall be
charged the minimum quarterly rate per each floor so used. In the
event that the said building contains an apartment or apartments
above the main floor, there shall be charged the minimum
quarterly, plus usage pursuant to § 144-8B for each apartment
therein contained above the main floor. The total amount to be
charged for all such apartments in the building or structure is then
charged to the property owner.
C. The sewer rates for all consumers outside the sewer district shall be 1
1/2 times the rate for consumers within the sewer district.28
28.Editor’s Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 144-8 MOBILE HOMES AND MOBILE HOME § 144-9
121:131
§ 144-9. New sewer connection charge. [Amended 10-20-1997 by
L.L. No. 2-1997]
Where a new sewer connection is required, a one-time construction
assessment will be made for each sewer connection in an amount
established by the Board of Trustees, as may be amended from time to time.
§ 144-10. Penalties and lien.
Sewer rents, together with the amount of any penalty which shall become
due and owing as provided in this chapter, shall constitute a lien upon the
real property served by the sewer system or such part or parts thereof for
which sewer rents shall have been established and imposed. Such rents
and/or penalties due may be included in the Village tax levy accounted for
and collected pursuant to Article 11 of the New York State Village Law or
such rents and/or penalties due may be collected pursuant to the provisions
of Article 14-F of the New York State General Municipal Law.
Chapter 147
SEWER USE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 76.
Sewer rents and charges — See Ch. 144.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 163.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 167.
Water — See Ch. 189.
Zoning — See Ch. 200.
§ 144-9 PALMYRA CODE § 144-10
121:132
ARTICLE I
Definitions
§ 147-1. Definitions and word usage.
A. Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meaning of
terms used in this chapter shall be as follows:
B.O.D. (denoting biochemical oxygen demand) — The quantity of
oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under
standard laboratory procedure in five days at 20° C. expressed in parts
per million by weight.
BUILDING DRAIN — That part of the lowest horizontal piping of a
drainage system which receives the discharge from soil wastes, and
other drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it
to the building sewer beginning five feet outside the inner face of the
building wall.
BUILDING SEWER — The extension from the building drain to the
public sewer or other place of disposal.
GARBAGE — Solid wastes from the preparation, cooking, and
dispensing of food, and from the handling, storage and sale of produce.
INDUSTRIAL WASTES — The liquid wastes from industrial processes
as distinct from sanitary sewage.
NATURAL OUTLET — Any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake
or other body of surface water or groundwater.
PERSON — Any individual, firm, company, association, society,
corporation, or group.
pH — The logarithm of the reciprocal of the weight of hydrogen ions in
grams per liter of solution.
PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE — The wastes from the preparation,
cooking, and dispensing of food that have been shredded to such
degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions
normally prevailing in public sewers, with no article greater than 1/2
inch in any dimension.
PUBLIC SEWER — A sewer in which all owners of abutting properties
have equal rights and is controlled by public authority.
SANITARY SEWER — A sewer which carries sewage and to which
stormwater, surface water and groundwater are not intentionally
admitted.
SEWAGE — A combination of the water-carried wastes from residences,
business buildings, institutions and industrial establishments together
with such groundwater, surface water and stormwater as may be
present.
SEWAGE TREATMENT PLANT — Any arrangement of devices and
structures used for treating sewage.
§ 147-1 MOBILE HOMES AND MOBILE HOME § 147-1
121:133
SEWAGE WORKS — All facilities for collecting, pumping, treating and
disposing of sewage.29
SEWER — A pipe or conduit for carrying sewage.
STORM SEWER or STORM DRAIN — A sewer which carries storm
and surface water and drainage, but excludes sewage and polluted
industrial wastes.
SUSPENDED SOLIDS — Solids that either float on the surface of, or
are in suspension in, water, sewage or other liquids, and which are
removable by laboratory filtering.
WATERCOURSE — A channel in which a flow of water occurs, either
continuously or intermittently.
B. “Shall” is mandatory; “may” is permissive.
29.Editor’s Note: The original definition of “Superintendent,” which immediately followed
this definition, was deleted at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
I).
§ 147-1 PALMYRA CODE § 147-1
121:134
ARTICLE II
Use of Public Sewers Required
§ 147-2. Unsanitary deposits on property prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit, or permit to be
deposited in an unsanitary manner upon public or private property within
the Village of Palmyra, or in any area under the jurisdiction of said Village,
any human or animal excrement, garbage, or other objectionable waste.
§ 147-3. Unsanitary discharges into outlets prohibited.
It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the Village of
Palmyra, or in any area under the jurisdiction of said Village, any sanitary
sewage, industrial wastes or other polluted waters, except where suitable
treatment has been provided in accordance with subsequent provisions of
this chapter.
§ 147-4. Use of privies, cesspools and similar receptacles restricted.
Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful to construct or maintain
any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool or other facility intended or used
for the disposal of sewage.
§ 147-5. Sewer facilities to be used when available.
The owner of all houses, buildings or properties used for human occupancy,
employment, recreation or other purposes, situated within the Village of
Palmyra and abutting on any street or right-of-way in which there is now
located, or may in the future be located, a public sanitary sewer of the
Village, is hereby required at his expense to install suitable toilet facilities
therein and to connect such facilities directly with the proper public sewer,
in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, within 90 days after date
of official notice to do so, provided that said public sewer is accessible and
available.
§ 147-2 MOBILE HOMES AND MOBILE HOME § 147-5
121:135

ARTICLE III
Private Sewage Disposal
§ 147-6. Use of private disposal limited.
Where a public sanitary or combined sewer is not available under the
provisions of § 147-5, the building sewer shall be connected to a private
sewage disposal system complying with the provisions of this article.
§ 147-7. Permit required for construction of private facilities.30
Before commencement of construction of a private sewage disposal system
the owner shall first obtain a written permit signed by the Village Engineer
or other Village-designated representative. The application for such permit
shall be made on a form furnished by the Village, which the applicant
shall supplement by any plans, specifications and other information as
are deemed necessary by the Village Engineer or other Village-designated
representative. A permit and inspection fee in the amount as set from time
to time by resolution of the Board of Trustees shall be paid to the Village
Treasurer at the time the application is filed.
§ 147-8. Inspection.31
A permit for a private sewage disposal system shall not become effective
until the installation is completed to the satisfaction of the Village Engineer
or other Village-designated representative. He shall be allowed to inspect
the work at all stages of construction and, in any event, the applicant
for the permit shall notify the Village Clerk when the work is ready for
final inspection, and before any underground portions are covered. The
inspection shall be within 72 hours of the receipt of notice.
§ 147-9. System to comply with recommendations.32
The type, capacities, location and layout of private sewage disposal systems
shall comply with all recommendations of the Code Enforcement Officer. No
septic tank or cesspool shall be permitted to discharge to any public sewer
or natural outlet.
§ 147-10. When public sewers become available.
At such time as a public sewer becomes available to a property served by a
private sewage disposal system, as provided in § 147-5, a direct connection
shall be made to the public sewer in compliance with this chapter, and any
septic tanks, cesspools and similar private sewage disposal facilities shall
be abandoned.
30.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
31.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
32.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 147-6 MOBILE HOMES AND MOBILE HOME § 147-11
121:137
§ 147-11. Operation of private facilities.
The owner shall operate and maintain the private sewage disposal facilities
in a sanitary manner at all times, at no expense to the Village.
§ 147-12. Saving clause.
No statement contained in this article shall be construed to interfere with
any additional requirements that may be imposed by the Health Officer.
§ 147-11 PALMYRA CODE § 147-12
121:138
ARTICLE IV
Building Sewers and Connections
§ 147-13. Permit required to alter or open sewers.33
No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with or
opening into, use, alter or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof
without first obtaining an application from the Village Clerk. The permit
application shall be supplemented by any plans, specifications or other
information considered pertinent.34
§ 147-14. Fees and costs.35
Application fees are set from time to time by resolution of the Board of
Trustees. All costs and expenses incident to the installation and connection
of the building sewer above and beyond the application fee shall be borne by
the owner. The owner shall indemnify the Village from any loss or damage
that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the
building sewer.
§ 147-15. Separate line to each building; exception.36
A separate and independent building-sewer line shall be provided for every
building except where otherwise permitted by the Village Engineer or duly
appointed official of the Village Board; except where one building stands at
the rear of another on an interior lot and no private sewer is available or can
be constructed to the rear building through an adjoining alley, court, yard
or driveway, the building sewer from the front building may be extended to
the rear building and the whole considered as one building sewer.37
§ 147-16. Materials.38
The building sewer shall be constructed of one of the following materials:
A. Sewer lateral pipe for gravity sewer.
(1) Cast iron sewer pipe shall be extra heavy class with rubber gasket
joints and maximum lengths equal to five feet zero inches per
ASTM A-74.
33.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
34.Editor’s Note: Original § 17-14, Classes of sewer permits, which immediately followed this
section, was deleted at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
35.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
36.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
37.Editor’s Note: Original § 17-17, Old sewers to new buildings, which immediately followed
this section, was deleted at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
I).
38.Editor’s Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 147-13 MOBILE HOMES AND MOBILE HOME § 147-16
121:139
§ 147-17. Size and slope.39
The size and slope of the building sewer shall be subject to the approval of
the Village Engineer or duly appointed official of the Village Board, but in
no event shall the diameter be less than four inches. The slope shall be not
less than 1/4 inch per foot.
§ 147-18. Laying of sewer.
No building sewer shall be laid parallel to or within three feet of any bearing
wall, which might thereby be weakened. The depth shall be sufficient to
afford protection from frost. The building sewer shall be laid at uniform
grade and in straight alignment insofar as possible. Changes in direction
shall be made only with properly curved pipe and fittings.
§ 147-19. Low drains.
In all buildings in which any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow
to the public sewer, sanitary sewage carried by such drain shall be lifted by
approved artificial means and discharged to the building sewer.
§ 147-20. Excavations and fill.40
All excavations required for the installation of a building sewer shall be
open-trench work unless otherwise approved by the Superintendent of
the Highway Department. Pipe laying and backfill shall be performed in
accordance with ASTM specification C12 except that no backfill shall be
placed until the work has been inspected.
§ 147-21. Joints.
All joints and connections shall be made gastight and watertight.
§ 147-22. Connecting private to public sewer.41
The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall be made
at the “Y” branch, if such branch is available at a suitable location. If the
public sewer is 12 inches in diameter or less, and no properly located “Y”
branch is available, the owner shall at his expense install a “Y” branch in
(2) Polyvinyl chloride (PVC) pipe shall be of a minimum wall thickness
SDR 35 with elastomeric gasket joints, supplied in standard
lengths, and conform to ASTM D-3034.
B. Sewer lateral pipe for pressure sewer.
(1) Polyvinyl chloride (PVC) pipe and fittings shall meet the same
requirements as PVC force mains.
39.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
40.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
41.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 147-16 PALMYRA CODE § 147-22
121:140
the public sewer at the location specified by the Village Engineer or duly
appointed official of the Village Board. Where the public sewer is greater
than 12 inches in diameter and no properly located “Y” branch is available,
a neat hole may be cut into the public sewer to receive the building sewer
with entry in the downstream direction at an angle of about 45°. A fortyfive-
degree ell may be used to make such connection with the spigot end
cut so as not to extend past the inner surface of the public sewer. The invert
of the building sewer at the point of connection shall be at the same or
at a higher elevation than the invert of the public sewer. A smooth, neat
joint shall be made and the connection made secure and watertight by
encasement of concrete. Special fittings may be used for the connection
only when approved by the Village Engineer or duly appointed official of the
Village Board.
§ 147-23. Inspection.42
The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the Village Clerk
or Water or Sewer Departments when the building sewer is ready for
inspection and connection to the public sewer. The connection shall be
made under the supervision of the Village Engineer or duly appointed
official of the Village Board, or his representative.
§ 147-24. Guarding excavations; restoration.
All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately guarded
with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard. Streets,
sidewalks, parkways and other public property disturbed in the course of
work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the Village.
§ 147-25. Cleanouts. [Added 4-11-1961 43]
There shall be an accessible cleanout on the building drain near its junction
with the building sewer or building trap inside the building. The cleanout
shall be installed on the sewer side of all building fixtures except the
building trap, if one is required. Approved material shall be four-inch castiron
pipe, or SDR-35 PVC. In no case shall the cleanout opening be less than
three inches above the basement or grade floor, whichever is lower. The
open drain of a basement shower shall not be less than three inches above
the basement or grade floor, whichever is lower.
§ 147-26. Traps. [Added 4-11-1961]
Where all water fixtures in a building are equipped with suitable fixture
traps a building trap shall not be required. Where any fixtures are not
equipped with suitable traps, there shall be a building trap located within
two feet of the cellar or basement wall inside the building consisting of four-
42.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
43.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 147-22 MOBILE HOMES AND MOBILE HOME § 147-26
121:141
inch cast-iron soil pipe provided with two brass cleanout plugs and suitably
vented on the house side.
§ 147-27. Connection between drain and sewer. [Added 4-11-1961]
The connection between the building drain and building sewer shall be a
duplex coupling and there shall be no threaded connection ahead of the
cleanout on the sewer side of the building connection. The bands shall be of
a full sweep and the cleanout plug shall be of full size.44
44.Editor’s Note: Original § 17-30, Surety for compliance required, added 4-11-1961, which
immediately followed this section, was deleted at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 147-26 PALMYRA CODE § 147-27
121:142
ARTICLE V
Regulations for Use of Public Sewers
§ 147-28. Prohibited discharges. [Amended 8-28-1972]
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any stormwater,
surface water, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, cooking
water or unpolluted industrial process waters to any sanitary sewer, nor
make or maintain any connections facilitating the discharge of said
stormwater, surface water, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage,
cooling water or unpolluted industrial process waters.
§ 147-29. Storm sewers.45
Stormwater and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to such
sewers as are specifically designated as storm sewers or to a natural outlet
approved by the Superintendent of the Highway Department. Industrial
cooling water or unpolluted process waters may be discharged upon
approval of the Superintendent of the Highway Department, to a storm
sewer or natural outlet.
§ 147-30. Description of prohibited discharges.
Except as hereinafter provided, no person shall discharge or cause to be
discharged any of the following described waters or wastes to any public
sewer:
A. Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than 150° F.
B. Any water or waste which may contain more than 100 parts per million
by weight of fat, oil or grease.
C. Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil or other flammable or explosive
liquid, solid or gas.
D. Any garbage that has not been properly shredded.
E. Any ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags,
feathers, tar, plastics, wood, paunch manure or any other solid or
viscous substance capable of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers
or other interference with the proper operation of the sewage works.
F. Any waters or waste having a pH lower than 5.5 or higher than 9.0, or
having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or
hazard to structures, equipment and personnel of the sewage works.
G. Any waters or wastes containing a toxic or poisonous substance in
sufficient quantity to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment
process, or which constitute a hazard to humans or animals, or create
any hazard in the receiving waters of the sewage treatment plant.
45.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 147-28 MOBILE HOMES AND MOBILE HOME § 147-30
121:143
§ 147-31. Interceptors required.46
Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion of
the Village Engineer or duly appointed official of the Village Board, they
are necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing grease
in excessive amounts, or any flammable wastes, sand and other harmful
ingredients; except that such interceptors shall not be required for private
living quarters or dwelling units. All interceptors shall be of a type and
capacity approved by the Village Engineer or duly appointed official of the
Village Board and shall be located as to be readily and easily accessible for
cleaning and inspection. Grease and oil interceptors shall be constructed of
impervious materials capable of withstanding abrupt and extreme changes
in temperature. They shall be of substantial construction, watertight and
equipped with easily removed covers which when bolted in place shall be
gastight and watertight.
§ 147-32. Maintenance of interceptors.
Where installed, all grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be maintained by
the owner, at his expense, in continuously efficient operation at all times.
§ 147-33. Treatment facilities.47
The admission into the public sewers of any waters or wastes having a
five-day biochemical oxygen demand greater than 300 parts per million
by weight, or containing more than 350 parts per million by weight of
suspended solids, or containing any quantity of substances having the
characteristics described in § 147-30C, or having an average daily flow
greater than 2% of the average daily sewage flow of the Village, shall be
subject to the review of the Village Engineer or duly appointed official of
the Village Board. Where necessary in the opinion of the Village Engineer
or duly appointed official of the Village Board, the owner shall provide,
at his sole expense, such preliminary treatment as may be necessary to
reduce the biochemical oxygen demand to 300 parts per million and the
suspended solids to 350 part per million by weight, or reduce objectionable
characteristics or constituents to within the maximum limits provided for in
§ 147-30, or control the quantities and rates of discharge of such waters or
wastes. Plans, specifications, and any other pertinent information relating
to proposed preliminary treatment facilities shall be submitted for the
approval of both the Village Engineer or duly appointed official of the
H. Any waters or wastes containing suspended solids of such character
and quantity that unusual attention or expense is required to handle
such materials at the sewage treatment plant.
I. Any noxious or malodorous gas or substance capable of creating a
public nuisance.
46.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
47.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 147-30 PALMYRA CODE § 147-33
121:144
Village Board and the Code Enforcement Officer, and no construction of
such facilities shall be commenced until said approvals are obtained in
writing.
§ 147-34. Treatment facilities to be maintained by owner.
Where preliminary treatment facilities are provided for any waters or
wastes, they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective
operation by the owner at his expense.
§ 147-35. Manholes.48
When required by the Superintendent of the Highway Department, the
owner of any property served by a building sewer carrying industrial wastes
shall install a suitable control manhole in the building sewer to facilitate
observation, sampling and measurement of the wastes. Such manhole, when
required, shall be accessibly and safely located and shall be constructed
in accordance with plans approved by the Superintendent of the Highway
Department. The manhole shall be installed by the owner at his sole
expense and shall be maintained by him so as to be safe and accessible at
all times.
§ 147-36. Tests.
All measurements, tests and analyses of the characteristics of waters and
wastes to which reference is made in §§ 147-30 and 147-33 shall be
determined in accordance with “Standard Methods for the Examination
of Water and Sewage,” and shall be determined at the control manhole
provided for in § 147-35, or upon suitable samples taken at said control
manhole. In the event that no special manhole has been required, the
control manhole shall be considered to be the nearest downstream manhole
in the public sewer from the point where the building sewer is connected.
§ 147-37. Saving clause.
No statement contained in this article shall be construed as preventing any
special agreement or arrangement between the Village and any industrial
concern whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or character may
be accepted by the Village for treatment, subject to payment therefor by the
industrial concern.
48.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 147-33 MOBILE HOMES AND MOBILE HOME § 147-37
121:145

ARTICLE VI
Protection from Damage
§ 147-38. Penalty for damage.
No unauthorized person shall maliciously, willfully or negligently break,
damage, destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any structure,
appurtenance or equipment which is a part of the municipal sewage works.
Any person violating this provision shall be subject to immediate arrest
under charge of disorderly conduct.
§ 147-38 MOBILE HOMES AND MOBILE HOME § 147-38
121:147

ARTICLE VII
Powers and Authority of Inspectors
§ 147-39. Right of entry.49
The Village Engineer or duly appointed official of the Village Board and
other duly authorized employees of the Village bearing proper credentials
and identification shall be permitted to enter upon all properties for the
purposes of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling and testing, in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
49.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 147-39 MOBILE HOMES AND MOBILE HOME § 147-39
121:149

ARTICLE VIII
Penalties
§ 147-40. Notice of violation; abatement.
Any person found to be violating any provision of this chapter except
§ 147-38 shall be served by the Village with written notice stating the nature
of the violation and providing a reasonable time limit for the satisfactory
correction thereof. The offender shall, within the period of time stated in
such notice, permanently cease all violations.
§ 147-41. Penalties for offenses.50
A violation of this chapter beyond the time limit provided by § 147-40 shall
subject such person, upon conviction, to a fine not exceeding $250 or a term
of imprisonment not exceeding 15 days, or both, for each violation. Each day
in which such violation shall continue shall be deemed a separate offense.
§ 147-42. Liability for expense.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall become
liable to the Village for any expense, loss or damage occasioned by reason
of such violation.
50.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 147-40 MOBILE HOMES AND MOBILE HOME § 147-42
121:151
Chapter 149
SEX OFFENDERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Adult uses — See Ch. 59.
Curfew — See Ch. 84.
Parks and recreation areas — See Ch. 132.
§ 149-1. Legislative authority.
This chapter is adopted pursuant to the Municipal Home Rule Law, which
enables local governments to adopt local laws relating to their property,
affairs, or government, so long as the local laws are not inconsistent with
the New York State Constitution or any general law of New York State.
The New York State Municipal Home Rule Law also authorizes local
governments to adopt local laws regulating the protection, order, conduct,
safety, health and welfare of the persons within the local municipality.
§ 149-2. Purpose.
A. The purpose of this chapter is to promote the health, safety, and welfare
of the community (including the preservation and protection of the
persons, property, minors, and children of the Village of Palmyra) and to
protect peace and good order in the Village, by regulating and
controlling residency, presence, and activities of certain sex offenders
in the Village of Palmyra and by providing enforcement in furtherance
thereof.
B. The State of New York and the Federal Government regulate certain
activities of sex offenders, but such regulations do not preclude further
legislation by municipalities. Thus, the Village of Palmyra is seeking to
further define local laws in relationship to individuals who have been
categorized as Level Two sex offenders and Level Three sex offenders.
Level Two and Level Three registered sex offenders, some of whom
have committed criminal sexual offenses against minors, reside in the
Village. Under the Corrections Law, Level Two sex offenders have been
determined to pose a moderate risk of repeat offense and Level Three
sex offenders have been determined to pose a high risk of repeat
offense. In order to protect the minor inhabitants of the Village from
such sex offenders, and the peace and good order therein, the Village
Board of the Village of Palmyra finds and determines that it is
necessary, and in the best interest of the residents of the Village of
Palmyra, to establish residency, proximity and activity restrictions for
all Level Two and Level Three registered sex offenders who reside in
the Village of Palmyra or who are otherwise actually present in the
Village of Palmyra at any time.
§ 147-42 PALMYRA CODE § 149-3
121:152
§ 149-3. Conflict with state or federal laws.
In the event of any conflict between federal law, New York State Law and
this chapter, federal law shall be deemed primary, state law secondary, and
this chapter tertiary, but only to the extent this chapter is impermissibly
inconsistent with such federal or state laws. Unless expressly preempted,
any provisions of this chapter that are more restrictive or stringent than
any applicable federal or state law shall be and remain enforceable until
and unless declared unenforceable, unconstitutional, or impermissible by a
court or other tribunal of competent jurisdiction.
§ 149-4. Word usage; definitions.
A. Terms and words used herein shall be construed in the singular or
plural as the context admits or requires.
B. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CHILD or MINOR — Person less than 18 years of age.
COMMUNITY RECREATIONAL FACILITY — A place, area, structure, or
other property or facility owned or operated by a governmental entity
or nonprofit organization used by persons in the community to carry out
recreational activities, including, but not limited to, outdoor and indoor
facilities such as tennis courts, swimming pools, soccer fields, baseball
fields, playgrounds, and/or similar facilities.
DAY-CARE FACILITY — Any property licensed by New York State (or
any county, governmental or municipal subdivision thereof) for the
provision of child or adult day care, including without limitation, Head
Start, pre-school and after-school services or facilities, and all
playgrounds adjacent thereto.
FACILITY FOR MINORS — Any facility or institution regularly used for
the training, entertainment, recreation, care or treatment of minors,
including, but not limited to day-care facilities and summer or other day
or overnight camps and campgrounds.
HOUSE OF WORSHIP — Any properties owned by any New York Stateregistered
charitable organization or religious corporation used or
utilized for prayer, meditation, celebratory or mass services, and/or
communion with nature or any one or more deities, including but not
limited to churches, synagogues, temples, shrines, and the like.
LEVEL THREE SEX OFFENDER —
A person who is designated as a Level Three sex offender pursuant
to Article 6-C of the Correction Law of the State of New York; or
(1)
A person classified as a Level Three sex offender by the Board of
Examiners of Sex Offenders; or
(2)
§ 149-3 MOBILE HOMES AND MOBILE HOME § 149-4
121:153
LEVEL TWO SEX OFFENDERS —
PERMIT — A date-and-time-specific written authorization stating that
a sex offender may be in, enter upon, pass through, or approach any
specifically identified prohibited area, which authorization may be
issued and signed by any sex offender's probation officer or parole
officer, the Village Clerk of the Village of Palmyra pursuant to a
resolution of the Village Board, or any Judge or Justice of the Unified
Court System of the State of New York.
PROHIBITED AREA — As to Level Two sex offender or Level Three
sex offender, any school grounds, special education facility, house of
worship, day-care facility, community recreational facility, museum
facility, library facility, or any other facility for minors while any person
under 18 years of age is present.
RESIDENCE — The place where a person sleeps, and may include more
than one location, and may be mobile or transitory.
SCHOOL GROUNDS — Any area in, under, over, on, or within any
building, structure, athletic playing field, playground or land contained
within the real property boundary line of a public or private nursery
school, kindergarten, preschool facility, Head Start teaching or daycare
facility, elementary school, parochial school, intermediate school,
junior high school, vocational school, special education center or
facility, Board of Cooperative Education Services facility, or high school.
"School grounds" shall also include all lands and areas within 500
feet of any area, structure or property described in the immediately
preceding sentence. "School grounds" shall also include any school
buses or other school vehicles, school bus stops and their immediate
vicinity, any area where any school bus (or other school vehicle) loads
Any person adjudicated as a Level Three sex offender by any court
of the State of New York; or
(3)
Any person listed as a Level Three sex offender on the New York
State Registry of Sex Offenders, or its equivalent.
(4)
A person who is designated as a Level Two sex offender pursuant
to Article 6-C of the Correction Law of the State of New York; or
(1)
A person classified as a Level Two sex offender by the Board of
Examiners of Sex Offenders; or
(2)
Any person adjudicated as a Level Two sex offender by any court of
the State of New York; or
(3)
Any person listed as a Level Two sex offender on the New York
State Registry of Sex Offenders, or its equivalent. All nonresidents
of the State of New York that are required to register as a sex
offender in their jurisdiction of residence or domicile shall also
be deemed "Level Two sex offenders" under this chapter, unless
reclassified in another class by the State of New York.
(4)
§ 149-4 PALMYRA CODE § 149-4
121:154
§ 149-5. Restrictions applicable to certain sex offenders.
§ 149-6. Permits.
or unloads any minors, and all school crosswalks and their immediate
vicinities.
SPECIAL EDUCATIONAL FACILITY —
VILLAGE — The Village of Palmyra, as located in Wayne County, New
York.
Any location and/or facility where any physically or mentally
handicapped or impaired persons work, are trained, cared for and/
or educated; or
(1)
Any home, residential center, or nonresidential center used for the
detention, supervision, education, and/or training of any persons
under age 21 who have been voluntarily or involuntarily
adjudicated or otherwise declared or determined to be a juvenile
delinquent or person in need of supervision.
(2)
A. Level Two sex offenders and Level Three sex offenders are hereby
prohibited from residing within 500 feet of the boundary lines of each
and any of the following: school grounds, a house of worship, a
community recreational facility, a day-care facility, a special education
facility, a museum, a library, and any other facility for minors, unless
granted a permit pursuant to the requirements of this chapter.
B. Level Two sex offenders and Level Three sex offenders are hereby
prohibited from being physically present within 500 feet of the
boundary lines of each and any of the following: school grounds, a
house of worship, a community recreational facility, a day-care facility, a
special education facility, a museum, a library, and any other facility for
minors, unless granted a permit pursuant to the requirements of this
chapter.
C. Level Two sex offenders and Level Three sex offenders are hereby
prohibited from observing, photographing, or recording in any manner
the movements of vehicles, persons or minors at any of the following:
school grounds, a house of worship, a community recreational facility, a
day-care facility, a special education facility, a museum, a library and
any other facility for minors.
D. Each Level Two sex offender and Level Three sex offender must provide
each school ground, house of worship, community recreational facility,
day-care facility, special education facility, museum, library, and each
other facility for minors with a copy of their permit prior to being
present in any prohibited area.
A. Permits may only be obtained from the sex offender's probation officer
or parole officer, the Village Clerk of the Village of Palmyra pursuant to
§ 149-4 MOBILE HOMES AND MOBILE HOME § 149-6
121:155
§ 149-7. Emergencies and lawful travel; limited permit exemptions.
Level Two sex offenders and Level Three sex offenders may lawfully enter
into or upon prohibited areas:
a resolution of the Village Board, or any Judge or Justice of the Unified
Court System of the State of New York.
B. Each permit must be issued for a specific time period, not to exceed one
year, and shall be of no further force or effect after expiration of the
time specified. Permit renewal may be issued on the same terms and
conditions as on the original permit. Where practical to so state, each
permit shall only be granted for specified times, dates, events, and
locations. For example, a permit that recites that it is granted for the
purpose of allowing the delivery of a dependent child to a school upon
each school-day morning shall be a sufficient specification of times,
dates, events, and locations.
C. Permits may only be granted when reasonably necessary or when
reasonably tailored to allow the exercise of activities authorized by the
laws of the State of New York or of the United States, or activities that
are otherwise protected by the Constitution of the State of New York or
the Constitution of the United States.
D. Permits allow presence in prohibited areas only for so long as is
reasonably necessary to accomplish the purpose for which the permit is
granted, and do not permit presence at any other times, or for any other
reasons.
E. It shall be presumptively reasonable for a sex offender to seek a permit
in the following circumstances:
(1) To attend any educational facility in which he or she is lawfully
enrolled as a student and otherwise entitled to attend classes at
such facility;
(2) To pick up or drop off any dependent minor family member or
dependent at any educational facility where no other reasonable
transportation options are available;
(3) To allow a sex offender to vote, petition government for a redress of
grievances, or engage in other lawful constitutionally protected
activities that are guaranteed by the Constitution of the United
States, or the State of New York, or for which rights are codified or
memorialized by the statutes or regulation of the State of New York
and/or the United States.
A. For bona fide medical emergencies that require immediate attention, so
long as they remove themselves immediately when such emergency
subsides or emergency medical care is provided;
§ 149-6 PALMYRA CODE § 149-7
121:156
§ 149-8. Residency restrictions.
§ 149-9. Notice.
B. To engage in lawful business at a federal, state, or local court or
governmental agency, so long as they remove themselves promptly
when such business is concluded; or
C. To travel upon a public highway for lawful reasons and without any
pretext or planned stops within any prohibited area.
A. No Level Two or Level Three sex offender shall establish a residence
within a radius of 500 feet, measured from the nearest property line, of
any land utilized as a day-care center, park, playground, school, house
of worship, community recreational facility, special education facility,
museum, library, or any other facility for the care or education of
minors.
B. The provisions of this section shall not apply:
(1) To a Level Two sex offender or Level Three sex offender who:
(a) Has acquired an ownership interest in a residence prior to the
effective date of this chapter; or
(b) Has established a residence prior to the effective date of this
chapter pursuant to the terms of a written lease; provided,
however, said Level Two or Level Three sex offender shall not
renew or otherwise extend said lease beyond the term in effect
on the date on which this chapter became effective; or
(2) If, after the effective date of this chapter a day-care center, park,
playground, school, community recreational facility, special
education facility, museum, library, and any other facility for the
care or education of minors is established within a radius of 500
feet, measured from the nearest property line thereof, from the
residence of the Level Two sex offender or Level Three sex offender
then existing; or
(3) If the Level Two sex offender or Level Three sex offender is
required to reside at a location fixed by order of a court of
competent jurisdiction, or by any federal, state or county agency
having jurisdiction over the residence location or activities of the
registered sex offender.
A. Notice in writing of the adoption and filing of this chapter shall be
mailed by certified or registered mail, return receipt requested, to each
Level Two sex offender and Level Three sex offender now or in the
future residing within the Village of Palmyra. Said notice shall be either
mailed certified or registered mail, return receipt requested, and by
regular mail to the last-known mailing address of the Level Two sex
offender and Level Three sex offender or delivered by any police officer
§ 149-7 MOBILE HOMES AND MOBILE HOME § 149-9
121:157
§ 149-10. Enforcement.
§ 149-11. Limitation of liability.
The Village shall not be liable or responsible for any injury to any civil or
other right, injuries to persons, or injury or damage to property, due to the
or peace officer to the sex offender or other party required to be
notified.
B. Any Level Two sex offender or Level Three sex offender who resides at a
location prohibited by this chapter shall, upon written notice from the
Village Clerk of the Village of Palmyra, discontinue such residency
within 30 days following the receipt of such notice. Such written notice
may be served upon the registered sex offender by registered or
certified mail, return receipt requested, or by personal service.
A. All of New York State law generally applicable to misdemeanors shall
apply to any criminal misdemeanor proceeding brought under this
section, and/except that each and any misdemeanor identified herein
shall be deemed an unclassified misdemeanor.
B. Any person that violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall be:
(1) Guilty of an unclassified misdemeanor and subject to a criminal fine
of not more than $1,000 and/or a period of incarceration not to
exceed 60 days; or
(2) Subject to a civil penalty of not more than $2,500 to be recovered
by the Village in a civil action. Each day that a violation of this
chapter occurs or continues shall be deemed a separate criminal or
civil violation of this chapter.
C. Each and all remedies and rights provided under this chapter shall be
cumulative. The Village's pursuit of any one right or remedy does not
effect a waiver or an election of remedies, and the Village may
thereafter pursue or continue to pursue any other right or remedy it
may have. The Village may also maintain actions or proceedings in the
name of the Village in a court of competent jurisdiction to:
(1) Compel compliance with or restrain by injunction the violation of
any provision or requirement of this chapter; and/or
(2) To evict or seek forcible removal of any person in violation of this
chapter.
D. A presumption of evidence and/or law shall apply to all proceedings
brought under this chapter such that any individual whose name is
listed in the New York State Sex Offender Registry, or its equivalent, as
a Level Two sex offender or a Level Three sex offender, is, for purposes
of this chapter a Level Two sex offender or a Level Three sex offender,
as applicable.
§ 149-9 PALMYRA CODE § 149-11
121:158
Village's actions, or failures to act, under or pursuant to this chapter, unless
it is proven to a reasonable degree of certainty that such injury or damage
was solely caused by a willful or intentional act of the Village, except that
the Village maintains all immunities from liability as set forth or referenced
in section 168-i of the Correction Law of the State of New York, as it now
exists or may be hereafter amended.
Chapter 151
SKATEBOARDS AND IN-LINE SKATES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 163.
§ 151-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to protect the public health, safety, and
welfare because of the hazards to the public, and the users of skateboards
and in-line skates, and annoyance to the public in the places that are
public or open to the public. The Village Board finds that the regulations
hereafter enacted are such that are reasonably necessary to accomplish
these objectives.
§ 151-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
IN-LINE SKATE — A roller skate whose wheels are arranged in a straight
line, including “rollerblades.”
SKATEBOARD — A single platform maintained on wheels, designed or
suitable, or in fact used, for riding underfoot, or a board with roller skate
wheels or other similar wheels attached to the underside without a
mechanism or other device for steering while being used, operated or
ridden.
SKATEBOARD RAMPS — Includes all ramps commonly referred to as such,
platforms constructed, or contriving surfaces, or any and every pattern or
configuration, and other similar devices; things designed for use for riding
a skateboard upon or above any area.
§ 151-3. Use of skateboards and in-line skates.
A. No person shall use or operate or ride on a skateboard or in-line skate
in a careless manner without due caution and circumstances, or while
endangering or in any manner to create a risk or danger to any person
or property, or in any manner to impede or interfere with pedestrian or
vehicular traffic.
§ 149-11 SKATEBOARDS AND IN-LINE SKATES § 151-3
151:159
§ 151-4. Responsibility of parent or guardian.
§ 151-5. Ramps.
If a police officer observes a skateboard ramp on a public street or sidewalk
and determines same to be a traffic or pedestrian hazard, the police officer
may order the ramp’s immediate removal, and the offender(s) shall be given
the opportunity to remove the ramp to a lawful place. If the ramp is not so
removed, or notice cannot be given for any reason, the police officer or the
Highway Department shall remove the ramp, and, if unclaimed within 10
days thereafter, said ramp shall be deemed abandoned.
§ 151-6. Penalties for offenses.
B. No person shall use or propel any skateboard or in-line skate on any
public street where a sidewalk exists, and, when using said sidewalk,
said use is restricted so as not to endanger the use of said sidewalk(s)
by any pedestrian(s).
C. Where sidewalks are not provided, a skateboard or in-line skate may be
used in the street as close to the curb as possible on the right side of the
roadway or its shoulder.
D. No person shall use, operate or ride upon any skateboard or in-line
skate in municipal public parking lots or on any sidewalk which is open
to the public fronting or adjacent to a business, commercial or retail
store or establishment.
A. No parent, guardian or any other person having the legal care, custody
or control of any child under the age of 16 years shall allow or permit
such child to use or propel any skateboard or in-line skate in violation of
§ 151-3; and such parent, guardian or person having legal care, custody
or control shall be subject to the penalties prescribed in § 151-6 of this
chapter.
B. Parents are encouraged to provide and require the use by their children
of safety equipment, including a helmet and elbow and knee pads.
A. Where a first violation of the chapter is observed by a police officer, in
the first instance, said police officer shall issue a written warning to the
violator, and, if said violator is under 16 years of age, said warning shall
be issued to his or her parents or guardians. A record of said warning
shall be kept by the police officer’s department, and the second
violation will result in a penalty in accordance with Subsections B
through D herein.
B. Upon second violation: the skateboard or in-line skates shall be
confiscated for a minimum of period of one week, after which the
skateboard will be returned to the parent or guardian of the minor, or to
the violator if over the age of 16 years.
§ 151-3 PALMYRA CODE § 151-6
151:160
Chapter 155
SNOWPLOWING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 163. Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 183.
C. Upon the third violation: the skateboard or in-line skates shall be
confiscated by a police officer for a minimum of two weeks, and an
appearance ticket issued which will subject the violator, or offender’s
parents if said violator is under the age of 16, to a civil fine of $25 and
confiscation of the skateboard for two weeks, or until said fine is paid,
whichever is later.
D. Upon the fourth violation or subsequent violations thereafter: issuance
of an appearance ticket to the violator, a civil fine not to exceed $50,
and, in lieu of a fine, the presiding Justice of the court may impose a
sentence of community service. If a fine is imposed, the parent or
guardian of an offender less than 16 years old shall be responsible for
payment of said fine.
§ 151-6 SNOWPLOWING § 151-6
155:161

ARTICLE I
Lights
[Adopted 5-4-1992 by L.L. No. 1-1992; amended in its entirety
12-6-2004 by L.L. No. 2-2004]
§ 155-1. Amber light required on all snowplowing vehicles.
Any person operating a motor vehicle and engaging in the plowing of snow
for hire shall have affixed to his or her vehicle a working amber light
visible to all approaching traffic under normal atmospheric conditions from
a distance of 500 feet from such vehicle.
§ 155-2. Penalties for offenses.
Any person not observing the provisions of § 155-1 hereof shall be
punishable, upon conviction, by a fine not exceeding $250 or a term of
imprisonment not exceeding 15 days, or both, for each violation.
§ 155-1 SNOWPLOWING § 155-2
155:163
Chapter 159
SPITTING
§ 159-1. Spitting prohibited.
No person shall, within the Village of Palmyra, at any time after the 20th
day of August, 1909, spit upon any sidewalk, crosswalk, or the floor of any
public place, building, church, school, Village Hall, post office or other place
used for public purposes or gatherings.
§ 159-2. Penalties for offenses.51
Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall be
punishable, upon conviction, by a fine not exceeding $250 or a term of
imprisonment not exceeding 15 days, or both, for each violation.
Chapter 163
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Snowplowing — See Ch. 155.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 167.
Zoning — See Ch. 200.
51.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 155-2 PALMYRA CODE § 159-2
159:164
ARTICLE I
Sidewalk Construction and Maintenance
[Adopted 1-3-1989 by L.L. No. 1-1989 (Ch. 16 of the 1974 Code)]
§ 163-1. Title.
This article shall be known and may be cited as the “Sidewalk Law of the
Village of Palmyra.”
§ 163-2. Purpose.
§ 163-3. Definitions. [Amended 11-5-2004 by L.L. No. 1-2004]
For purposes of this article, the following terms shall have the meaning
indicated:
HAZARDOUS SIDEWALK — A sidewalk in which there is a difference in
elevation of at least one inch at a joint or crack, in the slab or between slabs;
or that portion of a sidewalk so badly spalled, broken or deteriorated as to
present a tripping hazard. The existing surface shall be used in determining
whether or not a sidewalk is hazardous.
SIDEWALK — Any walkway or pathway, whether or not paved, constructed
within the Village right-of-way primarily for the use of pedestrians which is
contiguous to a street as defined in Chapter 200, Zoning, of the Code of the
Village of Palmyra.
§ 163-4. Construction of new sidewalk. [Amended 11-5-2004 by L.L.
No. 1-2004]
A. The purposes of this article are set forth in general terms in enabling
legislation contained in the Village Law. The provisions of this article
shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the protection of the
health, safety and welfare of the people at large, and are designed to
encourage the establishment of reasonable standards for the physical
environment.
B. It is fundamental for the purpose of this article to recognize that
sidewalks have been constructed in the Village for the safe use of the
public at large and for the convenience of property owners and their
guests, and that the public at large has the right to expect reasonable
standards of maintenance and freedom of access to such sidewalks.
C. This section, together with all provisions of the article, shall be
considered when appraising the spirit of this article as a guide to its
interpretation.
A. Where a sidewalk does not exist, the owner of property abutting the
Village right-of-way may request construction of a sidewalk by the
Village. The Village Board shall determine whether the Village shall
construct such sidewalk in the interest of public safety and welfare.
§ 163-1 SPITTING § 163-4
159:165
§ 163-5. Repair or replacement of existing sidewalk. [Amended
11-5-2004 by L.L. No. 1-2004]
§ 163-6. Snow and ice removal. [Amended 11-17-2003 by L.L. No.
2-2003; 11-5-2004 by L.L. No. 1-2004; 8-2-2010 by L.L. No. 3-2010;
3-20-2017 by L.L. No. 1-2017]
With the concurrence of the Village Board, a property owner may have
a sidewalk constructed, within the Village right-of-way, provided:
(1) No sidewalk shall be constructed within four feet of the curbing or
other recognized edge of a public roadway.
(2) Any sidewalk constructed shall have a minimum width of four feet.
(3) Any sidewalk constructed shall be of cement, consisting of a
minimum of a three inch base of crushed stone, tamped, plastic
mesh with expansion joints. The concrete must be 4,000 PSI with a
broom finish. The use of blacktop shall not be permitted. All
sidewalks at street intersections must be handicap accessible.
B. Nothing in this section shall be construed to prevent or in any way limit
the right of the Village to construct a sidewalk of its own volition within
the Village right-of-way.
A. It shall be the responsibility of the Village to repair or replace any
hazardous sections of the sidewalk, and the cost of such replacement
shall be borne in its entirety by the Village unless the hazardous
sidewalk was made hazardous by the acts or negligence of the adjoining
property owner, in which case the adjoining property owner shall be
responsible for the cost of repair or replacement.
B. Where a homeowner removes any or all of his/her sidewalk, for any
reason, he/she is responsible to have that sidewalk replaced within a
reasonable time or within 60 days (weather permitting). After the
sidewalk is removed, the area, however, must be accessible to Village
sidewalk equipment.
A. Purpose. The purpose of this section shall be to preserve the public
peace and good order in the Village and to contribute to the public
welfare, safety and good order of its people and to contribute to the safe
conveyance of its people over the streets and sidewalks of the Village by
establishing certain regulations for the removal of snow and ice from
the streets and sidewalks of the Village that are consistent with the
rights and privileges of other residents of the Village.
B. Duty of the property owner and occupant. It shall be the duty of the
owner and occupant, jointly, of every parcel of real estate adjoining a
public sidewalk, whether the parcel of real estate is occupied by a
structure or not, to keep such sidewalks adjoining such property free
from snow and ice for the full paved width of such sidewalk.
§ 163-4 PALMYRA CODE § 163-6
159:166
C. Time limit. Snow and ice shall be removed within 24 hours after the end
of a snowfall. In addition, sidewalks in front of commercial
establishments and commercial parking lots shall be kept free of snow
and ice at all times between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m.
D. Severe icing. In case snow and ice on any sidewalk shall be frozen so
hard that it cannot be removed without injury to the sidewalk, it shall,
within the time specified in Subsection C, be strewn and kept strewn
with ashes, sand, or other suitable material, so as to be no longer
dangerous to life and limb. As soon as practical thereafter, the sidewalk
shall be completely cleared of snow, ice and other materials strewn
thereon, as provided in this section.
E. Complaints concerning a violation of this chapter shall be made in
writing, sworn to by the complainant and filed with the Village Clerk,
who in turn shall cause a notice to be provided as set forth in
Subsection F herein.
F. The owner, occupant or any person having control over any lot, land or
property found in violation of this section shall be notified, in writing,
only once in any given year for a particular violation. Subsequent
violations of a similar nature at the same location during the same year
shall be corrected by the Village or its agent without notice to the
owner, occupant or person having control of said property. After initial
notification, such owner, occupant or person having control of said
property will be presumed to have been given sufficient notice of
infraction for the entire season. Such notice shall set forth the nature of
the complaint and shall direct the owner or occupant to remove the
snow and ice from the public sidewalk. The notice required under this
section shall be served upon the owner or his or her executor, legal
representative, agent, lessee or any other person having a vested or
contingent interest in such premises as shown by the records of the
Town Assessor or of the Wayne County Clerk. Service shall be made
either personally or, if not by personal service, by registered or certified
mail, and by first-class mail addressed to the last known address, if any,
of the owner, his or her executor, legal representative, agent, lessee or
other person having a vested or contingent interest in such premises as
aforesaid identified. If service is made by registered or certified mail, a
copy of the notice shall be posted on the premises. The notice shall be in
substantially the following form:
§ 163-6 SPITTING § 163-6
159:167
To the owner, occupant or person having charge of land known on
the assessment roll of the Village of Palmyra located on the __________
side of __________ Street or Avenue; or house and lot number __________
located on the __________ side of __________ Street or Avenue.
Notice is hereby given that you have failed to remove snow and/or ice
from the public sidewalk adjoining your property, pursuant to Chapter
163 of the Palmyra Village Code. Said snow and ice must be removed
within three days from the date of notice, if this notice is personally
served upon you, and five days from the date of this notice, if this
notice is served upon you by registered or certified mail.
In case you fail or refuse to comply with this notice on or before the
expiration of said three or five days from the date of this notice, as the
case may be, the Village of Palmyra, acting through its duly authorized
agents, servants, contractors, officers and employees, will enter upon
your land and remove snow and ice. The expense incurred by the
Village will be billed to you and, if not paid within 30 days, will be
assessed against the above-described land and shall constitute a lien
thereon and shall be added to the next real property tax levied against
the property by the Village and collected as provided by law.
You will be notified in writing only once in any given year for a
particular violation. Subsequent violations of a similar nature at the
same location during the same year shall be corrected by the Village
or its agent without notice to the owner, occupant or person having
control of said property. After initial notification, such owner, occupant
or person having control of said property will be presumed to have
been given sufficient notice of infraction for the entire season.
G. Collection of costs for removal by Village. The Clerk/Treasurer shall
promptly present to the owner or occupant of each parcel a bill for the
removal of snow and ice as certified by the Village Clerk/Treasurer. If
not paid within 30 days, the cost thereof shall be assessed against the
property, added to its tax bill and become a lien thereon, collectible in
the same manner as delinquent Village taxes.
H. Snow, ice and water falling from buildings. The owners or occupants of
buildings adjacent to public sidewalks shall take measures to protect
the public from the falling snow, ice or water from such buildings.
I. Placing of snow and ice on another's property. No person, firm,
corporation, property owner or occupant shall remove snow or ice from
any parcel of real estate and place it upon another parcel of real estate
without the express permission of the owner of the parcel of real estate
upon which the snow or ice is to be placed.
J. Tort liability. Such owner or occupant and each of them shall be liable
for any injury or damage by reason of omission, failure or negligence to
keep such sidewalks adjoining such property free from snow and ice.
§ 163-6 PALMYRA CODE § 163-7
159:168
§ 163-7. Removal by Village. [Added 11-5-2004 by L.L. No. 1-2004]
Whenever the owner or occupant of every parcel of real estate adjoining
a public sidewalk fails to remove the snow and ice from such sidewalk
adjoining such property within the time specified in this article or within
eight hours after notice by the Highway Superintendent or other
representative of the Village of Palmyra to remove same, it shall be the
duty of the Highway Superintendent or other representative to remove or
cause to be removed said snow or ice from such sidewalk and notify the
Village Clerk of the expense incurred by the amount of labor, equipment and
materials used.
§ 163-8. Cost of removal. [Added 11-5-2004 by L.L. No. 1-2004]
The Village Clerk shall promptly present to the owner or occupant of each
parcel a bill for the removal of snow and ice as certified by the Highway
Superintendent or other representative of the Village of Palmyra. If not paid
within 30 days, the cost thereof shall be assessed against the property and
become a lien thereon, collectible in the same manner as delinquent Village
real property taxes. If it becomes necessary to relevy the cost of snow and
ice removal upon the owner's real property taxes, then, in that event, there
shall also be an additional $50 added to the relevy as an administrative fee.
§ 163-7 SPITTING § 163-8
159:169
Chapter 167
SUBDIVISION OF LAND
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction— See Ch. 76.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 108.
Sewer use — See Ch. 147.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 163.
Trees — See Ch. 178.
Water — See Ch. 189.
Zoning — See Ch. 200.
§ 167-1. Authority. [Amended 8-1-2016 by L.L. No. 1-2016]
The Zoning Board of Appeals/Planning Board of the Village of Palmyra is
empowered and authorized to approve plans for land subdivision within the
Village of Palmyra. This chapter is adopted for the purpose of providing for
the future growth and development of the Village and affording adequate
facilities for the housing, transportation, distribution, comfort, convenience,
safety, health and welfare of its population.
§ 167-2. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and terms shall have
the meaning indicated:
BOND — A performance approved by the Village Board. Such bond shall
be either issued by a bonding or surety company or shall be issued by the
owner with security acceptable to the Village Board. Such security shall
accompany the performance bond, when the performance bond is issued
by the owner, and may be in the form of cash, certified check or United
States government bearer bonds deposited with the Village Board in the full
amount of the obligation.
DOUBLE FRONTAGE LOTS — Lots with the rear and front lot line abutting
an existing or proposed street right-of-way.
ENGINEER — The duly designated engineer of the Village or, if there be
no such official, the licensed engineer employed by or assigned to the
Zoning Board of Appeals/Planning Board.[Amended 8-1-2016 by L.L. No.
1-2016]
HALF-STREETS — Those that are 1/2 in width, in either paving or in rightof-
way.
MASTER PLAN — A comprehensive plan for the development of the Village
as authorized in § 179-g of the Village Law.52
52.Editor's Note: See now Village Law § 7-718.
§ 163-8 PALMYRA CODE § 167-2
159:170
OFFICIAL MAP — A map established by the Village Board of Trustees under
Section 179-e of the Village Law,53 showing the streets, highways, and parks
theretofore laid out, adopted and established by law and all changes or
additions thereto made under the provisions of the Village Law.
OWNER — The owner of the land proposed to be subdivided, or his agent.
PLAT — The final map, drawing or chart upon which the owner's plan of
subdivision is presented to the Zoning Board of Appeals/Planning Board
for approval, and which, if approved, will be submitted to the County
Clerk for recording. (Also referred to as "final subdivision plat.")[Amended
8-1-2016 by L.L. No. 1-2016]
PRELIMINARY PLAN — The preliminary drawings and supplementary
material indicating the proposed layout of the subdivision to be submitted
to the Zoning Board of Appeals/Planning Board for its
consideration.[Amended 8-1-2016 by L.L. No. 1-2016]
REVERSE FRONTAGE LOTS — Lots with the rear lot line abutting an
existing or proposed limited access highway or public reservation.
STREET — A way for vehicular traffic, whether designated as a street,
highway, thoroughfare, parkway, thruway, road, avenue, boulevard, land,
cul-de-sac, place or however otherwise designated.
SUBDIVISION — The division of any parcel of land into two or more lots,
plots, sites, or other divisions of land for immediate or future sale or for
building development, in such a way as to create one or more streets or
highway.
§ 167-3. Subdivision procedures. [Amended 8-1-2016 by L.L. No.
1-2016]
Whenever any subdivision of land is proposed to be made within the Village
and before any contract for the sale of, or any offer to sell, such subdivision,
or any part thereof, is made, and before any building permit shall be
granted, the procedure outlined below will be observed:
Arterial streets and highways are those used primarily for fast or heavy
traffic.
A.
Collector streets are those which carry traffic from minor streets to
the major system of arterial streets and highways. Collectors may also
serve as secondary arteries to carry some through traffic.
B.
Local streets are those which are used primarily for access to the
abutting properties.
C.
Marginal access streets are minor streets which are parallel to and
adjacent to arterial streets and highways and which provide access to
abutting properties and protection front through traffic.
D.
53.Editor's Note: See now Village Law § 7-724.
§ 167-2 SPITTING § 167-3
159:171
A. The owner shall apply, in writing, to the Zoning Board of Appeals/
Planning Board for approval of such subdivision.
B. Previous to the filing of the preliminary plan, the owner may submit
general site information, a location map and a sketch plan with a
request for informal consideration and advice. This step does not
require formal application, fee or the filing of a plat.
C. The owner shall submit to the Zoning Board of Appeals/Planning Board
two copies of a preliminary plan with other supplementary material as
described in § 167-6 of this chapter and subsequently a final subdivision
plat as hereinafter specified.
D. The Zoning Board of Appeals/Planning Board will discuss the
preliminary plan with the owner at a regular meeting of the Zoning
Board of Appeals/Planning Board.
E. Approval; disapproval.
(1) The Zoning Board of Appeals/Planning Board shall communicate to
the owner, in writing, within 30 days of the regular meeting, its
decision concerning the preliminary plan. If the preliminary plan is
approved, the Zoning Board of Appeals/Planning Board shall
express its approval as "conditional approval" and state any
specific changes it will require in the preliminary plan. For any
subdivision or portion of subdivision, the Zoning Board of Appeals/
Planning Board will state, in writing, the character and extent of
the required public improvements for which waivers may have
been requested which, in the opinion of the Zoning Board of
Appeals/Planning Board, may be waived without jeopardy to public
health, safety, morals, and general welfare or which are
inappropriate because of inadequacy or lack of connecting facilities
adjacent to or in proximity to the proposed subdivision.
(2) If the preliminary plan is disapproved, the Zoning Board of
Appeals/Planning Board shall state the reasons for its disapproval.
The action of the Zoning Board of Appeals/Planning Board shall be
noted on two copies of the preliminary plan, to which shall be
attached referenced statements of any conditions and
requirements determined by the Zoning Board of Appeals/Planning
Board in accordance with this chapter. One copy shall be returned
to the owner and the other retained by the Zoning Board of
Appeals/Planning Board. "Conditional approval" of a preliminary
plan shall not constitute approval of the final subdivision plat.
F. Within six months after receipt of the conditional approval of the
Zoning Board of Appeals/Planning Board with respect to the
preliminary plan, the owner shall file with the Zoning Board of Appeals/
Planning Board two copies drawn in ink on tracing cloth, or black line
prints on tracing cloth, of the final subdivision plat together with other
supplementary material as described in § 167-7 of this chapter. In the
event that a final subdivision plat is not submitted within six months,
§ 167-3 PALMYRA CODE § 167-3
159:172
the application shall be considered withdrawn and any preliminary
approval or waivers of required improvements by the Zoning Board of
Appeals/Planning Board shall be considered lapsed unless an extension
of time is applied for and granted by the Zoning Board of Appeals/
Planning Board.
G. Application for approval of the final subdivision plat shall be submitted,
in writing, to the Zoning Board of Appeals/Planning Board at least 10
days prior to a regular meeting of Zoning Board of Appeals/Planning
Board.
H. The final subdivision plat shall conform to the approved preliminary
plan and shall contain the changes specified by the Zoning Board of
Appeals/Planning Board. If desired by the owner, it may constitute only
that portion of the approved preliminary plan which he proposes to
record and develop at that time, provided that such portion conforms to
all requirements of this chapter.
I. The owner shall, at the time of filing the final subdivision plat with the
Zoning Board of Appeals/Planning Board:
(1) Present a certificate as to adequacy of proposed water supply and
sewerage service as required by the Public Health Law of the State
of New York.
(2) File with the Zoning Board of Appeals/Planning Board a
performance bond, bearing the approval of an attorney acting for
the Village as to form, sufficiency and manner of execution, for the
completion of all the improvements required by § 179-l of the
Village Law54 and not specifically waived by the Zoning Board of
Appeals/Planning Board.
(3) Tender offers of cession, in a form certified as satisfactory by an
attorney acting for the Village, of all land included in streets,
highways, walks or parks and all sewers, drains and water lines not
specifically reserved by the owner. Approval of the final subdivision
plat by the Zoning Board of Appeals/Planning Board, however, shall
not constitute acceptance of offers of cession by the Village.
J. The Zoning Board of Appeals/Planning Board shall hold a public hearing
on the proposed subdivision. Notice of such hearing shall be advertised
in a newspaper of general circulation in the Village, and posted in the
Village Hall, at least five days before such hearing, and all advertising
expenses shall be borne by the subdivider.
K. Within 45 days from the date of the filing of the subdivision plat, the
Zoning Board of Appeals/Planning Board shall approve, modify and
approve, or disapprove the plat.
54.Editor's Note: See now Village Law § 7-730.
§ 167-3 SPITTING § 167-3
159:173
§ 167-4. General requirements for subdivision of land. [Amended
8-1-2016 by L.L. No. 1-2016]
The owner shall observe the following general requirements and principles
of land subdivision:
L. If the final subdivision plat is approved by the Zoning Board of Appeals/
Planning Board, an appropriate notation to that effect will be made on
the face of original drawing or prints on tracing cloth submitted to the
Zoning Board of Appeals/Planning Board. One copy will be returned to
the owner, and one copy will be retained by the Planning Board for its
records.
M. The owner shall file the approved final subdivision plat with the County
Clerk within 90 days after approval by the Zoning Board of Appeals/
Planning Board. If the final subdivision plat is not filed within this time,
the approval shall expire, as provided in § 179-k of the Village Law.55
A. Streets.
(1) The arrangement, character, extent, width and location of all
streets shall conform to the Master Plan, if any, and to the Official
Map, if any, and shall be considered in their relation to other
existing and planned streets, to topographical conditions, to public
convenience and safety, and in their appropriate relation to the
proposed uses of land to be served and/or abutted by such streets.
(2) Where such is not shown in the Master Plan, the arrangement of
streets in a subdivision shall either:
(a) Provide for the continuation or appropriate projection of
existing principal streets in surrounding areas; or
(b) Conform to a plan for the neighborhood approved or adopted
by the Zoning Board of Appeals/Planning Board to meet a
particular situation where topographical or other conditions
make continuance or conformance to existing streets
impracticable or undesirable.
(3) Local streets shall be so laid out that their use by through traffic
will be discouraged.
(4) Where a subdivision abuts or contains an existing or proposed
arterial street, the Zoning Board of Appeals/Planning Board may
require marginal access streets, reverse frontage with screen
planting contained in a nonaccess reservation along the rear
property line, or such other treatment as may be necessary for
adequate protection of residential properties and afford separation
of through and local traffic.
55.Editor's Note: See now Village Law § 7-728.
§ 167-3 PALMYRA CODE § 167-4
159:174
(5) Where a subdivision abuts or contains a waterway, a railroad rightof-
way or a controlled access highway right-of-way, the Zoning
Board of Appeals/Planning Board may require a street
approximately parallel to and on each side of such right-of-way, at a
distance suitable for the appropriate use of the intervening land, as
for park purposes in residential districts or for commercial or
industrial purposes in appropriate districts. Such distances shall
also be determined with due regard for the requirements of
approach grades amid future grade separations.
(6) Reserve strips controlling access to streets, water plants, or to
other land dedicated or to be dedicated to public use shall be
prohibited, except where their control is definitely placed in the
Village under conditions approved by the Zoning Board of Appeals/
Planning Board.
(7) Street jogs with center-line offsets of less than 125 feet shall be
avoided.
(8) A tangent shall be introduced between reverse curves and shall be
of at least 100 feet in length on local and collector streets and of
such lengths as may be deemed necessary by the Zoning Board of
Appeals/Planning Board for arterial streets.
(9) When continuing street lines of a collector street deflect from each
other at any one point by more than 10°, they shall be connected by
a curve with a radius at the inner street right-of-way line of not less
than 350 feet; where continuing street lines of an arterial street
deflect from each other by more than 5°, they shall be connected by
a curve of not less than 800 feet in radius.
(10) Streets shall be laid out so as to intersect as nearly as possible at
right angles, and in no case shall any angle of intersection be less
than 75°. Any change in street alignment to meet this requirement
shall occur at least 100 feet from the intersection.
(11) Street right-of-way lines at street intersections shall be rounded
with a radius of 10 feet or with a greater radius where the Zoning
Board of Appeals/Planning Board may deem it necessary. The
Zoning Board of Appeals/Planning Board may permit comparable
cutoffs or chords in place of rounded corners.
(12) Street right-of-way widths shall be as shown on the Official Map
and, where not shown thereon, shall be not less than as follows:
Street Type
Right-of-Way Width
(feet)
Arterial 100
Collector 80
§ 167-4 SPITTING § 167-4
159:175
Street Type
Right-of-Way Width
(feet)
Local and marginal access 50
(13) Existing streets within the subdivided property shall be widened as
shown on the Official Map, if any, to achieve the width appropriate
to the type of street.
(14) Half streets shall be prohibited.
(15) Culs-de-sac shall not be longer than 800 feet and shall be provided
with a turnaround at the closed end having a street right-of-way
line diameter of at least 140 feet.
(16) Street grades shall not exceed the following, with due allowance
for vertical curves, and with not less than 200 feet between
changes of grade:
Street Type
Maximum Grade
(percent)
Arterial 4%
Collector 6%
Local and marginal access 7%
(17) Grades at street intersections shall be held to a maximum of 3% for
a distance of 100 feet in any direction from the point of intersection
of the street center lines.
(18) Street grades shall not be less than 5/10 per 0.3% if there are
street curbs and/or gutters or if pavement wearing surface is
smooth-finished, but only with the approval of the Engineer.
Drainage structures and adequate ditches shall be provided by the
subdivider to prevent ponding or damage to public or private
property.
(19) Limitation of access to streets shall be as follows:
(a) Local streets: no limitation.
(b) Collector streets: no limitation.
(c) Arterial streets: restricted as far as practicable.
(20) Street names shall be cleared with the County Highway
Department and the Village officials designated by the Village
Board of Trustees to avoid duplications or use of similarly sounding
or spelled names. House numbers should follow standard practice
of house numbering in the Village.
§ 167-4 PALMYRA CODE § 167-4
159:176
B. Easements.
(1) Easements across lots or centered on rear or side lot lines shall be
provided for utilities where necessary and shall be of not less than
20 feet in width.
(2) Where a subdivision is traversed by a watercourse, drainageway,
channel or stream, there shall be provided a stormwater easement
or drainage right-of-way of not less than 20 feet in width
conforming substantially with the lines of such watercourse, and
such further width or construction, or both, as will be adequate for
the purpose. Parallel streets or parkways may be required in
connection therewith.
C. Blocks.
(1) The lengths, widths, and shapes of blocks shall be determined with
due regard to:
(a) Provision of adequate building sites suitable to the special
needs of the type of use contemplated.
(b) Zoning requirements as to lot sizes and dimensions.
(c) Needs for convenient access, circulation, control and safety of
street traffic.
(d) Limitations and opportunities of topography.
(2) Block length generally shall not exceed 1,600 feet, nor shall it be
less than 600 feet.
(3) Intersections with arterial streets should be held to a minimum and
preferably spaced at least 1,000 feet apart.
(4) Pedestrian walk rights-of-way not less than 10 feet in width,
property line to property line, shall be required where deemed
essential to provide circulation, or access to schools, playgrounds,
shopping centers, transportation and other community facilities.
D. Lots.
(1) The size, width, depth, shape, orientation and yards of lots shall be
not less than specified in Chapter 200, Zoning, for the district in
which the lots are located and shall be appropriate for the type of
development and use contemplated.
(2) Land subject to flooding shall not be platted for residential
occupancy nor for such other uses as may increase danger to life or
property or aggravate the flood hazard.
(3) Residential lots, where not served by public sewer, shall be such as
to meet the requirements of the Village Plumbing Code, if any, and
all amendments thereto.
§ 167-4 SPITTING § 167-4
159:177
(4) Corner lots for residential use shall have extra width to permit
appropriate building setback from and orientation to both streets.
(5) The subdividing of the land shall be such as to provide, by means of
a public street, each lot with satisfactory access to an existing
public street or highway.
(6) Double frontage and reverse frontage lots should be avoided except
where essential to provide separation of residential development
from traffic arteries or to overcome specific disadvantages of
topography and orientation. A planting screen easement at least 10
feet wide, across which there shall be no right of access, shall be
provided along the line of lots abutting such a traffic artery or other
disadvantageous use.
(7) Side lot lines shall be substantially at right angles or radial to street
right-of-way lines.
(8) In case a tract is subdivided into larger parcels than normal
building lots, such parcels shall be arranged so as to allow the
opening of future streets and logical further resubdivision.
(9) In case only a portion of a tract is subdivided, or when the plan
submitted covers only a portion of the owner's entire holding, a
sketch of the prospective future street system of the entire holding
shall be submitted to the Zoning Board of Appeals/Planning Board.
E. Public sites and open places.
(1) The subdivision shall dedicate to the Village "usable land" equal in
size to 5% of the subdivider's tract. This land shall be used by the
Village for parks, playgrounds, or for other specific public
recreational uses as deemed desirable by the Village Board.
However, if the Village Board should consider a subdivider's tract
too small and that the dedication of 5% of the total area is not of a
size that would make it usable for a public purpose, the Village
Board shall direct the subdivider to make a money payment to the
Village in lieu of land. This money payment must be equal to 5% of
the market value of the total tract and cannot be used by the Village
for any purpose other than the purchase of land to be used for such
public uses as indicated above.
(2) Unusable areas or areas bordering streams, lakes or other courses
should be given special consideration by the Zoning Board of
Appeals/Planning Board in excess of the five-percent minimum. The
Zoning Board of Appeals/Planning Board may recommend that the
Village Board accept these areas as a gift, or purchase them,
should they be desirable for public open spaces.
(3) Where such sites and open spaces are not shown on the Master
Plan and where deemed essential by the Zoning Board of Appeals/
Planning Board upon consideration of the particular type of
§ 167-4 PALMYRA CODE § 167-4
159:178
§ 167-5. Required improvements. [Amended 8-1-2016 by L.L. No.
1-2016]
development proposed in the subdivision, and especially in largescale
neighborhood unit developments, the Zoning Board of
Appeals/Planning Board may recommend that the Village Board
require the dedication, or reservation, of areas in excess of the fivepercent
minimum. Under such conditions, a money payment at fair
market value will be made to the owner to compensate his loss in
excess of the five-percent contribution.
F. Street trees. No street trees shall be planted within the street right-ofway
nor within 10 feet of any street right-of-way line.
A. Monuments and lot corner markers. Monuments shall be placed at all
block corners, angle points of curves in streets and at intermediate
points as required by the Engineer. The monuments shall be of such
material, size and length as may be approved by the Engineer.
B. Utility and street improvements.
(1) Utility and street improvements shall be provided in each new
subdivision in accordance with the standards and requirements
described in the following schedules. The developer shall furnish a
performance bond sufficient to cover the full costs of the
construction of said utility and street improvements in accordance
with § 179-l of the Village Law.56 The developer may install such
utility and street improvements or, in the alternative, may arrange
with the Village to install such utility and street improvements
pursuant to pertinent laws of the State of New York.
(2) The standards and specifications for each general type of
development shall be as follows:
(a) For multiple dwellings and other residential types other than
one-family detached dwellings, improvements shall be in
accord with Standard A.
(b) For one-family detached dwellings in the areas where sanitary
sewers are available or accessible, improvements shall be in
accord with Standard B.
(c) For one-family dwellings with lot sufficiently large to meet the
requirements of the Plumbing Code, if any, of the Village and
located in the areas where sewers are not available or
accessible, improvements shall be in accord with Standard C.
(d) For commercial, industrial and other types, improvements
shall be as determined by the Zoning Board of Appeals/
Planning Board with the advice of the Engineer.
56.Editor's Note: See now Village Law § 7-730.
§ 167-4 SPITTING § 167-5
159:179
§ 167-6. Preliminary plan. [Amended 8-1-2016 by L.L. No. 1-2016]
The preliminary plan shall be at a scale not greater than 100 feet to one
inch and shall show, or be accompanied by, the following information:
C. Schedules of required street improvements and utilities.
Standards
A B C
X X X (1) Streets:
(a) Typical cross section in accordance with the
Master Plan, if any, or as determined by the
appropriate engineering officials, and as
approved by the Zoning Board of Appeals/
Planning Board and by the Village Board.
X X X (b) Grading and center-line gradients, pavement
base and wearing surface, curbing and gutter as
per specifications prepared by the Engineer and
approved by the Village Board, and as per plans
and profiles approved by the Engineer.
X X X (2) Storm sewer system and other drainage
improvements, including driveway culverts, per
plans and specifications approved by the Engineer.
X X X (3) Sidewalks along arterials and collector streets at
such locations as the Zoning Board of Appeals/
Planning Board may deem it necessary, and as per
plans and specifications approved by the Engineer.
X X X (4) Water mains as per plans approved by the Engineer.
X X X (5) Sanitary sewers as per plans approved by the
Engineer.
X X X (6) Street signs at all intersections at the locations and
of the design approved by the Village Board.
X X X (7) Streetlighting standards as per plans and design
approved by the Village Board.
(8) Fire alarm signal devices where a fire alarm system
is available to connect with as per plans approved by
the Engineer.
A. Proposed subdivision name or identifying title.
B. Name and address of owner and of designer of preliminary plan.
C. Date, North point, and scale.
§ 167-5 PALMYRA CODE § 167-6
159:180
D. Key plan, showing location (including name of village or town) and
boundaries of proposed subdivision platting (if this is a resubdivision
project).
E. Locations of existing property lines, easements, buildings,
watercourses, marshes, rock outcrops, wooded areas, other buildings
and other essential features, including streets and rights-of-way, as
shown on the Official Map in and adjacent to the proposed subdivision.
F. Topography with a contour interval not in excess of five feet.
G. Proposed public improvements, highways or other major improvements
planned by public authorities for further construction on or near the
proposed subdivision.
H. Location, names and widths of proposed streets, highways, alleys,
easements, parks or other public open spaces. Location of sites, if any,
for multifamily dwellings, shopping centers, churches, industry or other
nonpublic uses exclusive of single-family dwellings.
I. All areas proposed to be dedicated to public use and the conditions of
such dedications, and all areas specifically reserved to the owner and
for which formal offers of cession to the public are not made.
J. Any changes in the zoning regulations proposed for the area to be
subdivided.
K. Cross sections and profiles of all streets and cross sections of any
unusual differences in elevation between streets and adjoining lots.
L. Connections with existing water supply, or alternative means of supply,
giving location and size of mains.
M. Connections with existing sanitary sewer system, or alternative means
of sewage treatment and disposal, giving location, size and invert
elevations.
N. Provisions for collecting and discharging surface drainage, giving
location, size and invert elevations of storm or combined sewers. Where
drainage is to be a natural watercourse, lake, swamp, sink or roadside
or drainage ditch, the elevation of water in such watercourse or ditch at
recognized flood stage shall be shown. The Engineer will assist in
determining such recognized flood stage.
O. Subsurface conditions on the proposed subdivision, if required by the
Zoning Board of Appeals/Planning Board, including location and results
of tests made to ascertain surface soil, rock and groundwater
conditions, depth to groundwater unless test pits are dry at a depth of
five feet below finished grade, location and results of percolation tests if
individual sewage disposal is contemplated.
P. Preliminary designs of any bridges or culverts.
§ 167-6 SPITTING § 167-6
159:181
§ 167-7. Final subdivision plat. [Amended 8-1-2016 by L.L. No.
1-2016]
The final subdivision plat submitted for approval and subsequent recording
shall be clearly and legibly drawn in black waterproof ink on tracing cloth,
or black line prints on tracing cloth or equivalent material. The scale shall
not be greater than 100 feet to one inch, and the size of the sheet shall be
22 inches by 28 inches. When more than one sheet is required, an index
sheet of the same size shall be filed showing the entire subdivision at an
appropriate scale.
Q. Proposals for streetlighting and street trees.
R. Proposed lot lines with approximate dimensions, including minimum
building setback lines.
S. Draft of any protective covenants whereby the owner proposes to
regulate land use in the subdivision and otherwise protect the proposed
development.
T. When the preliminary plan submitted covers only a part of the owner's
entire holding, a sealed drawing, with topography of the prospective
future street system of the entire holding, shall be submitted to the
Zoning Board of Appeals/Planning Board.
A. The subdivision plat shall show the following:
(1) Proposed subdivision name or identifying title, date, true North
point and scale.
(2) Name and address of owner, and name, license number and seal of
the licensed professional engineer or land surveyor.
(3) The names and identifying titles of adjacent subdivisions and the
names of the owners of adjacent acreage.
(4) Name and width of each street or highway.
(5) The location, purpose and width of each easement.
(6) The location of all streets with the lot lines described by the length
of all straight lines, the deflection angles, radii and length of
curves, the central angles of all curves, tangent distances and
tangent bearings.
(7) Purpose for which sites, other than residential lots, are dedicated
or reserved.
(8) Minimum building setback line on all lots and other sites.
(9) Dimensions, bearings and angles of intersections for each lot line
as necessary for the location of each lot line in the field.
§ 167-6 PALMYRA CODE § 167-7
159:182
(10) Number to identify each lot or site in numerical order through the
entire subdivision.
(11) Suitable primary control points, or descriptions and ties to such
control points, to which all dimensions, bearings, angles, and
similar data given on the plat shall be referred.
(12) The location and description of all permanent monuments.
(13) The boundary lines of the subdivision with accurate distances,
bearings and angles as necessary.
B. Additional information shall include:
(1) Profiles and cross sections of all proposed streets, drains and
sewers with elevations based on a datum plane approved by the
Planning Board.
(2) Offers of cession by the owner dedicating streets, rights-of-way and
any sites for public uses and notation of the streets, highways and
parks specifically reserved to the owner and for which the formal
offers of cession to the public are not made.
(3) Water supply and sewage disposal arrangements with details and
certification of approval by the appropriate public agency. Where
any water- or sewer line, water plant or sewage treatment plant is
to be installed by the owner outside existing districts, the
organization or enlargement of a water district and/or a sewer
district may be required, unless water or sewage facilities are
available from any existing Village source.
(4) Certificate by the Engineer certifying that the owner has complied
with one of the following alternatives:
(a) All improvements have been installed in accord with the
requirements of this chapter and with the action of the Zoning
Board of Appeals/Planning Board giving conditional approval
of the preliminary plan; or
(b) A bond or certified check has been posted, which is available to
the Village and is of sufficient amount to assure such
completion of all required improvements.
(5) Certificates by the Village Attorney approving as to the legal
sufficiency all offers of cession, all covenants governing the
maintenance of unceded public space, and any action taken to
establish or extend water and/or sewer districts established or
extended in connection therewith.
(6) Protective covenants in form for recording, including covenants
governing the maintenance of unceded public spaces or
reservations.
§ 167-7 SPITTING § 167-7
159:183
§ 167-8. Variances and modifications. [Amended 8-1-2016 by L.L.
No. 1-2016]
Chapter 172
TAXATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Assessments — See Ch. 5.
(7) Other data. Such other certificates, affidavits, endorsements or
other agreements as may be required by the Zoning Board of
Appeals/Planning Board in the enforcement of this chapter.
A. Where the Zoning Board of Appeals/Planning Board finds that, because
of unusual circumstances of shape, topography or other physical
features of the proposed subdivision, or because of the nature of
adjacent developments, extraordinary hardship may result from strict
compliance with this chapter, it may change the chapter so that
substantial justice may be done and the public interest secured;
provided that no such change shall be granted which will have the
effect of nullifying the intent and purpose of the Official Map; Chapter
200, Zoning; this chapter; or any other pertinent rules, regulations or
ordinances of the Village. In granting changes and modifications, the
Zoning Board of Appeals/Planning Board may require such conditions
as will, in its judgment, secure substantially the objectives of the
standards or requirements so changed or modified.
B. The standards and requirements of this chapter may be modified by the
Zoning Board of Appeals/Planning Board in the case of a plan and
program for a planned development which in the judgment of the
Zoning Board of Appeals/Planning Board provides adequate public
spaces and improvements for the circulation, recreation, light, air, and
service needs of the neighborhood when fully developed and populated,
and which also provides such covenants or other legal provisions as will
assure conformity to and achievement of the plan.
§ 167-7 PALMYRA CODE § 167-8
172:184
ARTICLE I
Utility Tax
[Adopted 8-3-1970 by L.L. No. 3-1970 (Ch. 20A, Art. I, of the 1974
Code)]
§ 172-1. Imposition of tax; legislative authority.57
Pursuant to the authority granted by § 5-530 of the Village Law of the State
of New York, a tax equal to 1% of its gross income from and after the first
day of September 1970 is hereby imposed upon every utility doing business
in the Village of Palmyra, New York, which is subject to the supervision of
the State Department of Public Service, which utility has a gross income for
12 months ending August 31, in excess of $500, except motor carriers or
brokers subject to such supervision under Transportation Law § 240; and a
tax equal to 1% of its gross operating income from and after the first day of
September 1970 is hereby imposed upon every other utility doing business
in the Village of Palmyra, New York, which has a gross operating income
for the 12 months ending August 31, in excess of $500, which taxes shall
have application only within the territorial limits of the Village of Palmyra,
New York, and shall be in addition to any and all other taxes and fees
imposed by any other provision of law. Such taxes shall not be imposed on
any transaction originating or consummated outside of the territorial limits
of the Village of Palmyra, New York, notwithstanding that some acts be
necessarily performed with respect to such transaction within such limits.
§ 172-2. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the terms used herein are defined as follows:
GROSS INCOME — Receipts received in or by reason of any sale,
conditional or otherwise (except sales hereinafter referred to with respect
to which it is provided that the profits from the sale shall be included
in the gross income), made or service rendered for ultimate consumption
or use by the purchaser in the Village of Palmyra, New York, including
cash, credits and property of any kind or nature (whether or not such
sale is made or such service is rendered for profit), without any deduction
therefrom on account of the cost of the property sold, the cost of the
materials used, labor, services or other costs, interest or discount paid, or
any other expense whatsoever; also profits from the sale of real property
growing out of the ownership or use of or interest in such property; also
profit from the sale of personal property (other than property of a kind
which would properly be included in the inventory of the taxpayer if on hand
at the close of the period for which a return is made); also receipts from
interest, dividends and royalties derived from sources within the Village of
Palmyra, New York, other than such as are received from a corporation a
majority of whose voting stock is owned by the taxpaying utility, without any
deduction therefrom for any expenses whatsoever incurred in connection
with the receipt thereof; and also profits from any transaction (except sales
57.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 172-1 TAXATION § 172-2
172:185
for resale and rentals) within the Village of Palmyra, New York, whatsoever;
provided, however, that the words “gross income” shall include, in the case
of a utility engaged in selling telephony or telephone service, only receipts
from local exchange services wholly consummated within the Village of
Palmyra, New York, and in the case of a utility engaged in selling telegraphy
or telegraph service, only receipts from transactions wholly consummated
within the Village of Palmyra, New York.
GROSS OPERATING INCOME — Receipts received in or by reason of any
sale, conditional or otherwise, made for the ultimate consumption or use by
the purchaser of gas, electricity, steam, water, refrigeration, telephony or
telegraphy, or in or by reason of the furnishing for such consumption or use
of gas, electric, steam, water, refrigeration, telephone or telegraph service
in the Village of Palmyra, New York, including cash, credits and property
of any kind or nature, without any deduction therefrom on account of the
cost of the property sold, the cost of materials used, labor, services or other
costs, interest or discount paid, or any other expenses whatsoever.
PERSON — Includes persons, corporations, companies, associations, jointstock
associations, copartnerships, estates, assignees of rent, any person
acting in a fiduciary capacity or any other entity, and persons, their
assignees, lessees, trustees or receivers, appointed by any court
whatsoever, or by any other means, except the state, municipalities,
political and civil subdivisions of the state or municipality and public
districts.
UTILITY — Includes every person subject to the supervision of the State
Department of Public Service, except persons engaged in the business of
operating or leasing sleeping and parlor railroad cars or operating railroads
other than street surface, rapid transit, subway and elevated railroads, and
also includes every person (whether or not such person is subject to such
supervision) who sells gas, electricity, steam, water, refrigeration, telephony
or telegraphy, delivered through mains, pipes or wires, or furnishes gas,
electricity, steam, water, refrigeration, telephone or telegraph service by
means of mains, pipes or wires, regardless of whether such activities are
the main business of such person or are only incidental thereto, or whether
use is made of the public streets.
§ 172-3. Records to be kept by utility.
Every utility subject to tax under this article shall keep such records of its
business and in such form as the Village Treasurer or the Village Board
may require. Such records shall be preserved for a period of three years,
except that the Village Treasurer or the Village Board may consent to their
destruction within that period or may require that they be kept longer.
§ 172-4. Filing by utility.
Every utility subject to tax hereunder shall file annually, on or before the
25th day of February, a return for the 12 calendar months ending the 31st
day of December, or, on or before the 25th day of March, a return for the
§ 172-2 PALMYRA CODE § 172-4
172:186
12 calendar months preceding such return date of any portion thereof for
which the tax imposed hereby is effective; provided, however, that in lieu
of the annual return required by the foregoing provisions, any utility may
file quarterly on or before September 25, December 25, March 25 and June
25, a return for the three calendar months preceding each such return date,
and in the case of the first such return, for all preceding calendar months
during which the tax imposed hereby was effective. Every return shall state
the gross income or gross operating income for the period covered thereby.
Returns shall be filed with the Village Treasurer on a form to be furnished
by him for such purpose and shall contain such other data, information or
matter as he may require to be included therein. The Village Treasurer,
in order to ensure payment of the tax imposed, may require at any time
a further or supplemental return, which shall contain any data that may
be specified by him, and he may require any utility doing business in the
Village of Palmyra, New York, to file an annual return, which shall contain
any data specified by him, regardless of whether the utility is subject to
tax under this article. Every return shall have annexed thereto an affidavit
of the head of the utility making the same, or of the owner or copartner
thereof, or of a principal officer of the corporation, if such business is
conducted by a corporation, to the effect that the statements contained
therein are true.
§ 172-5. Payment of tax.
At the time of filing a return as required by this article, each utility shall
pay to the Village of Palmyra the tax imposed by this article for the period
covered by such return. Such tax shall be due and payable at the time of
filing the return, or, if a return is not filed when due, on the last day on
which the return is required to be filed.
§ 172-6. Sufficiency of return.
A. In case any return filed pursuant to this article shall be insufficient or
unsatisfactory to the Village Treasurer, and if a corrected or sufficient
return is not filed within 20 days after the same is required by notice
from him, or if no return is made for any period, the Village Treasurer
shall determine the amount of tax due from such information as he is
able to obtain, and if necessary, may estimate the tax on the basis of
external indices or otherwise. He shall give notice of such
determination to the person liable for such tax. Such determination
shall finally and irrevocably fix such tax, unless the person against
whom it is assessed shall, within 30 days after the giving of notice of
such determination, apply to the Village Treasurer for a hearing, or
unless the Village Treasurer of his own motion shall reduce the same.
After such hearing, the Village Treasurer shall give notice of his
decision to the person liable for the tax. Such decision may be reviewed
by a proceeding under Article 78 of the Civil Practice Law and Rules of
the State of New York if application therefor is made within 90 days
after the giving of notice of such decision. An order to review such
decision shall not be granted unless the amount of any tax sought to be
§ 172-4 TAXATION § 172-6
172:187
§ 172-7. Notice.
Any notice authorized or required under the provisions of this article may
be given by mailing the same to the persons for whom it is intended, in a
postpaid envelope, addressed to such person at the address given by him
in the last return filed by him under this article, or, if no return has been
filed, then to such address as may be obtainable. The mailing of such notice
shall be presumptive evidence of the receipt of the same by the person to
whom addressed. Any period of time which is determined according to the
provisions of this article by the giving of notice shall commence to run from
the date of mailing of such notice.
§ 172-8. Failure to file; penalty.
Any person failing to file a return or corrected return, or to pay any tax
or any portion thereof, within the time required by this article shall be
subject to a penalty of 5% of the amount of tax due, plus 1% of such tax
for each month of delay or fraction thereof, excepting the first month, after
such return was required to be filed or such tax became due. The Village
Treasurer, for cause shown, may extend the time for filing any return; and
if satisfied that the delay was excusable, may remit all or any portion of the
penalty fixed by the foregoing provisions of this section.
§ 172-9. Refund.
If, within one year from the payment of any tax or penalty, the payer thereof
shall make application for a refund thereof, and the Village Treasurer or
the court shall determine that such tax or penalty or any portion thereof
was erroneously or illegally collected, the Village Treasurer shall refund
the amount so determined. For like cause and within the same period, a
refund may be so made on the initiative of the Village Treasurer. However,
no refund shall be made of a tax or penalty paid pursuant to a determination
of the Village Treasurer as hereinbefore provided, unless the Village
reviewed, with interest and penalties thereon, if any, shall be first
deposited with the Village Treasurer and an undertaking filed with him,
in such amount and with such sureties as a justice of the Supreme Court
shall approve, to the effect that, if such proceeding be dismissed or
the tax confirmed, the applicant will pay all costs and charges which
may accrue in the prosecution of such proceeding, or at the option of
the applicant, such undertaking may be in a sum sufficient to cover the
tax, interest, penalties, costs and charges aforesaid, in which event the
applicant shall not be required to pay such tax, interest and penalties
as a condition precedent to the granting of such order.
B. Except in the case of a willfully false or fraudulent return with intent to
evade the tax, no assessment of additional tax shall be made after the
expiration of more than three years from the date of the filing of a
return; provided, however, that where no return has been filed as
required by this article, the tax may be assessed at any time.
§ 172-6 PALMYRA CODE § 172-9
172:188
Treasurer, after a hearing as hereinbefore provided, or of his own motion,
shall have reduced the tax or penalty or if it shall have been established in a
proceeding under Article 78 of the Civil Practice Law and Rules of the State
of New York that such determination was erroneous or illegal. All refunds
shall be made out of moneys collected under this article. An application for
a refund, made as hereinbefore provided, shall be deemed an application for
the revision of any tax or penalty complained of and the Village Treasurer
may receive additional evidence with respect thereto. After making his
determination, the Village Treasurer shall give notice thereof to the person
interested, and he shall be entitled to an order to review such determination
under said Article 78 of the Civil Practice Law and Rules of the State of
New York, subject to the provision hereinbefore contained relating to the
granting of such an order.
§ 172-10. Adding tax to bills prohibited.
The tax imposed by this article shall be charged against and be paid by the
utility and shall not be added as a separate item to bills rendered by the
utility to customers or others but shall constitute a part of the operating
costs of such utility.
§ 172-11. Failure to pay tax; lien.
Whenever any person shall fail to pay any tax or penalty imposed by this
article, the Village Attorney shall, upon the request of the Village Board,
bring an action to enforce payment of the same. The proceeds of any
judgment obtained in any such action shall be paid to the Village Treasurer,
Each such tax and penalty shall be a lien upon the property of the person
liable to pay the same, in the same manner and to the same extent that the
tax and penalty imposed by the Tax Law, § 186-a, is made a lien.
§ 172-12. Rules and regulations of Treasurer.
In the administration of this article, the Village Treasurer shall have power
to make such reasonable rules and regulations, not inconsistent with law,
as may be necessary for the exercise of his powers and the performance of
his duties, and to prescribe the form of blanks, reports and other records
relating to the administration and enforcement of the tax, to take testimony
and proofs, under oath, with reference to any matter within the line of his
official duty under this article, and to subpoena and require the attendance
of witnesses and the production of books, papers and documents.
§ 172-13. Disclosure by Treasurer; penalties for offenses.
A. Except in accordance with proper judicial order or as otherwise
provided by law, it shall be unlawful for the Village Treasurer, or any
agent, clerk or employee of the Village of Palmyra, New York, to divulge
or make known in any manner the amount of gross income or gross
operating income, or any particulars set forth or disclosed in any return
under this article. The officer charged with the custody of such returns
§ 172-9 TAXATION § 172-13
172:189
§ 172-14. Disposition of taxes and penalties.
All taxes and penalties received by the Village Treasurer under this article
shall be paid into the treasury of the Village of Palmyra, New York, and shall
be credited to and deposited in the general fund of the Village.
shall not be required to produce any of them or evidence of anything
contained in them in any action or proceeding in any court, except on
behalf of the Village of Palmyra, New York, in an action or proceeding
under the provisions of this article, or on behalf of the State Tax
Commission in an action or proceeding under the provisions of the Tax
Law of the State of New York, or on behalf of any party to any action
or proceeding under the provisions of this article when the returns or
facts shown thereby are directly involved in such action or proceeding,
in either of which events the court may require the production of, and
may admit in evidence, so much of said returns or of the facts shown
thereby as are pertinent to the action or proceeding and no more.
B. Nothing herein shall be construed to prohibit the delivery to a person,
or his duly authorized representative, of a copy of any return filed by
him, nor to prohibit the publication of statistics so classified as to
prevent the identification of particular returns and the items thereof, or
the publication of delinquent lists showing the names of persons who
have failed to pay their taxes at the time and in the manner provided for
by this article, together with any relevant information which in the
opinion of the Village Treasurer may assist in the collection of such
delinquent taxes; or the inspection by the Village Attorney or other
legal representative of the Village of Palmyra, New York, of the return
of any person who shall bring action to set aside or review the tax based
thereon, or against whom an action has been instituted in accordance
with the provisions of this article.
C. Any offense against the foregoing secrecy provisions shall be
punishable by a fine not exceeding $1,000 or by imprisonment not
exceeding one year, or both, and if the offender be an officer, agent,
clerk or employee of the Village of Palmyra, New York, he shall be
dismissed from office and shall be incapable of holding any office or
employment for the Village of Palmyra, New York, for a period of five
years thereafter.
D. Notwithstanding any provisions of this article, the Village Treasurer
may exchange with the chief fiscal officer of any city or any other village
in the State of New York information contained in returns filed under
this article, provided such city or other village grants similar privileges
to the Village of Palmyra, New York, and provided such information is to
be used for tax purposes only, and the Village Treasurer shall, upon
request, furnish the State Tax Commission with any information
contained in such returns.
§ 172-13 PALMYRA CODE § 172-14
172:190
ARTICLE II
Senior Citizens Tax Exemption
[Adopted 9-25-1972 (Ch. 20A, Art. II, of the 1974 Code); amended
in its entirety at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. I)]
§ 172-15. Exemption granted.
A partial exemption from taxation to the extent of 50% of the assessed
valuation of real property which is owned by certain persons with limited
income who are 65 years of age or older meeting the requirements set forth
in § 467 of the Real Property Tax Law is hereby granted.
§ 172-16. Maximum income level.
The maximum income level for the fifty-percent exemption is established at
$7,200.
§ 172-15 TAXATION § 172-16
172:191
Chapter 178
TREES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 163.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 167.
Noxious weeds and growth — See Ch. 194.
§ 178-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the “Street Tree Ordinance
of the Village of Palmyra.”
§ 178-2. Definitions and word usage.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meaning given herein. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words in the plural number include the singular number, and words
in the singular number include the plural number. The word “shall” is
always mandatory and not merely directory.
ARBORICULTURE or TREE PRESERVATION — Includes the treating,
spraying, pruning, maintaining and any other care or work intended for the
strengthening of trees, and the removal and prevention of tree pests, blights
and diseases of any kind and all kinds.
CITY ARBORIST or VILLAGE ARBORIST — The Superintendent of Buildings
and Grounds of the Village of Palmyra or a specially assigned member of his
staff. 58
PERSON — Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company or organization of any kind.
PUBLIC PLACE — Any public street, public highway, public park, or any
property owned or held by the Village of Palmyra within the boundaries of
said Village.
STREET TREE or TREE — A tree in a public place, except where otherwise
indicated.
VILLAGE — The Village of Palmyra.
§ 178-3. Appointment and jurisdiction of Village Arborist.
A. Appointment. There is hereby created the office of Village Arborist for
an indefinite term. The Superintendent of Buildings and Grounds shall,
by virtue of his office, be the Village Arborist.59
58.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 172-16 PALMYRA CODE § 178-3
178:192
§ 178-4. Required permit and conditions for granting thereof.
B. Scope of authority. The Village Arborist is hereby given full jurisdiction,
authority, control, supervision and direction of all trees which now or
which may hereafter exist upon any public place in this Village and over
all trees which exist upon any private property in this Village when such
trees constitute a menace to this Village.
(1) Issuance of permits. Said Village Arborist is also given full
jurisdiction, authority, and control in connection with the issuing of
permits hereinafter provided for.
(2) Delegation of duties and authority. In the exercise of any or all of
the powers herein granted, the Village Arborist shall have the
authority to delegate all or such part of his power and duties with
respect to supervision and control of trees to his subordinates and
assistants in the employ of the Village as he may from time to time
determine.
C. Order to preserve or remove. The Village Arborist shall have the
authority and it shall be his duty to order the trimming, preservation or
removal of trees or plants upon private property when he shall find such
action necessary to public safety or to prevent the spread of disease or
insects to public trees and places.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to plant, remove, destroy, cut, prune,
treat, break, climb, injure or spray any tree existing on any public place
in this Village, or to authorize or procure any person to do so, or to
remove or tamper with any device placed for the protection of any tree,
or to attach any rope, wire, chain, sign or other device placed for the
protection of said tree, or to authorize or cause the same to be done,
except having first obtained written permission from the Village
Arborist to do so.
B. Such permit, when granted for the planting of any tree to be located on
any public place in this Village, shall designate the species of tree to be
planted, the required spacing and required minimum planting size.
C. Application data. The application for permit herein required shall state
the number and kind of trees to be trimmed, sprayed, preserved,
removed or planted; the kind of treatment to be administered; and such
other information as the Village Arborist shall find reasonably
necessary to a fair determination of whether a permit should issue
hereunder.
D. Standards for issuance. The Village Arborist shall issue the permit
provided for herein when he finds that the desired action or treatment
is necessary and that the proposed method and workmanship arc
satisfactory.
59.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 178-3 TREES § 178-4
178:193
§ 178-5. General tree and shrub regulations.
E. Supervision. The Village Arborist shall have the authority and it shall be
his duty to supervise all work done under a permit issued in accordance
with the terms of this chapter.
F. Issue conditional permit. The Village Arborist shall have the authority
to affix reasonable conditions to the grant of a permit hereunder.
G. Exemptions. No permit shall be required to cultivate, fertilize or water
public trees or shrubs. The Village Arborist may authorize any person to
do any work or act described in Subsection A of this section without
written permit whenever he determines that such work or act will not
be detrimental to the public interest and will be in accord with the spirit
and other requirements of this chapter.
A. Injury to trees and shrubs prohibited. No person shall, without the
consent of the owner in the case of a private tree or shrub, or without
written permit from the Village Arborist in the case of a public tree or
shrub, do, or cause to be done by others, any of the following acts:
(1) Secure, fasten or run any rope, wire, sign or other device or
material to, around or through a tree or shrub.
(2) Break, injure, mutilate, deface, kill or destroy or permit any fire to
burn where it will injure any tree or shrub.
(3) Permit any toxic chemical, gas, smoke, salt, brine, oil or other
injurious substance to seep, drain or be emptied upon or about any
tree or shrub.
(4) Excavate any ditch, tunnel or trench or lay any drive within a radius
of 10 feet from any tree or shrub.
(5) Erect, alter, repair or raze any building or structure without placing
suitable guards around all nearby public trees or shrubs which may
be injured or defaced by, or where said injury or defacement may
arise out of, in connection with or by reason of such an operation.
Quality of said guard shall be determined by the Village Arborist.
(6) Knowingly permit any unprotected electric service wires to come in
prolonged contact with any public tree or shrub.
(7) Remove any guard, stake or other device or material intended for
the protection of a public tree or shrub or close or obstruct any
open space about the base of a public tree or shrub designed to
permit access of air, water and fertilizer.
B. Trimming of trees. The Village Arborist shall and he is hereby directed
to keep all trees standing upon any public place in this Village trimmed
so that the branches of such trees projecting over any public sidewalk,
private driveway, or into any public street beyond the curbline, shall not
conflict with the public welfare.
§ 178-4 PALMYRA CODE § 178-5
178:194
§ 178-6. Certain trees prohibited.
Any silver maple, honey locust, poplar basswood, box elder, catalpa or
willow upon private property in this Village in such close proximity to any
public place in this Village as will permit the roots of said tree to penetrate
through or under the surface of any public place in this Village is hereby
declared to be a public nuisance, and may be abated by the Village Arborist
as provided in §§ 178-3C and 178-8.
§ 178-7. Preservation and removal of trees on public property.
The Village Arborist shall have the right and duty to trim any tree existing
on any public place in this Village so as to insure the public safety or to
preserve the function or beauty of such public place; and he shall further
have the right to remove any such tree, or any part thereof, which is in an
unsafe condition or which, by reason of its location or nature, is injurious or
detrimental to other public improvements in this Village, or is infected with
any injury, fungus, insect, or other pest or disease which cannot otherwise
be controlled. Such infested or infected tree is a public nuisance.
§ 178-8. Procedure upon order to preserve or remove.
When the Village Arborist shall find it necessary to order the trimming,
preservation or removal of trees or plants upon private property as
authorized in §§ 178-3C and 178-6 herein, he shall serve a written order
to correct the dangerous condition upon the owner, operator, occupant or
other person responsible for its existence.
C. Trimming of trees on private property. All trees standing upon private
property in this Village having branches projecting into public highways
or public places shall, under the supervision of the Village Arborist, be
kept trimmed by the owner or occupant of such private property to such
an extent that the lowest branches of such trees shall not come within
nine feet of the ground where they overhang any public sidewalk, public
place or 13 feet over a public highway.
D. Obstruction of view at intersections prohibited. Notwithstanding any
other provision of this chapter, no person shall maintain, plant or permit
to remain on any private or public premises situated at the intersection
of two or more streets or alleys in the Village any hedge, tree, shrub or
other growth which may obstruct the view of the operator of any motor
vehicle approaching such intersection to the extent that such operator
is unable to observe other vehicles or pedestrians approaching or
crossing said intersection. Any such hedge, tree, shrub or growth is
hereby declared to be a public nuisance.
A. Method of service. The order required herein shall be served in one of
the following ways:
(1) By making personal delivery of the order to the person responsible.
§ 178-5 TREES § 178-8
178:195
§ 178-9. Prohibiting stone or concrete on ground adjacent to tree
trunk.
It shall be unlawful for any person to place or maintain upon the ground in
any public place any stone, concrete, brick or other impervious material or
substance in such a manner as may obstruct the free access of air and water
to the roots of any tree upon any public place in this Village without first
(2) By leaving the order with some person of suitable age and
discretion upon the premises.
(3) By affixing a copy of the order to the door at the entrance of the
premises in violation.
(4) By mailing a copy of the order to last-known address of the owner
of the premises, by registered mail.
(5) By publishing a copy of the order in local paper once a week for
three successive weeks.
B. Time for compliance. The order required herein shall set forth a time
limit for compliance, dependent upon the hazard and danger created by
the violation. In cases of extreme danger to persons or public property,
the Village Arborist shall have the authority to require compliance
immediately upon service of the order.
C. Appeal from order. A person to whom an order hereunder is directed
shall have the right, within five days of the service of such order, to
appeal to the Board of Trustees, who shall review such order within 20
days and file its decision thereon. Unless the order is revoked or
modified, it shall remain in full force and be obeyed by the person to
whom directed. No person to whom an order is directed shall fail to
comply with such order within 10 days after an appeal shall have been
determined.
D. Failure to comply. When a person to whom an order is directed shall fail
to comply within the specified time, the Village Arborist shall remedy
the condition or contract with others for such purpose and charge the
cost thereof to the person to whom the order is directed. The person
remedying a condition under a contract made hereunder shall be
authorized to enter premises for that purpose.
E. Special assessment. If the cost of remedying a condition is not paid
within 30 days after receipt of a statement therefor from the Village
Arborist, such cost shall be levied against the property upon which said
hazard exists, as a special assessment. The levying of such assessment
shall not affect the liability of the person to whom the order is directed
to fine and imprisonment as herein provided. Such special assessment
shall be collected, with a forfeiture of 5% and interest for failure to pay
at the time fixed by the assessing ordinance. 60
60.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 178-8 PALMYRA CODE § 178-9
178:196
having obtained written permission. Unless otherwise provided for there
shall be maintained about the base of the trunk of each such tree at least
nine square feet of open ground for a tree three inches in diameter, and for
every two inches of increase of such diameter there shall be an increase of
at least one square foot of open ground.
§ 178-10. Moving of trees.
All moving of trees upon any public place in this Village made necessary by
the moving of a building or structure or any other private enterprise shall
be done under the supervision of and with the written permission of the
Village Arborist, and at the expense of the applicant or person seeking the
removal of such tree. Such applicant, as one of the conditions to obtaining
such permission, shall deposit with the Village such sum in cash as the
cost of moving and replacing such tree, if the conditions of such permission
require the replacement thereof; provided, however, that in lieu of such
cash deposit the Village Arborist may, in his discretion, accept a good and
sufficient bond in like amount, conditioned upon the payment of all the cost
of such moving and replacing.
§ 178-11. Duties of private owners.
It shall be the duty of any person growing a tree within a public highway
or responsible for trees growing on property abutting on public places
supporting trees or plants to:
§ 178-12. Authority of Village Arborist to enter private premises.
The Village Arborist shall have the authority to enter upon private premises
at all reasonable times for the purpose of examining any tree or shrub
located upon or over such premises and carrying out any of the provisions
of this chapter.
§ 178-13. Interference with objectives of Village Arborist
prohibited.
No person shall prevent, delay or interfere with the Village Arborist or his
agents, employees or servants while they are engaged in carrying out any
work or activities authorized by this chapter.
A. Trim his trees so as not to cause a hazard to public places or interfere
with the proper lighting of public highways by the street lights, and so
that the minimum clearance of any overhanging portion thereof shall be
nine feet over footways and 13 feet over vehicular ways.
B. Treat or remove any tree or plant so diseased or insect-ridden as to
constitute a hazard to trees or plants in public places.
C. Remove and refrain from planting any of the aforementioned species in
§ 178-6.
§ 178-9 TREES § 178-14
178:197
§ 178-14. Penalties for offenses.61
Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall be
punishable, upon conviction, by a fine not exceeding $250 or a term of
imprisonment not exceeding 15 days, or both, for each violation. Each day
during which the violation shall continue shall constitute a separate offense.
Chapter 183
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
GENERAL REFERENCES
Recreational vehicles in Prospect Hill
Park — See Ch. 132, Art. I.
Snowplowing — See Ch. 155.
61.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 178-14 PALMYRA CODE § 178-14
178:198
ARTICLE I
Speed Restrictions
§ 183-1. Definitions.
The words and terms used in this chapter, unless otherwise expressly
stated, or unless the context or subject matter otherwise requires, shall
have the same meanings as defined in the Vehicle and Traffic Law of the
State of New York.
§ 183-2. Maximum speed limits.
A. Thirty miles per hour is hereby established as the maximum speed at
which vehicles may proceed on or along highways within the corporate
limits of the Village of Palmyra, except on the following:
(1) On the portion of Hyde Parkway as more particularly described in
Subsection B of this section during times stated in said Subsection
B.
(2) On the portion of West Foster Street as more particularly described
in Subsection B of this section, during the times stated in said
Subsection B.
(3) On the portion of Canandaigua Street as more particularly
described in Subsection B of this section, during the times stated in
said Subsection B.
B. Twenty miles per hour is hereby established as the maximum speed at
which vehicles may proceed during school days between the hours of
7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. on or along the following highway areas:
(1) Hyde Parkway from a point 300 feet north of the intersection of the
north building line of the Palmyra-Macedon Senior High School
Building, as said building line is projected easterly with the west
boundary of Hyde Parkway, to the intersection of Hyde Parkway
and West Foster Street.
(2) West Foster Street from its intersection with the east boundary of
Hyde Parkway east for a distance of 300 feet.
(3) Canandaigua Street from a point 300 feet north of the intersection
of the north building line of the Palmyra Elementary School, as said
line is projected westerly, with the Canandaigua Street east
boundary, to a point 300 feet south of the intersection of the south
building line of the Palmyra Elementary School, as said line is
projected westerly with the Canandaigua Street east boundary.
C. Notwithstanding the foregoing, no person shall drive a vehicle at a
speed greater than is reasonable and prudent under the conditions and
having regard to the actual and potential hazards then existing.
§ 183-1 TREES § 183-2
178:199

ARTICLE II
Directional, Stop and Yield Restrictions
§ 183-3. One-way streets.
The following streets or parts of streets are hereby designated as one-way
streets in the direction indicated:
Name of Street Direction Limits
Fayette Street North From the south bounds of Walker
Street to the north bounds of East
Foster Street
Market Street North From the intersection of Market
Street with the north boundary
line of Main Street north for a
distance of 155.16 feet
§ 183-4. Stop streets. [Amended 8-15-1988 by L.L. No. 4-1988;
4-17-1989 by L.L. No. 5-1989; 2-21-1995 by L.L. No. 2-1995;
8-4-2008 by L.L. No. 3-2008; 9-1-2017 by L.L. No. 3-2017]
Intersection of With Stop Sign On Entrance(s) From
Birdsall Parkway Brookside Terrace East
Birdsall Parkway Charlotte Avenue East
Birdsall Parkway Sunset Drive East
Canal Street Clinton Street South
Canal Street Division Street North
Canal Street Holmes Street South
Canal Street Market Street South
Canal Street William Street South
Canal Street Willow Street North
Canandaigua Street Brookside Terrace West
Canandaigua Street Charlotte Avenue East and west
Canandaigua Street Dar-Lind Lane East
Canandaigua Street Foster Street East and west
Canandaigua Street Jackson Street East and west
Charlotte Avenue Hathaway Place South
Church Street Canal Street East
Cuyler Street Jackson Street East and west
Cuyler Street Walker Street East
Division Street Canal Street East and west
East Foster Street Howell Street South
§ 183-3 TREES § 183-4
178:201
Intersection of With Stop Sign On Entrance(s) From
Fayette Street Jackson Street West
Fayette Street Prospect Drive East
Fayette Street Spring Street East
Fayette Street Walker Street West
Foster Street Birdsall Parkway North
Foster Street Hathaway Place North
Foster Street Hyde Parkway South
Foster Street Johnson Road North and south
Foster Street Stafford Street North and south
Howell Street East Foster Street West
Howell Street Howell Street
Extension
South
Hyde Parkway Jackson Street East
Hyde Parkway West Foster Street South
Jackson Street Aldrich Drive South
Jackson Street Birdsall Parkway South
Jackson Street Cuyler Street North and south
Jackson Street Fayette Street North and south
Jackson Street Gates Street North
Jackson Street Stafford Street North and south
Jackson Street Tremont Street North
Jackson Street Washington Street North
Johnson Street Foster Street East
Liberty Street Hansen Street West
Main Street East Bucknam Place South
Main Street East Clinton Street North
Main Street East Fayette Street South
Main Street East Holmes Street North
Main Street East Mill Street South
Main Street East Park Drive Northeast
Main Street East Throop Street North and south
Main Street West Burnham Heights South
Main Street West Carroll Street North
Main Street West Gates Street South
Main Street West Hyde Parkway South
Main Street West Liberty Street North
§ 183-4 PALMYRA CODE § 183-4
178:202
Intersection of With Stop Sign On Entrance(s) From
Main Street West Stafford Street South
Main Street West Washington Street South
Market Street Canal Street East and west
Mill Street Vienna Street East
NYS Route 21 North Kent Street East
Park Drive Canal Street West
Park Drive Throop Street Southeast
Prospect Drive Mill Street North
Stafford Street Clairmont Street East
Stafford Street Foster Street East and west
Stafford Street Jackson Street East and west
Vienna Street Bucknam Place North
Vienna Street Cemetery Road South
Vienna Street Crescent Drive South
Vienna Street Howell Street South
Vienna Street Johnson Street South
Vienna Street Prospect Drive West
Vienna Street Throop Street North
Walker Street Cuyler Street North
West Foster Street Hyde Parkway East
§ 183-5. Traffic control signals.
The intersection listed below is hereby designated as controlled by a
flashing traffic control signal as defined in § 1113 of the New York State
Vehicle and Traffic Law. The flashing yellow indications shall control traffic
upon the first mentioned street, and the flashing red indications the second.
Traffic control signals shall be erected in conformance with the New York
State Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices (Chapter II of Title 15 of
the Official Compilation of Codes, Rules and Regulations of the State of New
York), adopted pursuant to § 1680 of the New York State Vehicle and Traffic
Law.
Intersection of With
Canandaigua Street Jackson Street
§ 183-6. Yield intersections.
The intersections listed below are hereby designated as yield intersections
and yield signs shall be erected on entrances thereto indicated:
§ 183-4 TREES § 183-6
178:203
Intersection Of With Yield Sign On Entrance(s) From
Canal Street Market Street Market Street, turning right
onto Canal Street
§ 183-6 PALMYRA CODE § 183-6
178:204
ARTICLE III
Parking Restrictions
§ 183-7. Parking or standing prohibited. [Amended 8-15-1998 by
L.L. No. 4-19-1988; 2-6-1989 by L.L. No. 2-1989; 1-4-1993 by L.L.
No. 1-1993; 11-17-2003 by L.L. No. 2-2003; 12-20-2004 by L.L. No.
3-2004; 5-3-2010 by L.L. No. 4-2010]
The parking or standing of vehicles in any of the following locations is
hereby prohibited:
A. On all Village streets between the pavement edge and sidewalk or, on
streets without public sidewalks, for a distance of five feet from the
pavement edge.
B. It shall be unlawful to park any trailer, tractor, tractor-trailer, housetrailer,
recreational vehicle, motor home, farm equipment, tow truck,
utility trailer or construction vehicle (including but not limited to
cement mixers, dump trucks, heavy equipment loaders, bulldozers,
diggers, and front loaders) along and upon either side of any residential
street in the Village of Palmyra at any time. "Tractor-trailer" is defined
as a combination trucking unit consisting of a tractor hooked up to a full
trailer or semitrailer, including but not limited to a rig, semi, trucking
rig, lorry, motor truck, semitrailer and/or tandem trailer.
(1) Exception. Those vehicles, trucks and/or trailers temporarily
parked along a roadway utilized while performing a service or job,
such as lawn mowing, driveway sealing or driveway paving, shall
be exempt from this section.
(2) The purpose of this Subsection B is to protect the health, safety and
welfare of the public, as parked tractor-trailer vehicles on
residential streets prevent other drivers, pedestrians and bicyclists
from seeing around them and they diminish the street space
available for other passing motor vehicles, pedestrians and
bicycles.
C. In the following locations:
Name of Street Side Location
Canal Street Both East from Church Street for a
distance of 123 feet
Canal Street North Anywhere other than where
indicated by the paved designated
parking areas
Canal Street South Market Street to Park Drive
Canandaigua Street East Entire length from Main Street to
Village line except in designated
areas
§ 183-7 TREES § 183-7
178:205
Name of Street Side Location
Canandaigua Street West Entire length from Main Street
south to Village line
Canandaigua Street West Between West Main Street and West
Jackson Street
Carroll Street East side
of north
curbline
Intersection of Carroll Street and
Main Street, a distance of 300 feet
northerly
Carroll Street East Main Street to Hansen Street
Charlotte Avenue
East
North Between Canandaigua Street and
Cuyler Street
Church Street West Between West Main Street and
Canal Street
Clinton Street West Between Main Street East and Canal
Street
Cuyler Street East From a point 289 feet southerly
from the south edge of the sidewalk
or crosswalk on the south side of
Main Street East a distance of 100
feet southerly, encompassing the
area in front of the United States
Post Office
Cuyler Street West Between East Main Street and East
Jackson Street
East Jackson Street North From Route 21 South to Fayette
Street
Fayette Street Both From Walker Street South to Spring
Street
Fayette Street East Between the north bounds of Walker
Street extended easterly and Foster
Street
Fayette Street West Between Main Street East and the
south bounds of Spring Street
extended westerly
Fayette Street West From Spring Street South to Foster
Street
Gates Street West Between Main Street West and
Jackson Street West
Hansen Street South Entire length
Hathaway Place East Entire length
Hyde Parkway West Entire length
§ 183-7 PALMYRA CODE § 183-7
178:206
Name of Street Side Location
Jackson Street West North Between Canandaigua Street and
Stafford Street
Johnson Street Both From the point of intersection of the
north edge of the sidewalk or
crosswalk on Vienna Street a
distance of 100 feet south
Liberty Street West Entire length
Main Street East
(Route 31)
North Between the east curbline of William
Street and a point 30 feet easterly
therefrom
Main Street East
(Route 31)
South Between the west curbline of Cuyler
Street and a point 30 feet westerly
therefrom
Main Street East
(Route 31)
South Between Mill Street and Bucknam
Place
Main Street West Both From the intersection of the west
edge of the sidewalk on the west
side of Hyde Park a distance of 637
feet westerly along Main Street to
the west corporate limits of the
Village of Palmyra
Market Street West Between Main Street East and Canal
Street
Mill Street East Between Main Street East (Route
311) and Vienna Street
Mill Street West From the intersection of the west
bounds of Mill Street and the north
bounds of Prospect Street a distance
of 90 feet north
Park Drive East From the north limits of Main Street
to the northerly limit of Park Drive
Prospect Drive Both From Fayette Street to Mill Street
Prospect Street North From the intersection of the north
bounds of Prospect Street and the
east bounds of Fayette Street a
distance of 680 feet east
Route 31 Both From Route 21 North to East Village
line
Route 31 North West from Route 21 North up to 509
East Main Street
Route 31 South West from Route 21 North to Mill
Street
§ 183-7 TREES § 183-7
178:207
§ 183-8. Two-hour parking. [Amended 6-6-2005 by L.L. No. 2-2005]
No vehicle of any description shall be continuously parked for a period
of two hours between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m., prevailing
time, any day of the week but Sunday, with the exception of the following
holidays: New Year's Day, Memorial Day, Fourth of July, Labor Day,
Thanksgiving Day, and Christmas Day, in the following locations:
Name of Street Side Location
Spring Street North
and south
From the point of intersection with
Fayette Street for a distance of 50
feet extended easterly
Stafford Street West Entire length from Main Street to
Foster Street
Throop Street West From the north edge of Main Street
to the south edge of Park Drive
Tremont Street West From Jackson Street to the north
end of Tremont Street
Vienna Street South Between the east bounds of Mill
Street extended southerly in the
east corporate limits of the Village
of Palmyra
Walker Street North Entire length
Washington Street West Between Main Street and Jackson
Street
West Foster Street South 60 feet east from the corner of Hyde
Parkway and West Foster Street
William Street East From the point of intersection of the
south edge of the sidewalk or
crosswalk on the south side of Canal
Street a distance of 300 feet south
William Street West From the point of intersection of the
north edge of the sidewalk of
crosswalk on the north side of Main
Street East a distance of 400 feet
north
§ 183-7 PALMYRA CODE § 183-8
178:208
Name of Street Side Location
Canandaigua Street East From a point 40 feet southerly from the
south edge of the sidewalk on the south
side of Main Street East, southerly to
East Jackson Street, except as further
restricted in § 183-9
Cuyler Street East From the south edge of the sidewalk on
the south side of East Main Street, a
distance of 289 feet southerly, being
such portion of Cuyler Street north of
the United States Post Office
Fayette Street East Commencing at a point 139 feet six
inches south of the south line of the
sidewalk on the south side of East Main
Street a distance of 301 feet and six
inches south
Main Street East North From a point 20 feet measured easterly
from the intersection of the north
curbline of East Main Street with the
east curbline of Market Street a
distance of approximately 260 feet
easterly to a point 20 feet measured
westerly from the intersection of the
north curbline of East Main Street with
the west curbline of Clinton Street
Main Street East North From a point 20 feet measured
westerly from the intersection of the
north curbline of East Main Street with
the west curbline of Market Street a
distance of approximately 300 feet
westerly to a point 20 feet measured
easterly from the intersection of the
north curbline of East Main Street with
the east curbline of William Street
Main Street East North From a point 20 feet measured
westerly from the intersection of the
north curbline of East Main Street with
the west curbline of William Street, a
distance of approximately 275 feet
westerly
§ 183-8 TREES § 183-8
178:209
Name of Street Side Location
Main Street East South From a point 20 feet measured
westerly from the intersection of the
south curbline of East Main Street with
the west curbline of Fayette Street a
distance of approximately 330 feet
westerly to a point 20 feet measured
easterly from the intersection of the
south curbline of East Main Street with
the east curbline of Cuyler Street
Main Street East South From a point 20 feet measured easterly
from the intersection of the south
curbline of East Main Street with the
east curbline of Fayette Street a
distance of approximately 337 feet
easterly
Main Street East South From a point 200 feet measured
westerly from the intersection of the
south curbline of East Main Street with
the west curbline of Cuyler Street a
distance of approximately 25 feet
westerly
Market Street East From a point 20 feet measured
northerly from the intersection of the
north curbline of East Main Street with
the east curbline of Market Street a
distance of approximately 500 feet
northerly to a point 20 feet measured
southerly from the intersection of the
south curbline of Canal Street with the
east curbline of Market Street
William Street East From a point 300 feet south of the
intersection of the southerly edge of
the sidewalk a crosswalk on the south
side of Canal Street to a point 20 feet
measured northerly from the north
curbline of East Main Street
§ 183-8.1. Fifteen-minute parking. [Added 6-6-2005 by L.L. No.
2-2005]
No vehicle of any description shall be continuously parked for a period of
15 minutes any day of the week in the following locations:
Name of Street Side Location
Canal Street Both Between Willow Street and Division
Street where marked.
§ 183-8 PALMYRA CODE § 183-9
178:210
§ 183-9. Parking prohibited during designated times in designated
locations.
The parking or standing of vehicles in any of the following locations
between the times hereinafter set forth is prohibited:
Name of Street Side Location Hours/Days
Aldrich Drive Both Between the hours of
7:30 a.m. and 4:00
p.m., from September
1 to July 1
Canandaigua
Street
East From a point 160 feet
southerly from the
south edge of the
sidewalk on the south
side of Main Street
east southerly for a
distance of 380 feet
Between the hours of
8:00 a.m. and 4:30
p.m., from September
1 to July 1
Hyde Parkway Between the hours of
7:30 a.m. and 4:00
p.m.
Jackson Street
[Added
8-15-1988 by
L.L. No.
4-1988]
Both Between Stafford
Street and Hyde
Parkway
Between the hours of
7:30 a.m. and 4:00
p.m., from September
1 to July 1; except
Saturday, Sunday and
holidays
Main Street East
[Added
1-4-1993 by
L.L. No.
1-1993]
South From a point 310 feet
west from the
intersection with Mill
Street continuing
west for a distance of
60 feet
Between the hours of
6:00 a.m. and 6:00
p.m.
West Foster
Street
Between Stafford
Street and Hyde
Parkway
Between the hours of
7:30 a.m. and 4:00
p.m.
§ 183-10. Prohibition of all-night parking. [Amended 11-17-2003 by
L.L. No. 2-2003; 12-20-2004 by L.L. No. 3-2004]
A. No vehicle shall be parked on any public highway within the corporate
limits of the Village of Palmyra between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 7:00
a.m. during the period beginning November 1 and ending March 31 of
each year.
B. No parking 2:00 a.m. to 7:00 a.m., 12 months of the year: East Main
Street from Route 21 to Clinton Street.
§ 183-9 TREES § 183-11
178:211
§ 183-11. Prohibition of parking during special events.
§ 183-12. Regulations for Village parking lots.
§ 183-12.1. Regulations for boat docking. [Added 10-3-2005 by L.L.
No. 6-2005]
A. In addition to and notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter
permitting or prohibiting parking, the stopping, standing or parking of
vehicles upon any street or portion thereof or public area, except state
highways, within the Village of Palmyra may be prohibited by resolution
of the Board of Trustees of the Village of Palmyra for such period of time
as is required, in the opinion of the Board of Trustees, to provide for the
safe passage of vehicles, pedestrians and/or emergency vehicles.
B. A resolution adopted by the Board of Trustees pursuant to this section
shall designate the area, street or portion thereof within which the
stopping, standing or parking of vehicles is prohibited and the period of
time of such prohibition.
C. If a resolution is adopted by the Board of Trustees pursuant to this
section, the Board of Trustees shall direct posting of temporary signs or
markings in the area affected in accordance with the applicable
provisions of the Vehicle and Traffic Law of the State of New York, and
such resolution shall not take effect until signs or markings giving
notice thereof are posted.
A. The standing or parking of any vehicle for a period in excess of 24 hours
in any parking lots owned by or under the control of the Village of
Palmyra is hereby prohibited.
B. The repair or maintenance of any vehicle parked or located in any
parking lots owned by or under the control of the Village of Palmyra is
hereby prohibited.
A. The docking of boats, yachts or other floating craft anywhere within the
Palmyra marina for more than 48 hours is prohibited, unless extended
by written permission from the Village of Palmyra.
B. Any person violating this section of this chapter shall, upon conviction,
be sentenced to a fine of $50 for a first offense and a fine not to exceed
$100 for any subsequent offenses.
§ 183-11 PALMYRA CODE § 183-12.1
178:212
ARTICLE IV
Handicapped Parking
§ 183-13. Designated areas. [Amended 1-4-1993 by L.L. No. 1-1993;
5-3-2010 by L.L. No. 4-2010]
A. The stopping, standing or parking of any vehicle, except for a vehicle
which bears a handicapped parking permit issued pursuant to § 1203-a
of the New York State Vehicle and Traffic Law or a registration issued
under § 404-a of the New York State Vehicle and Traffic Law and such
vehicle is being used for the transportation of a handicapped person, is
prohibited in the following areas:
Name of Street Side Location
Cuyler Street East Between the point of intersection of the
south curbline of East Main Street with
the east bounds of Cuyler Street to a
point 34 feet southerly from said
intersection.
Main Street East North From a point 142 feet east from the east
curbline of William Street east a distance
of 27 feet to the west bounds of the
crosswalk
Main Street East South From a point 204 feet from the east
curbline Canandaigua Street east a
distance of 25 feet
Main Street East South From a point 158 feet west from the west
curbline of Cuyler Street a distance of
146 feet west, encompassing the area in
front of the Palmyra Village Hall
Main Street East South From a point 192 feet west from the west
curbline of Fayette Street west a distance
of 27 feet to the east bounds of the
crosswalk
Market Street East Between the point of intersection of the
north curbline of East Main Street with
the east bounds of Market Street to a
point 34 feet northerly from said
intersection
West Jackson
Street
South The first parking space west of
Canandaigua Street
B. Spaces specified as parking and stopping places for handicapped
persons shall be marked and indicated by suitable stationary signs
indicating the location and extent of such places so reserved.
§ 183-13 TREES § 183-14
178:213
§ 183-14. Issuance of permits.
Pursuant to § 1203-a of the Vehicle and Traffic Law of the State of New York,
the Chief of Police of the Village of Palmyra is designated as the issuing
agent of permits for the handicapped.
A. The issuing agent shall issue permits for handicapped parking upon his
receipt of a completed application executed by the handicapped person,
or by the parent or guardian of a minor handicapped person, upon a
form to be provided by the issuing agent, provided that said application
shall be accompanied by a medical certification relating to the applicant
or such minor child, which certification shall be made by a physician
licensed to practice medicine in the State of New York and which
certification shall establish that the applicant or such minor child is
qualified to receive such permit pursuant to the qualifications set forth
below.
B. A person shall be qualified to receive a handicapped parking permit if
such person:
(1) Has limited or no use of one or both lower limbs;
(2) Has a neuromuscular dysfunction which severely limits mobility;
(3) Has a pulmonary or cardiovascular condition which limits mobility
or severely limits the individual’s activities in the open air; or
(4) Has a physical or mental impairment or condition, other than those
specified above, but of such nature as to impose an unusual
hardship in connection with physical mobility so as to render it
medically desirable that such person is permitted to use
handicapped parking facilities, if such condition is certified by a
physician duly licensed to practice medicine in New York State as
constituting a degree of disability (specifying the particular
condition) equal to those set forth in the preceding subsections
hereof so as to prevent such person from having physical mobility
as a pedestrian without great difficulty.
C. Each permit issued hereunder shall bear the license plate number of
those vehicles in which the handicapped person customarily rides. The
application shall also be accompanied by valid New York State
registration certificates for each of said vehicles.
D. The permit to be issued shall be in the form of a sticker to be provided
by New York State pursuant to § 1203-a of the Vehicle and Traffic Law,
which sticker shall be affixed to each vehicle for which the registration
is included in the application. Each such sticker or permit shall expire
upon the expiration date of the registration certificate concerned, but
shall be renewed upon an application accompanied by the renewal
registration certificate for any succeeding period of time or by a valid
registration certificate for any other or different vehicle which the
§ 183-14 PALMYRA CODE § 183-14
178:214
§ 183-15. Revocation of permits.
The issuing agent may suspend or revoke any permit or refuse to renew any
permit upon a finding that:
§ 183-16. Hearing upon denial, suspension or revocation of permit.
Upon denial of an application for a permit or a renewal or upon a suspension
or revocation of a permit, the applicant may make written request for a
hearing. The issuing agent shall grant such hearing, to be held before
him, within 10 days after his receipt of such written request. The written
request must be filed with the issuing agent no later than 30 days following
notification of the applicant of the action as to which the hearing is
requested. The issuing agent shall in any event notify the applicant within
21 days after receipt of the completed application as to its approval or
disapproval. If the application is disapproved, a statement setting forth the
reasons for disapproval shall be provided.
applicant or his parent or guardian shall certify as being a vehicle in
which the applicant customarily rides.
A. The applicant has made a material false statement in the application;
B. The applicant has used or permitted the use of the permit contrary to
conditions set forth in the permit and in this chapter;
C. The applicant has failed to comply with or observe any of the conditions
of the application and/or of the permit; or
D. The applicant shall have failed to have notified the issuing agent of any
change of address or disability within 10 days after such change.
§ 183-14 TREES § 183-16
178:215

ARTICLE V
Enforcement
§ 183-17. Penalties for offenses.
Any person violating any of the provisions of any of the sections of this
chapter shall, upon conviction, be punished by penalties not to exceed
the maximum penalties for similar offenses provided in the Vehicle and
Traffic Law of the State of New York. In the event there is not a similar
offense therein provided, the maximum penalties set forth in § 1800(b) of
the Vehicle and Traffic Law of the State of New York shall apply.
§ 183-17 TREES § 183-17
178:217
Chapter 189
WATER
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction and fire
prevention — See Ch. 76.
Sewer use — See Ch. 147.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 167.
Zoning — See Ch. 200.
§ 183-17 PALMYRA CODE § 183-17
178:218
ARTICLE I
Rules, Regulations and Rates.
[Adopted 8-9-195562]
§ 189-1. Applicability.
These rules, regulations and rates shall be a part of the contract with any
person, firm or corporation which is supplied with water or whose property
is supplied with water by the Village of Palmyra, and every such person, firm
or corporation taking water, or whose property is supplied with water, shall
be bound thereby.
§ 189-2. Application for water service. [Amended 11-17-2003 by L.L.
No. 2-2003]
All applications for the use of water must be made in writing on a form
which will be provided, and shall be left with the Clerk of the Village of
Palmyra for processing, together with the cost of the application fee. Each
application shall be subscribed by the owner or owners of the premises
for which the use of water is sought, which shall import a covenant and
agreement on the part of the applicant or applicants and his or their
successors, in interest in the ownership of the premises to be bound by and
to comply with in all respects the provisions of these rules and regulations
and any amendments thereof and to pay the rates and charges herein
established, which schedule of rates and charges is set from time to time by
resolution of the Board of Trustees.
§ 189-3. General conditions.
The Village of Palmyra will endeavor to use reasonable care and diligence
to provide at all times an adequate supply of water at adequate pressure,
but assumes no liability for the failure so to do. The right is reserved to
shut off the water temporarily for the purpose of making repairs, changes,
tests or improvements to the water system and to control water use and
consumption in any emergency or when there is insufficient water available.
In case of a shutdown, reasonable efforts will be made to notify consumers,
but no liability will be assumed for failure or inability so to do. Consumers
are cautioned to make adequate provisions against collapse or drainage of
their boilers because of lack of pressure. All house and other boilers shall
be fitted with a suitable check valve to prevent accidents from collapse or
damage in case the water is suddenly drawn off from the water mains or
pipes.
§ 189-4. Operation and work on water system.
No person or persons except duly authorized officials and employees of the
Village of Palmyra shall do any work or operate the water mains, valves,
62.Editor's Note: This legislation was published 8-18-1955, posted 8-18-1995 and became
effective 9-1-1955.
§ 189-1 TREES § 189-4
178:219
hydrants, meters, curb boxes or services of the water system, except that
members of an organized Fire Department or Fire Company may operate
hydrants in the performance of their duties or for a directed drill.
§ 189-5. Installation charges; materials; connection times.
[Amended 1-25-1966; 3-3-1969; 5-10-1972; 11-17-2003 by L.L. No.
2-2003; 10-15-2007 by L.L. No. 1-2007; 12-2-2013 by L.L. No.
4-2013]
A. The labor and materials for completing the installation of water service
from the main to and including the curb box will be furnished by the
Village of Palmyra for which a flat charge as set from time to time by
resolution of the Board of Trustees will be made, and this amount must
be paid when the application for service is filed with the Village Clerk.
All costs and expenses incident to the installation of the water line
above and beyond the application fee shall be borne by the owner.
B. The necessary labor and materials for completing the installation from
the curb box to the meter shall be furnished and paid for by the
applicant for water service. Service pipes shall not be less than 3/4 inch
and must be copper tubing, Type K, with swedged joints or polyethylene
service line and be placed at least 4 1/2 feet below the surface. The
installation and materials must be approved by a duly authorized
official or employee of the Village of Palmyra before the trench is
backfilled. If any defects in the workmanship or materials are found, or
if the consumer's service pipe has not been installed in accordance with
the specifications or requirements herein provided, water service will
not be turned on until such defects have been remedied, and if water
service has been turned on before discovery of such defects, the service
may be turned off until the defects are remedied.
C. The requirements for the use of polyethylene service line are as follows:
(1) Approved service line materials, one inch to two inches:
(a) High-density polyethylene tubing classified as PE 3308 or PE
3408 with 200 psi pressure rating. This material should be the
same OD as copper or be stamped CTS (copper tubing size).
(2) Polyethylene service line shall not be used within the road right-ofway
between the corporation stop and the curb stop unless the
length exceeds the available coil length for a copper water service.
(3) All polyethylene water services shall be installed with No. 10 gauge
tracer wire and metallic tracer tape. The tape should have "Caution
Buried Water Line Below" printed continually along it. Tape should
be installed under the supervision of a Village of Palmyra
representative or his or her agent.
D. Service connections will be made within a reasonable time after the
filing and approval of the application for service, but the Village of
§ 189-4 PALMYRA CODE § 189-5
178:220
§ 189-6. Service equipment in streets property of Village.
The Village of Palmyra shall at all times remain the owner of all equipment
from the water main to the property line or curb stop and curb box, and
this equipment shall be maintained by the Village of Palmyra and may be
removed or changed by it at any time.
§ 189-7. Meters.
Meters shall be installed in all water services. Meters will be furnished and
set in position by the Village of Palmyra and rented to the owner of the
premises, but title to all meters so furnished shall remain in the Village
of Palmyra. A rental charge in accordance with the scheduled rates and
charges as herein established will be charged, except where the water
service pipe is larger than one inch, the meter must be paid for and owned
by the water consumer, and such meter must be approved by the Board of
Trustees of the Village of Palmyra. Whenever a meter is to be installed a
suitable place must be provided by the owner of the premises and must be
in a place free from frost, accessible at all times and properly safeguarded.
If it is possible to place the meter where it will be free from frost, a
suitable boxing must be built and the meter packed to prevent freezing
at the expense of the property owner. No person except a duly authorized
official, employee or agent of the Village of Palmyra shall open, change,
tamper with or otherwise disturb any water meter lawfully connected with
the Village water system. The cost of repairing any damage which may
be sustained to a meter resulting from carelessness of the owner, tenant,
agent or employee or occupant of the premises, or from neglect of either or
any of them properly to protect such meter, as well as any damage which
may result from allowing such meter to become frozen, burned, injured or
damaged by hot water or steam, shall be paid to the Village of Palmyra
on demand. Whenever an owner of premises shall fail to comply, or shall
fail to procure compliance by a tenant or other occupant of the premises,
with the provisions of this section, the Village of Palmyra in addition to all
other penalties provided may discontinue supplying water to the premises,
without notice, and may, in addition, provide at the expense of the owner a
meter vault and meter at the curbline or other convenient location between
the water main and the buildings on the said premises.
§ 189-8. Application for meter for each separate use of water.
Palmyra reserves the right to make service connections only during the
period from April 1 to November 1 in any calendar year.
A. A separate application must be made and a separate water meter must
be installed for each premises, and the owner of each premises shall be
required to pay a separate and full scale of water rates and meter rental
for each separate use of water on his premises, separate use being
supplied for:
§ 189-5 TREES § 189-8
178:221
§ 189-9. Frozen pipes. [Amended 5-10-1972]
In the event service to any consumer is impeded due to freezing of water
in the supply pipe connection, the curb box and the building to which
water service is furnished, the consumer, if he desires to have such pipe
thawed out by the Village of Palmyra, shall make written application for
such service and file the same with the Village Clerk and pay to the Village
Clerk a sum as set from time to time by resolution of the Board of Trustees,
which said sum is hereby determined to be a fair and reasonable charge for
such service. When such application is made and the above charge paid to
the Village Clerk, the Village of Palmyra will as soon as reasonably possible
cause the ice in the pipe to be thawed so that water will run through the
same.
§ 189-10. No liability for damage from leaks.
The Village of Palmyra will not be liable for any damage from leakage
of service pipes, fixtures or equipment in or upon the premises of any
consumer of water. The Village of Palmyra reserves the right to shut off
water service in the event any owner or consumer fails, neglects or refuses
(1) A single dwelling occupied by members of a single family or
household sharing common bathing, washing and sanitary
facilities; or
(2) Any separate dwelling unit in a single structure occupied by a
single family or household sharing common bathing, washing and
sanitary facilities, to the exclusion of other occupants of the same
structure; or
(3) Any portion of any premises occupied by a separate business or
other enterprise, using and maintaining any water facilities to the
practical exclusion of any other occupant of the same premises.
B. Where a property owner or consumer in order to comply with the
foregoing provisions of this section will be put to undue expense or
hardship in changing and installing new piping or equipment, the Board
of Trustees may waive compliance as to separate meters, but the owner
of such property will be required in any event to pay a quarterly
minimum bill which shall be the minimum quarterly charge established
from time to time by resolution of the Board of Trustees for a single unit
or dwelling times the number of users determined by the foregoing
provisions of this section. [Amended 11-17-2003 by L.L. No. 2-2003]
C. No connection shall be made to any service for the benefit of any other
residence, family, business or establishment nor shall any submetering
of water be allowed. At no time shall there be any physical connection
between a water system or source of supply on the premises and the
water system of the Village of Palmyra or any pipe carrying water from
the Village system, nor shall there be any connection or taps between
the meter and the water main.
§ 189-8 PALMYRA CODE § 189-10
178:222
to promptly repair the service pipe if a leak develops between the curb box
and the meter, and service will not be restored until the service pipe is
repaired to the satisfaction of the Village of Palmyra.
§ 189-11. Inspection of premises.
A member of the Board of Trustees of the Village of Palmyra and any official
or employee of the Village of Palmyra may, at any time, enter any building
or upon any premises where water service is furnished by the Village of
Palmyra for the purpose of making any examination of the pipes, fixtures,
equipment or meter.
§ 189-12. Estimate of water used.
In the event a meter becomes out of order, requiring that the same be
removed for repairs or adjustment, the consumer will be charged the
estimated amount of water used.
§ 189-13. Checking meters and adjustments. [Amended 5-10-1972]
Any consumer making complaint as to the correctness of a meter and
claiming to be overcharged may apply in writing to the Village Clerk within
15 days after the bill is rendered, deposit a sum in an amount as set from
time to time by resolution of the Board of Trustees and request the meter to
be tested. If the meter is found to be correct or to underregister the amount
of water, such deposit will be retained by the Village of Palmyra in payment
of the testing charge. Should the meter be found to overregister the amount
of water, the deposit will be returned and proper correction made in the
bill for the quarter the bill covers only. The Village Clerk or water cashier
are each authorized to correct any bill so shown to be incorrect due to an
incorrect reading of the meter or to a fault in the meter, but for no other
reason.
§ 189-14. Payment of water charges; penalties. [Amended
5-10-1972; 8-28-1972; 2-15-1999 by L.L. No. 1-1999; 2-15-2010 by
L.L. No. 1-2010]
A. Charges for water supplies in each quarter year shall be due and
payable on the first day of March, June, September and December in
each year for the preceding quarter, and shall be payable in full without
discount or reduction of any kind. There shall be added to any charges
remaining unpaid after 45 days from having been billed a penalty of
10% of the amount due and unpaid, and, if such bill is not paid within 45
days from its due date, the supply shall be cut off without notice, and
thereafter service will not be restored unless and until all charges and
penalties have been paid in full.
B. In the event of shutoff for unpaid water bills, there shall be an
administrative fee imposed by the Village of $20 for shutoff and $20 for
turn-on of the water supply. This penalty may be modified from time to
time by resolution of the Village Board.
§ 189-10 TREES § 189-14
178:223
§ 189-15. Water rates and charges. [Amended 5-10-1972; 10-3-1983
by L.L. No. 4-1983; 11-17-2003 by L.L. No. 2-2003]
§ 189-16. Miscellaneous provisions.
C. Unpaid water supply charges and/or penalties due may be included in
the Village tax levy, accounted for and collected pursuant to Article 11
of the New York State Village Law.
A. For consumers within the Village of Palmyra, the rates and charges for
water shall be, and the same hereby are fixed and established, as set
from time to time by resolution of the Board of Trustees.
B. For all water meters owned by the Village of Palmyra and furnished to
consumers either within or without the Village of Palmyra, there shall
be a quarterly charge as set from time to time by resolution of the
Board of Trustees, which shall be added to the quarterly bill rendered
consumers.
C. The water rates for all consumers outside of the Village of Palmyra shall
be 1 1/2 times the rates for consumers within the Village of Palmyra,
unless such consumers are in an organized water district when the
rates fixed by contract shall prevail.
D. The rate for water when sold in tank lots, and the minimum charge per
tank, shall be as set from time to time by resolution of the Board of
Trustees.
A. The Village of Palmyra reserves the right to refuse to supply water
service to any applicant or consumer unless such service is to be
furnished to a permanent residence or dwelling, including trailers
erected on a permanent foundation and with toilet facilities connected
with a septic tank and drainage facilities approved by the Board of
Trustees or Health Officer of the Village of Palmyra.
B. The Board of Trustees reserves the right to make a flat charge as set
from time to time by resolution of the Board of Trustees to be added to
the regular quarterly bill if a consumer fails, neglects or refuses to
provide or arrange for access to the meter during the regular hours of
employment of Village employees for the purpose of reading or
inspecting the same after written notice to the consumer of the date
and time when said meter will be read or inspected. [Amended
5-10-1972]
§ 189-14 PALMYRA CODE § 189-16
178:224
ARTICLE II
Water Department Cross-Connection Control Program
[Adopted 5-16-2005 by L.L. No. 5-2005]
§ 189-17. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is:
§ 189-18. Statutory authority.
This article is enacted pursuant to:
§ 189-19. Responsibility for protection of system.
The Village Board shall be responsible for the protection of the public
potable water distribution system from contamination or pollution due to
the backflow or back-siphonage of contaminants or pollutants through the
water service connection. If, in the judgment of the Village Board, an
approved backflow device is required at the Village's water service
connection to any customer's premises, the Board, or its delegated agent,
shall give notice in writing to said customer to install an approved backflow
prevention device at each service connection to his premises. The customer
shall, within 90 days, install such approved device or devices at his own
expense, and failure to install said device or devices within 90 days shall
constitute a ground for discontinuing water service to the premises until
such device or devices have been properly installed.
A. To protect the public potable water supply served by the Village of
Palmyra Water Department from the possibility of contamination or
pollution by isolating, within its customers internal distribution system,
such contaminants or pollutants which could backflow or back-siphon
into the public water system.
B. To promote the elimination or control of existing cross-connections,
actual or potential, between its customers in-plant potable water
system, and nonpotable systems.
C. To provide for the maintenance of a continuing program of crossconnection
control which will effectively prevent the contamination or
pollution of all potable water systems by cross-connection.
A. The Federal Safe Drinking Water Act of 1974 and the statutes of the
State of New York. The water purveyor has the primary responsibility
for preventing water from unapproved sources, or any other
substances, from entering the public potable water system.
B. The Village of Palmyra Water Department Rules and Regulations, as
adopted.
§ 189-17 TREES § 189-20
178:225
§ 189-20. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
APPROVED — Accepted by the Director of Municipal Services as meeting
an applicable specification stated or cited in this regulation or as suitable
for the proposed use.
AUXILIARY WATER SUPPLY — Any water supply on or available to the
premises other than the purveyor's approved public potable water supply.
BACKFLOW — The flow of water or other liquids, mixtures or substances,
under positive or reduced pressure in the distribution pipes of a potable
water supply from any source other than its intended source.
BACKFLOW PREVENTER — A device or means designated to prevent
backflow or back-siphonage; most commonly categorized as air gap,
reduced-pressure-principle device, double-check-valve assembly, pressure
vacuum breaker, atmospheric vacuum breaker, hose bibb vacuum breaker,
residential dual check, double check with intermediate atmospheric vent,
and barometric loop.
AIR GAP — A physical separation sufficient to prevent backflow
between the free-flowing discharge end of the potable water system
and any other system; physically defined as a distance equal to twice
the diameter of the supply side pipe diameter but never less than one
inch.
A.
ATMOSPHERIC VACUUM BREAKER — A device which prevents backsiphonage
by creating an atomospheric vent when there is either a
negative pressure or subatmospheric pressure in a water system.
B.
BAROMETRIC LOOP — A fabricated piping arrangement rising at least
35 feet at its topmost point above he highest fixture it supplies. It is
utilized in water supply systems to protect against back-siphonage.
C.
DOUBLE-CHECK-VALVE ASSEMBLY — An assembly of two
independently operating spring-loaded check valves with tightly closing
shutoff valves on each side of the check valves, plus properly located
test cocks for the testing of each check valve.
D.
DOUBLE-CHECK-VALVE WITH INTERMEDIATE ATMOSPHERIC VENT
— A device having two spring-loaded check valves separated by an
atomospheric vent chamber.
E.
HOSE BIBB VACUUM BREAKER — A device which is permanently
attached to a hose bibb and which acts as an atmospheric vacuum
breaker.
F.
PRESSURE VACUUM BREAKER — A device containing one or two
independently operated spring-loaded check valves and an
independently operated spring-loaded air inlet valve located on the
discharge side of the check or checks; device includes tightly closing
G.
§ 189-20 PALMYRA CODE § 189-20
178:226
BACK-PRESSURE — A condition in which the owner's system pressure is
greater than the supplier's system pressure.
BACK-SIPHONAGE — The flow of water or other liquids, mixtures or
substances into the distribution pipes of a potable water supply system from
any source other than its intended source caused by the sudden reduction
of pressure in the potable water supply system.
COMMISSION — The New York State Department of Health.
CONTAINMENT — A method of backflow prevention which requires a
backflow prevention preventer at the water service entrance.
CONTAMINANT — A substance that will impair the quality of the water to
a degree that it creates a serious health hazard to the public leading to
poisoning or the spread of disease.
CROSS-CONNECTION — Any actual or potential connection between the
public water supply and a source of contamination or pollution.
DEPARTMENT — Village of Palmyra Water Department.
DIRECTOR OF MUNICIPAL SERVICES — The Director, or his delegated
representative in charge of the Village of Palmyra Department of Municipal
Services, is invested with the authority and responsibility for the
implementation of a cross-connection control program and for the
enforcement of the provisions of the article.
FIXTURE ISOLATION — A method of backflow prevention in which a
backflow preventer is located to correct a cross-connection in an in-plant
location rather than at a water service entrance.
OWNER — Any person who has legal title to, or license to operate or habitat
in, a property upon which a cross-connection inspection is to be made or
upon which a cross-connection is present.
PERMIT — A document issued by the Department which allows the use of a
backflow preventer.
shutoff valves on each side of the check valves and properly located test
cocks for the testing of the check valve(s).
REDUCED-PRESSURE-PRINCIPLE BACKFLOW PREVENTER — An
assembly consisting of two independently operating approved check
valves with an automatically operating differential relief valve located
between the two check valves, tightly closing shutoff valves on each
side of the check valves, plus properly located test cocks for the testing
of the check valves and the relief valve.
H.
RESIDENTIAL DUAL CHECK — An assembly of two spring-loaded,
independently operating check valves without tightly closing shutoff
valves and test cocks; generally employed immediately downstream of
the water meter to act as a containment device.
I.
§ 189-20 TREES § 189-20
178:227
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, company, public or private
corporation, political subdivision, or agency of the State Department,
agency or instrumentality of the United States or any other legal entity.
POLLUTANT — A foreign substance, that if permitted to get into the public
water system, will degrade its quality so as to constitute a moderate hazard,
or impair the usefulness or quality of the water to a degree which does not
create an actual hazard to the public health but which does adversely and
unreasonably effect such water for domestic use.
WATER SERVICE ENTRANCE — That point in the owner's water system
beyond the sanitary control of the District; generally considered to be the
outlet end of the water meter and always before any unprotected branch.
§ 189-21. Administration.
§ 189-22. Requirements of Department and owners.
A. The Department will operate a cross-connection control program, to
include the keeping of necessary records, which fulfills the
requirements of the Commission's cross-connection regulations and is
approved by the Commission.
B. The owner shall allow his property to be inspected for possible crossconnections
and shall follow the provisions of the Department's
program and the Commission's regulations if a cross-connection is
permitted.
C. If the Department requires that the public supply be protected by
containment, the owner shall be responsible for water quality beyond
the outlet end of the containment. He may utilize public health officials
or personnel from the Department, or their delegated representatives,
to assist him in the survey of his facilities and to assist him in the
selection of proper fixture outlet devices and the proper installation of
these devices.
A. Department.
(1) On new installations, a professional engineer will provide on-site
evaluation and/or inspection of plans in order to determine the type
of backflow preventer, if any, that will be required; will issue permit
and perform inspection and testing. In any case, a minimum of a
dual check valve will be required in any new construction. All plans
must be approved by the New York State Department of Health.
(2) For premises existing prior to the start of this program, a
professional engineer will perform evaluations and inspections of
plans and/or premises and inform the owner by letter of any
corrective action deemed necessary, the method of achieving the
correction, and the time allowed for the correction to be made.
Ordinarily, 90 days will be allowed; however, this time period may
§ 189-20 PALMYRA CODE § 189-22
178:228
be shortened depending upon the degree of hazard involved and
the history of the device(s) in question.
(3) The Department will not allow any cross-connection to remain
unless it is protected by an approved backflow preventer for which
a permit has been issued and which will be regularly tested to
insure satisfactory operation.
(4) The Department shall inform the owner by letter of any failure to
comply by the time of the first reinspection. The Department will
allow an additional 15 days for the correction. In the event the
owner fails to comply with the necessary correction by the time of
the second reinspection, the Department will inform the owner by
letter that the water service to the owner's premises will be
terminated within a period not to exceed five days. In the event that
the owner informs the Department of extenuating circumstances as
to why the correction has not been made, a time extension may be
granted by the Department but in no case will exceed an additional
30 days.
(5) If the Department determines at any time that a serious threat to
the public health exists, the water service will be terminated
immediately.
(6) The Department shall have on file a list of private contractors who
are certified New York State backflow device testers. All charges
for these tests will be paid by the owner of the building or property.
(7) The Department will begin initial premises' inspections to
determine the nature of existing or potential hazards, following the
approval of this program by the Commission, during the calendar
year 2005. Initial focus will be on high-hazard industries and
commercial premises.
B. Owner.
(1) The owner shall be responsible for the elimination or protection of
all cross-connections on his premises.
(2) The owner, after having been informed by a letter from the
Department, shall, at his expense, install, maintain and test, or
have tested, any and all backflow preventers on his premises.
(3) The owner shall correct any malfunction of the backflow preventer
which is revealed by periodic testing.
(4) The owner shall inform the Department of any proposed or
modified cross-connections and also any existing cross-connections
of which the owner is aware but have not been found by the
Department.
(5) The owner shall not install a bypass around any backflow preventer
unless there is a backflow preventer of the same type on the
§ 189-22 TREES § 189-22
178:229
§ 189-23. Degree of hazard.
The Department recognizes the threat to the public water system arising
from cross-connections. All threats will be classified by degree of hazard
and will require the installation of approved reduced-pressure-principle
backflow prevention devices or double check valves.
§ 189-24. Permits.
The Department shall not permit a cross-connection within the public water
supply system unless it is considered necessary and that it cannot be
eliminated.
§ 189-25. Existing in-use backflow prevention devices.
Any existing backflow preventer shall be allowed by the Department to
continue in service unless the degree of hazard is such as to supersede the
effectiveness of the present backflow preventer or result in an unreasonable
bypass. Owners who cannot shut down operation for testing of the
device(s) must supply additional devices necessary to allow testing
to take place.
(6) The owner shall install backflow preventers in a manner approved
by the New York State Department of Health.
(7) The owner shall install only backflow preventers approved by the
Department or the Commission.
(8) Any owner having a private well or other private water source shall
not be permitted to cross connect to the Department's water
system.
(9) In the event the owner installs plumbing to provide potable water
for domestic purposes which is on the Department's side of the
backflow preventer, such plumbing must have its own backflow
preventer installed.
(10) The owner shall be responsible for the payment of all fees for
permits, annual device testing, retesting in the case that the device
fails to operate correctly, and second reinspections for
noncompliance with Department or Commission requirements.
A. Cross-connection permits that are required for each backflow
prevention device are obtained from the Department. The fees charged
for such permits will be established by resolution of the Village Board.
B. Permits are nontransferable. Permits are subject to revocation and
become immediately revoked if the owner should so change the type of
cross-connection or degree of hazard associated with the service.
C. A permit is not required when fixture isolation is achieved with the
utilization of a nontestable backflow preventer.
§ 189-22 PALMYRA CODE § 189-25
178:230
risk to the public health. Where the degree of hazard has increased, as in
the case of a residential installation converting to a business establishment,
any existing backflow preventer must be upgraded to a reduced-pressureprinciple
device, or a reduced-pressure-principle device must be installed in
the event that no backflow device was present.
§ 189-26. Periodic testing.
§ 189-27. Records and reports.
§ 189-28. Fees and charges.
A. Reduced-pressure-principle backflow devices shall be tested and
inspected annually.
B. Periodic testing shall be performed by a New York State certified tester.
A copy of the New York State test report also needs to be sent to the
Palmyra Water Department, 144 East Main Street, Palmyra, NY, 14522.
This testing will be done at the owner's expense.
C. Any backflow preventer which fails during a periodic test will be
repaired or replaced. When repairs are necessary, upon completion of
the repair, the device will be retested at the owner's expense to insure
correct operation. High-hazard situations will not be allowed to
continue unprotected if the backflow preventer fails the test and cannot
be repaired immediately. In other situations, a compliance date of not
more than 30 days after the test date will be established. The owner is
responsible for spare parts, repair tools, or a replacement device.
Parallel installation of two devices is an effective means of the owner
insuring uninterrupted water service during testing or repair of devices
and is strongly recommended when the owner desires such continuity.
A. Records. The Department will initiate and maintain the copies of lists
and summaries supplied to the Commission.
B. Reports. The Department will submit the following to the Commission:
(1) Initial listing of low-hazard cross-connections to the state.
(2) Initial listing of high-hazard cross-connections to the state.
(3) Annual update lists of Subsections B(1) and (2) above.
(4) Annual summary of cross-connection inspections to the state.
A. The Department will publish a list of fees or charges for the following
services or permits:
(1) Testing fees.
(2) Retesting fees.
(3) Fee for reinspection.
§ 189-25 TREES § 189-28
178:231
§ 189-29. Strainers.
The Department strongly recommends that all new retrofit installations
of reduced-pressure-principle devices and double-check-valve backflow
preventers include the installation of strainers located immediately
upstream of the backflow device. The installation of strainers will preclude
the fouling of backflow devices due to both foreseen and unforeseen
circumstances occurring to the water supply system such as water main
repairs, water main breaks, fires, periodic cleaning and flushing of mains,
etc. These occurrences may stir up debris within the water main that will
cause fouling of backflow devices installed without the benefit of strainers.
§ 189-30. Amendments. [Amended 5-16-2005 by L.L. No. 5-2005]
The Board of Trustees of the Village of Palmyra reserves the right to change,
amend, repeal or add to this chapter at any time.
(4) Charges for after-hours inspections or tests.
B. These fees may be changed from time to time by resolution of the
Palmyra Village Board.
§ 189-28 PALMYRA CODE § 189-30
178:232
Chapter 194
YARD AND PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 163. Trees — See Ch. 178.
§ 194-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Yard Maintenance
Law of the Village of Palmyra."
§ 194-2. Purpose.
It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety and
general welfare, and to maintain property within the Village of Palmyra in a
safe, healthy and aesthetically pleasing manner.
§ 194-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following words, phrases and terms shall have
the following meanings:
DISASSEMBLED, INOPERABLE, JUNKED OR WRECKED MOTOR
VEHICLES, TRUCK BODIES, TRACTORS, TRAILERS, WATERCRAFT —
Motor vehicles, truck bodies, tractors or trailers and watercraft in such
state of physical or mechanical ruin as to be incapable of propulsion or of
being operated upon the public streets or highways.
JUNK — Worn out or discarded material of little or no value, including
but not limited to household appliances or parts thereof, tools, discarded
building materials, garbage, discarded furniture or any other unsightly
debris, the accumulation of which has an adverse effect upon neighborhood
or Village property values, health, safety or general welfare.
LAWN — Land covered with grass kept closely mowed, especially around a
house.
MOTOR VEHICLE — As defined in § 125 of the New York State Vehicle and
Traffic Law; unlicensed motor vehicles, truck bodies, tractors or trailers;
motor vehicles, truck bodies, tractors or trailers which do not bear lawful
current license plates.
NOXIOUS WEEDS AND GROWTH — Grass, brush, rubbish or weeds of a
nature which is a fire or health hazard, including lawns in excess of 10
inches in height.
PERSONS — Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company or organization of any kind. "Persons" shall also include the
occupant of the parcel of land.
§ 189-30 TREES § 194-3
178:233
WATERCRAFT — A boat or vessel designed to navigate on water, including
jet skis and personal watercraft.
§ 194-4. Storage or accumulation of inoperable vehicles.
§ 194-5. Storage of unlicensed vehicles.
§ 194-6. Noxious weeds or growth prohibited.
No person shall maintain, plant or permit to remain on any private property
any noxious weeds or growth.
§ 194-7. Complaints.
Complaints concerning any violation of this chapter shall be made in
writing, sworn to by the complainant, and filed with the Building Inspector
for the Village of Palmyra, who shall immediately cause an investigation to
be made with respect thereto and the written report of such investigation
filed with the Clerk of the Village.
§ 194-8. Notice.
A. Restricted. No person shall accumulate, store or allow any
disassembled, junked or wrecked watercraft, motor vehicles, truck
bodies, tractors or trailers in the open upon any public or private
property within the Village.
B. Exceptions. Any business engaged in automotive sales or repair located
in a properly zoned district may retain no more than three disassembled
or wrecked vehicles in the open for a period of not to exceed 30 days,
after which such vehicles shall be removed. Also excepted shall be
properly zoned, permitted and licensed junkyards established pursuant
to § 136 of the General Municipal Law.
A. Restricted. No person shall accumulate, store or allow any unlicensed
motor vehicle, truck body, tractor or trailer in the open upon any public
or private property within the Village.
B. Exception: any business engaged in the sale, repair or storage of such
unlicensed vehicles.
A. If, after such investigation, it appears that there is a reasonable basis to
believe that any of the provisions of this chapter have been violated, the
Building Inspector shall immediately cause a notice in writing to be
served upon the owner or occupant of the property. Such notice shall
set forth the nature of the complaint and shall direct the owner or
occupant to remove said noxious weeds and growth, junk or motor
vehicles. Subsequent violations of a similar nature at the same location
during the same year shall be corrected by the Village or its agent
without notice to the owner, occupant or person having control of said
property. After initial notification, such owner, occupant or person
§ 194-3 PALMYRA CODE § 194-8
178:234
§ 194-9. Inquiry by Village Board; hearing.
Any person feeling aggrieved by any such action or notice may, within three
days after the receipt of such notice, demand the matter be inquired into by
the Village Board. Such demand must be in writing, signed by the person
having control of said property will be presumed to have been given
sufficient notice of infraction for the entire season.
B. The notice required under this chapter shall be served upon the owner,
his or her executors, legal representatives, agent, lessee or any other
person having a vested or contingent interest in such premises as
shown by the records of the Town Assessor or of the Wayne County
Clerk. Service shall be made either personally or by registered or
certified mail, addressed to the last known address, if any, of the owner,
his or her executors, legal representative, agent, lessee or other person
having vested or contingent interest in such premises as aforesaid
identified. If service is made by registered or certified mail, a copy of
the notice shall be posted on the premises. The notice shall be in
substantially the following form:
To the owner, occupant or person having charge of land known on the
Assessment Roll of the Village of Palmyra as vacant lot(s) located on
the _____ side of _____ Street or Avenue; or house and lot number _____
located on the _____ side of _____ Street or Avenue.
Notice is hereby given that you have failed to cut the grass or weeds or
to remove junk or refuse, or unlicensed or inoperable motor vehicle(s)
pursuant to Chapter 194 of the Code of the Village of Palmyra. Said
grass or weeds must be cut and any junk or refuse or unlicensed or
inoperable motor vehicle(s) removed within four days from the date of
this notice.
In case you fail or refuse to comply with this notice on or before
the expiration of said four days from the date of this notice, the
Village of Palmyra, acting through its duly authorized agents, servants,
officers and employees, will enter upon your land and cut said grass
or weeds or remove said junk or refuse or unlicensed or inoperable
motor vehicle(s). The expense incurred by the Village, including a $75
administration fee, will be assessed against the above-described land,
and shall constitute a lien therein, and shall be added to the real
property tax levied against the property and collected as provided by
law.
You will be notified in writing only once in any given year for a
particular violation. Subsequent violations of a similar nature at the
same location during the same year shall be corrected by the Village
or its agent without notice to the owner, occupant or person having
control of said property. After initial notification, such owner, occupant
or person having control of said property will be presumed to have
been given sufficient notice of infraction for the entire season.
Dated: Code Enforcement Officer
§ 194-8 TREES § 194-9
178:235
seeking such inquiry, and filed with the Village Clerk. Within a reasonable
time, the Village Board shall schedule a date, time and place for a hearing
before the Village Board in which the aggrieved person may address the
Village Board. Such hearing shall be scheduled not less than five business
days from the date of service of the notice.
§ 194-10. Failure to comply.
In the event of the refusal or neglect of the person so notified to comply with
said order and after hearing, if requested, the Village Board shall provide
for the removal of the junk, motor vehicle or noxious weeds or growth, as
the case may be, either by Village employees or by contract, and the total
cost thereof, including an administration fee of $75 or such administrative
fee as may be amended from time to time by Village Board resolution, shall
be assessed upon the real property upon which the motor vehicle, junk or
noxious weeds and growth are found, and shall constitute a lien and charge
upon the real property on which it is levied until paid or otherwise satisfied
or discharged, and shall be collected by the Village Treasurer in the manner
provided by law for the collection of real property taxes.
Chapter 200
ZONING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Adult uses — See Ch. 59.
Building construction and fire
prevention — See Ch. 76.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 108.
Sewer use — See Ch. 147.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 163.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 167.
Trees — See Ch. 178.
Water — See Ch. 189.
§ 194-9 PALMYRA CODE § 194-10
178:236
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 200-1. Enacting clause; legislative authority.
The Village Board of the Village of Palmyra in the County of Wayne, under
the authority of the Village Law of the State of New York, hereby ordains,
enacts and publishes as follows.
§ 200-2. Title.
This chapter shall be known as “Local Law No. 3 of 1967,” and the map
referred to herein and made a part of this chapter shall be known as the
“Zoning District Map.”63
§ 200-3. When effective.
This chapter shall be effective immediately.
§ 200-4. Zoning Board of Appeals/Planning Board. [Amended
8-1-2016 by L.L. No. 2-2016]
The Village of Palmyra Planning Board is hereby abolished. All functions of
the Planning Board are hereby transferred to the Zoning Board of Appeals,
to be known hereafter as the "Zoning Board of Appeals/Planning Board"
("ZBA/Planning Board"). All references to either "Planning Board" or
"Zoning Board of Appeals" contained in the Code of the Village of Palmyra
shall be replaced with the term "Zoning Board of Appeals/Planning Board."
§ 200-5. Conflict with other regulations.
Where a provision of this chapter is found to be in conflict with or in any
other local law of the Village existing on the effective date of this chapter, or
in any regulation issued under the authority of such code or ordinance, the
provision which establishes the higher standard for the protection of health,
safety and welfare shall prevail.
§ 200-6. Purpose.
A. The purposes of this chapter are set forth in general terms in the Village
Law which enables the Village to adopt this chapter. The provisions of
this chapter shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the
protection of the health, safety and welfare of the people at large, and
are designed to encourage the establishment and maintenance of
reasonable standards of the physical environment.
B. It is fundamental for the purpose of this chapter to recognize that some
existing lots in the Village are more difficult to use for the intended
purpose because of location, size, slope or general topography. Usually
63.Editor's Note: The current Zoning District Map is on file in the office of the Village Clerk.
§ 200-1 TREES § 200-6
178:237
such differences will not make use of a lot impractical, although such
use may require greater expense or ingenuity. Where such lots cannot
practically be used for a permitted use, the remedy of variance is
available to permit modifications in yard or other requirements to make
possible a use generally permitted in the district, but not to permit a
more intensive use. Difficulty in using land for a permitted dwelling
because of topography problems should not justify use of the land
for a commercial use not normally permitted but should justify only
accommodation in the regulations so as to facilitate a dwelling.
C. It is the further intent that the administration of this chapter, where it
affects properties near or adjacent to the Village boundary lines, will be
such as to promote administrative cooperation with bordering
municipalities for the benefit and protection of all properties.
D. This section, together with all provisions of the chapter, shall be
considered when appraising the spirit of this chapter as a guide to its
interpretation.
§ 200-6 PALMYRA CODE § 200-6
178:238
ARTICLE II
Word Usage and Definitions
§ 200-7. Word usage.
For the purpose of this chapter, certain terms and words are herein defined;
whenever used in this chapter, they shall have the meaning indicated in
this article, except where the context indicates a clearly different meaning.
Words used in the present tense include the future; the singular number
includes the plural and the plural the singular; the words “used for” include
the meaning “designed or redesigned for” and vice versa; the word “shall”
is mandatory and not discretionary; and the word “may” is permissive.
§ 200-8. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the terms used herein are defined as
follows:
ABANDONED SIGN — A sign structure that has ceased to be used, and the
owner intends no longer to have used, for the display of sign copy, or as
otherwise defined by state law.[Added 5-16-2005 by L.L. No. 4-2005]
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE — A detached subordinate structure, the use of
which is incidental to the main structure or the use of the land.
ACCESSORY USE — A use customarily incidental and subordinate to the
principal use or building and located on the same lot with such principal use
or building.
AGRICULTURAL FAIRGROUNDS — An area of land, including structures
thereon, that is used primarily for the display and judging of agricultural
products, animals and machinery, during a period of not to exceed seven
days per year or such additional period of time as may be required by state
regulations in order to qualify for premium payment.[Added 5-7-1979 by
L.L. No. 4-1979]
ALTERATION — As applied to a building or structure, a change or
rearrangement in the structural parts or exit facilities or an enlargement,
whether by extending on a side, by increasing in height or by moving from
one location or position to another.
ALTERATION, STRUCTURAL — Any change in the supporting members of a
building, such as bearing walls, columns, beams or girders.
ANIMATED SIGN — A sign employing actual motion or the illusion of
motion. Animated signs, which are differentiated from changeable signs as
defined and regulated by this chapter, include the following types:[Added
5-16-2005 by L.L. No. 4-2005]
ELECTRICALLY ACTIVATED — - Animated signs producing the illusion
of movement by means of electronic, electrical or electromechanical
input and/or illumination capable of simulating movement through
employment of the characteristics of one or both of the classifications
noted below:
A.
§ 200-7 TREES § 200-8
178:239
ARCHITECTURAL PROJECTION — Any projection that is not intended for
occupancy and that extends beyond the face of an exterior wall of a
building, but that does not include signs as defined herein. See also,
"awning;” "back-lit awning;" and "canopy, attached and
freestanding."[Added 5-16-2005 by L.L. No. 4-2005]
AREA, BUILDING — The total of areas taken on a horizontal plane at
the main grade level of the principal building and all accessory buildings,
exclusive of uncovered porches, terraces and steps.
AREA, LAND — When referring to the required area per dwelling unit,
means net land area, the area exclusive of any streets and alleys.
AUTO COURT — A building or group of buildings, whether detached or
in connected units, used as individual sleeping or dwelling units designed
primarily for transient automobile travelers and providing for accessory offstreet
parking facilities.
AUTOMATIC COIN LAUNDRY OR DRY CLEANER — A business premises
equipped with individual clothes washing or cleaning machines for the
principal use of retail customers.
AUTOMOBILE AND/OR TRAILER SALES AREA — An open area, other than
a street or way, used for the display or sale of new or used automobiles or
trailers and where minor and incidental repair work, other than body and
fender, may be done.
AUTOMOBILE LAUNDRY — Establishment for the washing of motor
vehicles as a principal use.
AUTOMOBILE REPAIR GARAGE — A building used for the repair of motor
vehicles involving operations not permitted at a gasoline station.
AUTOMOBILE WRECKING — The dismantling or wrecking of used
automobiles or trailers or the storage, sale or dumping of dismantled,
partially dismantled, obsolete or wrecked vehicles or their parts.
Flashing. Animated signs or animated portions of signs whose
illumination is characterized by a repetitive cycle in which the
period of illumination is either the same as or less than the period
of nonillumination. For the purposes of this chapter, flashing will
not be defined as occurring if the cyclical period between on and
off phases of illumination exceeds four seconds.
(1)
Patterned illusionary movement. Animated signs or animated
portions of signs whose illumination is characterized by simulated
movement through alternate or sequential activation of various
illuminated elements for the purpose of producing repetitive light
patterns designed to appear in some form of constant motion.
(2)
ENVIRONMENTALLY ACTIVATED — - Animated signs or devices
motivated by wind, thermal changes or other natural environmental
input. Includes spinners, pinwheels, pennant strings, and/or other
devices or displays that respond to naturally occurring external
motivation.
B.
§ 200-8 PALMYRA CODE § 200-8
178:240
AWNING — An architectural projection or shelter projecting from and
supported by the exterior wall of a building and composed of non-rigid
materials and/or fabric on a supporting retractable framework.[Added
5-16-2005 by L.L. No. 4-2005]
AWNING SIGN — A sign displayed on or attached flat against the surface or
surfaces of an awning. See also, "wall" or "fascia sign."[Added 5-16-2005
by L.L. No. 4-2005]
BACKLIT AWNING — An awning with a translucent covering material and
a source of illumination contained within its framework.[Added 5-16-2005
by L.L. No. 4-2005]
BANNER — A flexible substrate on which copy or graphics may be
displayed.[Added 5-16-2005 by L.L. No. 4-2005]
BANNER SIGN — A sign utilizing a banner as its display surface.[Added
5-16-2005 by L.L. No. 4-2005]
BASEMENT — A story partly underground but having at least 1/2 of its
height above the average level of the adjoining ground.
BILLBOARD — See "off-premises sign" and "outdoor advertising
sign."[Added 5-16-2005 by L.L. No. 4-2005]
BOARDINGHOUSE — A building or portion thereof, other than a hotel,
containing not more than one dwelling unit where meals and lodging are
provided for three or more persons in addition to the family unit.
BUILDING — A structure having a roof for the housing or enclosure of
persons, animals or chattels.
BUILDING, ACCESSORY — A subordinate building, or a portion of the main
building on a lot, the use of which is customarily incidental to that of the
main or principal building.
BUILDING ELEVATION — The entire side of a building, from ground level
to the roofline, as viewed perpendicular to the walls on that side of the
building.[Added 5-16-2005 by L.L. No. 4-2005]
BUILDING, PRINCIPAL — A building in which is conducted the main or
principal use of the lot on which said building is situated.
CANOPY (ATTACHED) — A multisided overhead structure or architectural
projection supported by attachments to a building on one or more sides and
cantilevered from such building. The surface(s) and/or soffit of an attached
canopy may be illuminated by means of internal or external sources of
light.[Added 5-16-2005 by L.L. No. 4-2005]
CANOPY (FREESTANDING) — A multisided overhead structure supported
by columns, but not enclosed by walls. The surface(s) and or soffit of a
freestanding canopy may be illuminated by means of internal or external
sources of light.[Added 5-16-2005 by L.L. No. 4-2005]
CANOPY SIGN — A sign affixed to the visible surface(s) of an attached
or freestanding canopy. For reference, see Figure 200-25 A(1)(b).64[Added
5-16-2005 by L.L. No. 4-2005]
§ 200-8 TREES § 200-8
178:241
CELLAR — A portion of the building having 1/2 or more of its height below
the average level of the adjoining ground.
CEMETERY — Land used or intended to be used for the burial of the
dead and dedicated for cemetery purposes, including columbariums,
crematories, mausoleums and mortuaries, when operated in conjunction
with and within the boundary of such cemetery.
CHANGEABLE SIGN — A sign with the capability of content change by
means of manual or remote input, including signs which are:[Added
5-16-2005 by L.L. No. 4-2005]
CHURCH — Includes any or all of the following: church, cathedral, temple,
synagogue, manse, rectory, convent, parish school or similar building
incidental to the particular use; school for religious education; convents
and other buildings for the housing of students, teachers, communicants
and domestic or maintenance employees, but not including business offices
(except administrative offices incidental to the operation of the particular
use), rescue missions or the occasional use for religious purposes of
properties not regularly so used.
CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — The agent or representative of the
Village of Palmyra, or his delegates or deputies, responsible for the
enforcement of the ordinances and codes of the Village.[Added 5-16-2005
by L.L. No. 4-2005]
COMBINATION SIGN — A sign that is supported partly by pole and partly
by a building structure.[Added 5-16-2005 by L.L. No. 4-2005]
COPY — Those letters, numerals, figures, symbols, logos and graphic
elements comprising the content or message of a sign, excluding numerals
identifying a street address only.[Added 5-16-2005 by L.L. No. 4-2005]
COVERAGE — That percentage of the plot or lot area covered by the
building.65
DEVELOPMENT COMPLEX SIGN — A freestanding sign identifying a
multiple-occupancy development, such as a shopping center or planned
industrial park, which is controlled by a single owner or landlord, approved
MANUALLY ACTIVATED — - Changeable sign whose message copy or
content can be changed manually.
A.
ELECTRICALLY ACTIVATED — - Changeable sign whose message copy
or content can be changed by means of remote electrically energized
on-off switching combinations of alphabetic or pictographic
components arranged on a display surface. Illumination may be integral
to the components, such as characterized by lamps or other lightemitting
devices or it may be from an external light source designed
to reflect off the changeable component display. See also, "electronic
message sign or center.”
B.
64.Editor's Note: Sign figures are included at the end of this chapter.
65.Editor’s Note: The former definition of “customary home occupation or profession,” which
immediately followed this definition, was repealed 6-1-1992 by L.L. No. 2-1992.
§ 200-8 PALMYRA CODE § 200-8
178:242
in accordance with § 200-25G(2) of this chapter.[Added 5-16-2005 by L.L.
No. 4-2005]
DIRECTIONAL SIGN — Any sign that is designed and erected for the
purpose of providing direction and/or orientation for pedestrian or vehicular
traffic.[Added 5-16-2005 by L.L. No. 4-2005]
DOG KENNEL — A structure used for the harboring of more than three dogs
that are more than six months old.
DOUBLE-FACED SIGN — A sign with two faces, back to back.[Added
5-16-2005 by L.L. No. 4-2005]
DRIVE-IN USE — Any use customarily providing service to or selling at
retail to a person occupying an automobile.
DWELLING — A building or portion thereof designed for and used primarily
for human occupancy and having the floor area required in this chapter,
but not including auto courts, hospitals, hotels, boardinghouses, residential
clubs, rooming houses and the like.
DWELLING GROUP — A group of two or more one-family, two-family or
multiple dwellings occupying a lot in one ownership and having any yard in
common.
DWELLING, MULTIPLE-FAMILY — A building or portion thereof containing
three or more dwelling units.
DWELLING UNIT — One or more living or sleeping rooms with cooking and
sanitary facilities for one person or one family.
EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTION — A college or university giving general
academic instruction. Included within this term are areas of structures used
for administration, housing of students or faculty, dining halls and social or
athletic activities, when located on the institution’s land that is not detached
from that portion of the campus where classroom facilities are maintained
by more than street and/or other property owned by the institution.
ELECTRIC SIGN — Any sign activated or illuminated by means of electrical
energy.[Added 5-16-2005 by L.L. No. 4-2005]
ELECTRONIC MESSAGE SIGN OR CENTER — An electrically activated
changeable sign whose variable message capability can be electronically
programmed.[Added 5-16-2005 by L.L. No. 4-2005]
EXTERIOR SIGN — Any sign placed outside a building.[Added 5-16-2005
by L.L. No. 4-2005]
FACADE — See "building facade."[Added 5-16-2005 by L.L. No. 4-2005]
FAMILY — One or more persons occupying a dwelling unit as a single,
nonprofit housekeeping unit, who are living together as a bona fide stable
and committed living unit, being a traditional family unit or the functional
equivalent thereof, exhibiting the generic character of a traditional
family.[Amended 11-17-2005 by L.L. No. 2-2003]
FASCIA SIGN — See "wall sign."[Added 5-16-2005 by L.L. No. 4-2005]
§ 200-8 TREES § 200-8
178:243
FLASHING SIGN — See "animated sign, electrically activated."[Added
5-16-2005 by L.L. No. 4-2005]
FLOOR AREA (of a building) — The sum of the gross horizontal area of
the several floors, including the basement of a building and its accessory
buildings on the same lot, and including the area of roofed porches and
roofed terraces. All dimensions shall be measured between exterior faces of
walls.
FLOOR AREA RATIO — The floor area of a building divided by the area of
the occupied lot.
FREESTANDING SIGN — A sign principally supported by a structure affixed
to the ground, and not supported by a building, including signs supported
by one or more columns, poles or braces placed in or upon the ground. For
visual reference, see Figure 200-25 A(1)(a).[Added 5-16-2005 by L.L. No.
4-2005]
FRONTAGE (BUILDING) — The length of an exterior building wall or
structure of a single premises oriented to the public way or other properties
that it faces.66[Added 5-16-2005 by L.L. No. 4-2005]
FRONTAGE (PROPERTY) — The length of the property line(s) of any single
premises along either a public way or other properties on which it
borders.[Added 5-16-2005 by L.L. No. 4-2005]
GARAGE — A building or part of building used for the parking of one or
more operative motor vehicles.
GARAGE, REPAIR — See “automobile repair garage.”
GASOLINE STATION — Any area of land, including structures thereon,
that is used for the sale of gasoline or any other motor vehicle fuel and
lubricating substances, including sale of motor vehicle accessories, and
which may or may not include facilities for lubricating, washing or
otherwise servicing motor vehicles, but not including the painting thereof
by any means, body and fender work or the dismantling or replacing of
engines.
GROUND SIGN — See "freestanding sign."[Added 5-16-2005 by L.L. No.
4-2005]
HEIGHT OF BUILDING — The vertical distance measured from the average
elevation of the proposed finished grade at the front of the building to the
highest point of the roof for flat roofs, to the deck line of mansard roofs,
and to the mean height between eaves and ridge for gable, hip and gambrel
roofs.
HEIGHT OF STRUCTURE (other than a building) — Vertical distance
between the mean elevation of the base of the structure and the highest
point of the structure.
66.Editor’s Note: Sign figures are included at the end of this chapter.
§ 200-8 PALMYRA CODE § 200-8
178:244
HOME OCCUPATION — An income-producing occupation or profession
carried on wholly within the principal building or within a building
accessory thereto where:[Added 6-1-1992 by L.L. No. 2-1992]
HOSPITAL — Includes sanitarium, sanitorium and preventorium for the
diagnosis, treatment or other care of human ailments.[Amended
10-26-1970 by L.L. No. 4-1970]
HOTEL — A building designed primarily for occupancy as the temporary
abiding place of individuals who are lodged with or without meals, in which
building:
IDENTIFICATION SIGN — A sign used to identify a specific property by
address, occupant or use.[Added 5-16-2005 by L.L. No. 4-2005]
ILLUMINATED SIGN — A sign characterized by the use of artificial light
either projecting through its surface(s) (internally illuminated) or reflecting
off its surface(s) (externally illuminated).[Added 5-16-2005 by L.L. No.
4-2005]
INSTITUTIONAL HOME — A building used for the full-time home of three
or more babies, children or aged persons, a rest home, nursing home,
related health facility, clinic and convalescent home, except correctional
institutions or hospitals.[Amended 10-26-1970 by L.L. No. 4-1970]
The occupation is carried on by a member of the family residing in the
dwelling (and no more than one other person other than the immediate
family);
A.
The appearance of the structure or property is not altered or expanded
to accommodate the home occupation, or otherwise causes the
premises to differ from residential character;
B.
The occupation is clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the
dwelling unit for residential purposes;
C.
There is no exterior display, sign, storage of equipment or materials or
any other indication of the home occupation, including noise, vibration,
smoke, dust, odors, heat or glare;
D.
The occupation shall not detract from the uses of neighboring
properties; and
E.
The home occupation will not cause a hazard to health, safety or use of
neighboring properties.
F.
A. There are more than 12 sleeping rooms.
B. Incidental business may be conducted.
C. There may be club rooms, ballrooms and common dining facilities.
Such hotel services as maid, telephone and postal services are
provided.
D.
§ 200-8 TREES § 200-8
178:245
INTERIOR SIGN — Any sign placed within a building, but not including
"window signs" as defined by this section. Interior signs, with the exception
of window signs as defined, are not regulated by this chapter.[Added
5-16-2005 by L.L. No. 4-2005]
JUNKYARD — A lot, land or structure, or part thereof, over 200 square feet
in area, used primarily for the collecting, storage and sale of wastepaper,
rags, scrap metal or discarded material; or for the collecting, dismantling,
storage and salvaging of machinery or vehicles not in running condition
and for the sale of parts thereof, except as accessory to a principal
manufacturing use on the lot.
LOADING SPACE — An off-street space or berth, abutting upon a street
or way or other appropriate means of access, intended for the temporary
standing of a commercial vehicle while being loaded or unloaded, which
space or berth is not less than 10 feet in width and sufficient in length,
measured perpendicularly to the street or way, to ensure that no vehicle
using the space shall extend beyond a property line, but in no case less than
25 feet in length and which has a clear height of not less than 15 feet.
LOT — A parcel of land.
LOT, BUILDABLE AREA OF — That portion of a zoning lot or an accredited
zoning lot bounded by required front, rear and side yards.
LOT, CORNER — A lot situated at and abutting the intersection of two
streets having an interior angle of intersection not greater than 135°.
LOT DEPTH — The distance between the front and rear lot lines measured
along the median between the two side lot lines as determined by the
Zoning Administrator.
LOT, INTERIOR — A lot other than a corner lot.
LOT LINES — The lines that bound a lot.
LOT WIDTH — The distance between the side lot lines measured along the
front building line as determined by the prescribed front yard requirement.
MAJOR EXCAVATING, GRADING OR FILLING — Any operation, other than
in connection with the foundation for a structure, involving:
Strip or other mining of minerals; excavating of sand, gravel or rock
and the washing, screening, grading, crushing of rock or gravel;
sanitary and other fills; or
A.
Material alteration of the ground surface so as to affect streets,
recreation sites and other public facilities, or physically affect private
property within 1,000 feet of the intended operation; or
B.
A volume of earth movement exceeding an average of one cubic foot
per square foot of surface area, or 1,000 cubic yards, whichever is the
lesser; or
C.
D. A change in ground elevation exceeding 10 feet.
§ 200-8 PALMYRA CODE § 200-8
178:246
MANSARD — An inclined decorative rooflike projection that is attached to
an exterior building facade.[Added 5-16-2005 by L.L. No. 4-2005]
MECHANICALLY ACTIVATED — Animated signs characterized by repetitive
motion and/or rotation activated by a mechanical system powered by
electric motors or other mechanically induced means.[Added 5-16-2005
by L.L. No. 4-2005]
MOTEL — See “auto court.”
MOTOR FREIGHT TERMINAL — Any premises used by a motor freight
company regulated by the Public Service Commission of New York and/or
the Interstate Commerce Commission as a carrier of goods, which is the
origin and/or destination point of goods being transported for the purpose
of storing, transferring, loading and unloading such goods.
MULTIPLE-FACED SIGN — A sign containing three or more faces.[Added
5-16-2005 by L.L. No. 4-2005]
NONCONFORMING SIGN — A sign lawfully existing on the effective date
of this chapter or subsequent amendment hereto, which does not conform
to the sign regulations applicable in the district in which it is located.
NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE — A structure or portion thereof, other
than a sign, lawfully existing on the effective date of this chapter or
subsequent amendment thereto, which was erected or altered for a use that
does not conform to the use regulations applicable in the district in which it
is located.
NONCONFORMING USE — A use of a structure or land, other than a
sign, lawfully existing on the effective date of this chapter or subsequent
amendment thereto, which does not conform to the use regulations
applicable in the district in which it is located.
NURSERY SCHOOL — A school designed to provide daytime care or
instruction for two or more children from two to five years of age, inclusive,
and operated on a regular basis.
OFF-PREMISES SIGN — See "outdoor advertising sign."[Added 5-16-2005
by L.L. No. 4-2005]
ON-PREMISES SIGN — A sign erected, maintained or used in the outdoor
environment for the purpose of the display of messages appurtenant to the
use of, products sold on, or the sale or lease of, the property on which it is
displayed.[Added 5-16-2005 by L.L. No. 4-2005]
OUTDOOR ADVERTISING SIGN — A permanent sign erected, maintained
or used in the outdoor environment for the purpose of the display of
commercial or noncommercial messages not appurtenant to the use of,
products sold on, or the sale or lease of, the property on which it is
displayed.[Added 5-16-2005 by L.L. No. 4-2005]
PARAPET — The extension of a building facade above the line of the
structural roof.[Added 5-16-2005 by L.L. No. 4-2005]
§ 200-8 TREES § 200-8
178:247
PARKING SPACE — A space in a parking garage or parking area not
less than nine feet wide and 20 feet long, exclusive of passageways and
driveways, giving access thereto, and having direct access to a street or
alley.
POLE SIGN — See "freestanding sign."[Added 5-16-2005 by L.L. No.
4-2005]
POLITICAL SIGN — A temporary sign intended to advance a political
statement, cause or candidate for office. A legally permitted outdoor
advertising sign shall not be considered to be a political sign.[Added
5-16-2005 by L.L. No. 4-2005]
PORTABLE SIGN — Any sign not permanently attached to the ground or to
a building or building surface.[Added 5-16-2005 by L.L. No. 4-2005]
PROJECTING SIGN — A sign other than a wall sign that is attached to
or projects more than 12 inches from a building face or wall or from a
structure whose primary purpose is other than the support of a sign. For
visual reference, see Figure 200-25 A(1)(a).67[Added 5-16-2005 by L.L.
No. 4-2005]
PUBLIC — Owned, operated or controlled by a government agency (federal,
state or local), including a corporation created by law for the performance
of certain specialized governmental functions, or a public school district or
service district.
REAL ESTATE SIGN — A temporary sign advertising the sale, lease or rental
of the property or premises upon which it is located.[Added 5-16-2005 by
L.L. No. 4-2005]
REVOLVING SIGN — A sign that revolves 360 degrees about an axis. See
also, "animated sign, mechanically activated."[Added 5-16-2005 by L.L.
No. 4-2005]
ROOFLINE — The top edge of a peaked roof or, in the case of an extended
facade or parapet, the upper-most point of said facade or parapet.[Added
5-16-2005 by L.L. No. 4-2005]
ROOF SIGN — A sign mounted on and supported by the main roof portion of
a building, or above the uppermost edge of a parapet wall of a building and
which is wholly or partially supported by such a building. Signs mounted on
mansard facades, pent eaves and architectural projections such as canopies
or marquees shall not be considered to be roof signs, For a visual reference
example of a roof sign, and a comparison of differences between roof and
fascia signs, see Figure 200-25 A(1)(b).68[Added 5-16-2005 by L.L. No.
4-2005]
SCHOOL — Any place of instruction in any branch of knowledge.
SCHOOL, ELEMENTARY — Any school having regular sessions with
regularly employed instructors which teaches those subjects that are
67.Editor’s Note: Sign figures are included at the end of this chapter.
68.Editor’s Note: Sign figures are included at the end of this chapter.
§ 200-8 PALMYRA CODE § 200-8
178:248
fundamental and essential in general education and which teaches and
provides elementary education, under the supervision of the State of New
York or a lawfully constituted ecclesiastical governing body, or a corporation
meeting the requirements of the state.
SCHOOL, SECONDARY — Same as elementary school, except secondary
education is provided.
SCHOOL, VOCATIONAL — Any school having regular sessions with
regularly employed instructors which, as a principal activity, provides
training in a trade or vocation and teaches those subjects that are
fundamental and essential in elementary or secondary education, under the
supervision of the State of New York or a lawfully constituted ecclesiastical
governing body, or a corporation meeting the requirements of the state.
SIGN — Any device visible from a public place that displays either
commercial or noncommercial messages by means of graphic presentation
of alphabetic or pictorial symbols or representations. Noncommercial flags
or any flags displayed from flagpoles or staffs will not be considered to be
signs.[Amended 5-16-2005 by L.L. No. 4-2005]
SIGN AREA — The area of the smallest geometric figure, or the sum of the
combination of regular geometric figures, which comprise the sign face. The
area of any double sided or V-shaped sign shall be the area of the largest
single face only. The area of a sphere shall be computed as the area of a
circle. The area of all other multiple-sided signs shall be computed as 50%
of the sum of the area of all faces of the sign.[Added 5-16-2005 by L.L.
No. 4-2005]
SIGN, BUSINESS — A sign which directs attention to a business, profession
or industry located upon the premises where the sign is displayed, to the
type of products sold, manufactured or assembled and/or to service or
entertainment offered on said premises; except a sign pertaining to the
preceding if such activity is only minor and incidental to the principal use,
of the premises.
SIGN COPY — Those letters, numerals, figures, symbols, logos and graphic
elements comprising the content or message of a sign, exclusive of
numerals identifying a street address only.[Added 5-16-2005 by L.L. No.
4-2005]
SIGN FACE — The surface upon, against or through which the sign copy
is displayed or illustrated, not including structural supports, architectural
features of a building or sign structure, nonstructural or decorative trim, or
any areas that are separated from the background surface upon which the
sign copy is displayed by a distinct delineation, such as a reveal or border.
See § 200-25A(1)(d).[Added 5-16-2005 by L.L. No. 4-2005]
In the case of panel or cabinet-type signs, the sign face shall include
the entire area of the sign panel, cabinet or face substrate upon which
the sign copy is displayed or illustrated, but not open space between
separate panels or cabinets.
A.
§ 200-8 TREES § 200-8
178:249
SIGN, IDENTIFICATION — A sign used to identify the individual or
organization occupying the premises or the name of the building on which
the sign is displayed.
SIGN, REAL ESTATE — A sign advertising the property on which it is
located, or a building located thereon, for sale, rent or lease preceding such
transaction only.
SIGN, SPECIAL EVENT — A temporary sign giving notice of a special event
or activity if not more than a quarterly occurrence.
SIGN STRUCTURE — Any structure supporting a sign.[Added 5-16-2005
by L.L. No. 4-2005]
SIGN, TRAFFIC INFORMATION — A sign used to provide only directional
information relative to entrances, exits and traffic circulation.
STOP, BUMPER — A barrier capable of effectively preventing any
encroachment by any part of a conventional passenger motor vehicle on or
over an area.
STOP, WHEEL — A barrier capable of effectively preventing encroachment
on an area by the operating wheels of a motor vehicle.
STREET — Any right-of-way greater than 20 feet in width dedicated to
public travel and serving the abutting properties as a means of access.
STREET LINE — The right-of-way line of a street as indicated by dedication
or by deed of record or appearing on a duly adopted Official Map, such
line to be determined by the Zoning Administrator in the instance of any
question.
STRUCTURE — That which is built or constructed, or a portion
thereof.[Amended 5-16-2005 by L.L. No. 4-2005]
SWIMMING POOL — Any body of water (excluding natural bodies of water
fed by rivers, streams or brooks) or receptacle for water having a depth at
any point greater than two feet, used or intended to be used for swimming
In the case of sign structures with routed areas of sign copy, the sign
face shall include the entire area of the surface that is routed, except
where interrupted by a reveal, border, or a contrasting surface or color.
B.
In the case of signs painted on a building, or individual letters or
graphic elements affixed to a building or structure, the sign face shall
comprise the sum of the geometric figures or combination of regular
geometric figures drawn closest to the edge of the letters or separate
graphic elements comprising the sign copy, but not the open space
between separate groupings of sign copy on the same building or
structure.
C.
In the case of sign copy enclosed within a painted or illuminated border,
or displayed on a background contrasting in color with the color of the
building or structure, the sign face shall comprise the area within the
contrasting background, or within the painted or illuminated border.
D.
§ 200-8 PALMYRA CODE § 200-8
178:250
or bathing, and constructed, installed or maintained in or above the ground
outside any building.
TEMPORARY SIGN — A sign intended to display either commercial or
noncommercial messages of a transitory or temporary nature. Portable
signs or any sign not permanently embedded in the ground or not
permanently fixed to a building or sign structure that is permanently
embedded in the ground are considered temporary signs.[Added
5-16-2005 by L.L. No. 4-2005]
THEATER — A building or part of a building devoted to presenting
entertainment on a paid admission basis.
TOURIST HOME — A private residence in which overnight accommodations
are provided for not more than 10 transient paying guests.
TRAILER, BOAT — A vehicle designed exclusively for the transportation of
one boat of less than ten-foot beam and twenty-four-foot length.
TRAILER, CAMP — A vehicle or portable structure not over 150 square feet
in floor area, equipped for, but not regularly used for, sleeping.
TRAILER, CARGO — A vehicle, not over 70 square feet in floor area, used
for the hauling of cargo.
UNDER CANOPY SIGN or UNDER MARQUEE SIGN — A sign attached
to the underside of a canopy or marquee.[Added 5-16-2005 by L.L. No.
4-2005]
USE — The specific purpose for which land or a building is designed,
arranged, intended or for which it is or may be occupied or maintained. The
term “permitted use,” or its equivalent, shall not be deemed to include any
nonconforming use.
V SIGN — Signs containing two faces of approximately equal size, erected
upon common or separate structures, positioned in a "V" shape with an
interior angle between faces of not more than 90% with the distance
between the sign faces not exceeding five feet at their closest point.[Added
5-16-2005 by L.L. No. 4-2005]
WALL OR FASCIA SIGN — A sign that is in any manner affixed to any
exterior wall of a building or structure and that projects not more than
12 inches from the building or structure wall, including signs affixed to
architectural projections from a building, provided the copy area of such
signs remains on a parallel plane to the face of the building facade or to the
face or faces of the architectural projection to which it is affixed. For visual
reference and comparison examples of differences between wall or fascia
signs and roof signs, see Figure 2005-25 A(1)(a).69[Added 5-16-2005 by
L.L. No. 4-2005]
WINDOW SIGN — A sign affixed to or within 12 inches directly behind the
surface of a window with its message intended to be visible to and readable
69.Editor’s Note: Sign figures are included at the end of this chapter.
§ 200-8 TREES § 200-8
178:251
from the public way or from adjacent property.[Added 5-16-2005 by L.L.
No. 4-2005]
YARD — An open space on a lot, other than a court, unoccupied and
unobstructed from the ground to the sky.
YARD, FRONT — A yard extending across the full width of the lot and
abutting the front lot line, the required depth of which yard is a prescribed
minimum distance between the front lot line and a line parallel thereto on
the lot.
YARD, REAR — A yard extending across the full width of the lot and abutting
the rear lot line, the required depth of which yard is a prescribed minimum
distance between the rear lot line and a line parallel thereto on the lot.
YARD, SIDE — A yard extending from the front yard to the rear yard and
abutting a side lot line, the required width of which yard is a prescribed
minimum distance between the side lot line and a line parallel thereto on
the lot.
§ 200-8 PALMYRA CODE § 200-8
178:252
ARTICLE III
Establishment of Districts; District Map
§ 200-9. Districts established. [Amended 11-17-2003 by L.L. No.
2-2003; 8-1-2011 by L.L. No. 1-2011]
To carry out the purposes of this chapter, the area of the Village is hereby
divided into the following types of districts. For convenience in discussion,
in the text and on the Zoning District Map, each district has been assigned
an identifying short title. Such short title may be used in the text or on the
Zoning Map to identify the district.
District Short Title
Residence 1 R-1
Commercial Overlay (R-1) RC-1
Residence 2 R-2
Commercial Overlay (R-2) RC-2
Central Commercial C-1
General Commercial C-2
Highway Commercial C-3
Neighborhood Commercial C-4
Industrial I
Office Park/Multiple-Family Overlay OM
Business Overlay BO
§ 200-10. District relationships.
No ranking or hierarchy is intended among districts; for example, a
residential district is not necessarily considered a higher type of district
than a commercial district. Each district is designed to provide optimum
conditions for the intended uses. Uses permitted in a residential district
are, therefore, not automatically permitted in a commercial district, nor
are commercial uses necessarily permitted in an industrial district. For
convenience, and where applicable, uses may be permitted by reference
when they are identical in several districts.
§ 200-11. Zoning District Map.
A. Establishment. The locations of the districts enumerated in preceding
§ 200-9, and the boundaries of such districts, are hereby established as
shown upon the map which is attached hereto and made a part of this
chapter, being designated as the “Zoning District Map.” The said Map
and all the notations, references and other information shown thereon
shall be as much a part of this chapter as if the matters and information
set forth by said Map were all fully described herein.70
70.Editor’s Note: The current Zoning District Map is on file in the office of the Village Clerk.
§ 200-9 TREES § 200-11
178:253
B. Boundary determination. The boundaries of districts shall be as shown
by heavy solid lines on the Zoning District Map. Where uncertainty
exists as to any of said boundaries as shown on said Map, the following
rules shall apply:
(1) Where such boundaries are indicated as approximately following
the center lines of streets, alleys, railroads, streams or canals, such
center lines shall be construed to be such boundaries.
(2) Where such boundaries are indicated as approximately following
the boundary lines of parks or reservations, such lines shall be
construed to be such boundaries.
(3) Where such boundaries are indicated as approximately following
lot lines, such lot lines shall be construed to be such boundaries.
(4) In unsubdivided land and where a district boundary divides a lot,
the location of such boundary, unless the same is indicated by
dimensions shown on the Map, shall be determined by the use of
the scale appearing thereon.
§ 200-11 PALMYRA CODE § 200-11
178:254
ARTICLE IV
District Regulations
§ 200-12. Applicability.
Except as may be hereinafter provided, the provisions of this article shall
govern the use of land and buildings in the various districts, specifically:
§ 200-13. Residence 1 (R-1) Districts.
A. Use of land and buildings. No building shall hereafter be erected and no
existing building shall be altered, added to or moved on or onto a lot,
nor shall any land or building be used or arranged to be used for any
purpose other than is included among the uses listed in this article for
the district in which it is located.
B. Structure and building height. No structure or building shall hereafter
be erected or altered to exceed in height the limit designated for the
district in which it is located.
C. Space and area regulations. No building shall be hereafter erected; nor
shall any existing building be altered, enlarged or moved; nor shall any
open space, loading or parking space required in relation to any
building or use be encroached upon or reduced in any manner not in
conformity with the lot area, lot coverage, open space and building bulk
regulations, yard requirements and other space and area regulations
designated herein for the district in which it is located, unless such
reduction is by a duly constituted public authority for a public purpose.
D. Yard as related to a building. No part of a yard or other open space
required appurtenant to any building or use shall be included as a part
of a yard or other open space required for any other building on any
other lot.
E. Use of yards. Yards, as required herein, shall not be used for the storage
of merchandise, equipment, building materials, junk, vehicles, vehicle
parts or any other material, or for signs, except as specific provision is
made therefor.
F. Maintenance of lot size. No lot may be reduced in area so that yards, lot
area, lot area per dwelling unit, lot width or other requirements of this
chapter are not maintained, unless such reduction is by a duly
constituted public authority for a public purpose.
A. Purpose. In addition to the general purposes of this chapter, this section
is to provide for the development and quiet enjoyment of low-density
residential use in suitable areas.
B. Permitted uses.
(1) Cemetery on a site of not less than 10 acres.
(2) Church.
§ 200-12 TREES § 200-13
178:255
(3) Dwelling for one or two families.
(4) Educational institution on a site of not less than 10 acres.
(5) Golf course on a site not less than 100 acres, provided that no
buildings, intensive recreation areas, greens, tees or parking areas
are located closer than 100 feet to any property line.
(6) Institutional home, provided that the site contains not less than
1,000 square feet for each person accommodated, in addition to
4,000 square feet for any resident family.
(7) Public and parochial and private elementary, secondary and
vocational schools.
(8) Public park, playground and similar public recreational uses.
(9) Public uses other than uses of an industrial nature.
(10) Agricultural fairgrounds on a site of not less than 30 acres,
provided that buildings for the housing of animals are located not
less than 125 feet from any property line, not less than 200 feet nor
more than 600 feet from any rear street line and not less than 600
feet nor more than 800 feet from any westerly through street line,
and provided further that buildings for uses other than housing of
animals are located not less than 55 feet from any property line and
not less than 40 feet from any existing structure. [Added 5-7-1979
by L.L. No. 4-1979]
C. Permitted accessory uses. [Amended 1-2-1979 by L.L. No. 1-197971]
(1) Keeping of not more than two transient roomers and boarders.
(2) Outdoor storage of not more than one of the following on each
premises: boat, boat and trailer, boat hauler, camp trailer, cargo
trailer or pickup camper owned for personal nonbusiness use by a
resident of the premises, provided that such storage is in a rear
yard and not within four feet of any rear lot line or side lot line.
(3) Parking garage or open parking for operative passenger vehicles of
persons visiting or residing on the premises and rental of not more
than two parking units to off-site residents. Parking for other uses
in accordance with § 200-30.
(4) Playhouse, toolhouse, garden house or greenhouse not operated for
gain and not over 150 square feet in area. [Amended 4-15-1991
by L.L. No. 1-1991]
(5) Private swimming pool not conducted for gain.
71.Editor’s Note: This local law repealed original Subsection C(1), permitting as accessory
uses customary home occupations and professions, which immediately followed this
paragraph.
§ 200-13 PALMYRA CODE § 200-13
178:256
(6) Signs in accordance with the general regulations on signs in
§ 200-25, as follows:
(a) Bulletin board for a church or other institution.
(b) Business signs for nonconforming uses.
(c) Home occupation and professional signs.
(d) Identification signs.
(e) Real estate signs.
(f) Temporary special event signs for churches and other
nonprofit organizations.
(g) Traffic information signs.
(7) Home occupations. [Added 6-1-1992 by L.L. No. 2-1992]
D. Uses requiring a special permit in accordance with Article VII.72
(1) Hospital and/or office of a licensed physician or dentist. [Amended
4-8-1974 by L.L. No. 3-1974; 11-1-1976 by L.L. No. 5-1976]
(2) Nursery school.
(3) Parking lot for more than five vehicles for a use on the premises.
(4) Public utility installation necessary to serve the immediate area.
(5) Tourist home.73
E. Lot area requirements.
(1) Minimum lot area requirements:
(a) Without central water and sewer: 30,000 square feet.
(b) With central water and sewer: 9,600 square feet. [Amended
4-8-1974 by L.L. No. 3-1974]
(2) Minimum lot area per family requirements:
(a) Without central water and sewer: 30,000 square feet.
(b) With central water and sewer: 4,000 square feet.
F. Minimum lot width requirement.
(1) Without central water and sewer: 150 feet.
72.Editor's Note: Original Subsection D(1), Multiple-family dwelling, which immediately
followed this subsection, was repealed 3-20-1972 by L.L. No. 2-1972.
73.Editor's Note: Original Subsection D(7), Customary home occupations and professions,
added 1-2-1979 by L.L. No. 1-1979, which immediately followed this subsection, was
deleted 11-17-2003 by L.L. No. 2-2003.
§ 200-13 TREES § 200-13
178:257
§ 200-13.1. Commercial Overlay (RC-1) District. [Added 8-1-2011 by
L.L. No. 1-2011]
(2) With central water and sewer: 80 feet. [Amended 4-8-1974 by
L.L. No. 3-1974]
G. Lot coverage. Maximum lot coverage permitted: 20%.
H. Yard requirements.
(1) Front yard, minimum depth: 30 feet.
(2) Side yards, minimum width: [Amended 4-8-1974 by L.L. No.
3-1974]
(a) For interior lots: both sides, 22 feet; one side, 10 feet.
(b) For corner lots: street side, 14 feet; interior side, 10 feet.
(3) Rear yard, minimum depth: 30 feet.
I. Height limitations.
(1) Maximum height of structure: 50 feet.
(2) Maximum height of building: 30 feet.
A. Purpose. In addition to general purposes of this chapter, the purpose of
this section is to provide, in suitable locations, for the establishment of
residence and commercial uses. The overlay district regulations are
designed to limit and restrict uses to those that will be compatible and
have a minimum adverse effect upon residential and commercial areas
in close proximity.
B. The overlay district shall be located upon the Zoning Map, and mapped
in conjunction with the underlying district. The uses allowed in the
overlay district shall be those permitted in the R1 District and those
permitted in the overlay district. Any overlay district so located creates
a separate district in accordance with § 7-702 of the Village law and
regulated as such pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.
C. The following uses are permitted in the overlay district:
(1) Offices for business, administrative and professional entities,
corporate headquarters and government offices.
(2) Salesroom or shop of a builder, contractor or artisan, provided no
equipment, materials or supplies are stored out-of-doors.
(3) Stores and shops for the conduct of retail trade.
(4) Manufacturing for retail sale exclusively on the premises of food
products or hand-crafted items.
(5) Health and fitness center.
§ 200-13 PALMYRA CODE § 200-13.1
178:258
§ 200-14. Residence 2 (R-2) Districts.
D. Uses requiring a special permit in accordance with Article VII,
§ 200-45D:
(1) Personal service establishments.
E. The following properties shall be included in this district:
(1) 504 West Main Street.
(2) 101 Hyde Parkway.
(3) 102 Hyde Parkway.
A. Purpose. In addition to the general purposes of this chapter, this section
is to provide, in areas located in close proximity to the Village center,
for low-density multifamily residential construction under conditions
compatible with the character of the Village and to provide for the
adequate protection of residential uses therein as well as for specified
transitional uses adjacent to and serving the Village center.
B. Permitted uses. [Amended 4-8-1974 by L.L. No. 3-1974]
(1) Any use permitted in § 200-13B.
C. Permitted accessory uses.
(1) Any accessory use permitted in § 200-13C.
(2) Parking lot for more than five vehicles for a permitted use on the
premises.
D. Uses requiring a special permit in accordance with Article VII:
(1) Any use provided in § 200-13D subject to the same requirements.
(2) Clubs or fraternal organization on a lot of not less than 20,000
square feet, provided neither alcoholic beverages nor meals are
normally served.
(3) Mortuary on a lot of not less than 20,000 square feet.
(4) Parking lot for a use off the premises on a lot abutting a
Commercial or Industrial District.
(5) Multiple dwellings and dwellings in groups, provided that there
shall not be more than eight dwelling units in any one building; that
all buildings shall be separated from each other by a minimum
distance of 40 feet if within 30° of parallel and opposite, and 20 feet
if not; and that each dwelling unit has separate access to ground
level without the use of common hallways or stairs. [Added
4-8-1974 by L.L. No. 3-1974]
E. Lot area requirements.
§ 200-13.1 TREES § 200-14
178:259
§ 200-14.1. Commercial Overlay (RC-2) District. [Added 8-1-2011 by
L.L. No. 1-2011]
(1) Minimum lot area required: 8,000 square feet. [Amended
4-8-1974 by L.L. No. 3-1974]
(2) Minimum lot area per family required: 2,500 square feet.
F. Minimum lot width requirement: 80 feet. [Amended 4-8-1974 by L.L.
No. 3-1974]
G. Lot coverage. Maximum lot coverage permitted: 25%.
H. Yard requirements.
(1) Front yards, minimum depth: 30 feet.
(2) Side yards, minimum width: [Amended 4-8-1974 by L.L. No.
3-1974]
(a) For interior lots: both sides 22 feet; one side, 10 feet.
(b) For corner lots: street side, 14 feet; interior side, 10 feet.
(3) Rear yard, minimum depth: 30 feet.
I. Height limitations.
(1) Maximum height of structure: 50 feet.
(2) Maximum height of building: 30 feet.
A. Purpose. In addition to general purposes of this chapter, the purpose of
this section is to provide, in suitable locations, for the establishment of
residence and commercial uses. The overlay district regulations are
designed to limit and restrict uses to those that will be compatible and
have a minimum adverse effect upon residential and commercial areas
in close proximity.
B. The overlay district shall be located upon the Zoning Map, and mapped
in conjunction with the underlying district. The uses allowed in the
overlay district shall be those permitted in the R2 District and those
permitted in the overlay district. Any overlay district so located creates
a separate district in accordance with § 7-702 of the Village Law and
regulated as such pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.
C. The following uses are permitted in the overlay district:
(1) Offices for business, administrative and professional entities,
corporate headquarters and government offices.
(2) Stores and shops for the conduct of retail trade.
(3) Manufacturing for retail sale exclusively on the premises of food
products or hand-crafted items.
§ 200-14 PALMYRA CODE § 200-14.1
178:260
§ 200-15. Central Commercial (C-1) Districts.
D. Uses requiring a special permit in accordance with Article VII,
§ 200-45D:
(1) Club or fraternal organization.
(2) Salesroom or shop of a builder, contractor or artisan, provided no
equipment, materials or supplies are stored out-of-doors.
(3) Theater of the arts.
(4) Day-care or child-learning center.
(5) Lodging establishment.
(6) Restaurant and other food services for consumption exclusively on
the premises.
(7) Personal service establishments.
E. The following properties shall be included in this district:
(1) 122 Cuyler Street.
(2) 126 Cuyler Street.
(3) 127 Cuyler Street.
(4) 134 Cuyler Street.
(5) The municipal parking areas behind 122, 126 and 134 Cuyler
Street.
A. Purposes. In addition to general purposes of this chapter, the purposes
of this section are more specifically to provide for the development and
redevelopment of the central shopping district of the Village as a safe,
convenient, efficient and attractive shopping center, provided with
adequate off-street parking and off-street loading area.
B. Permitted uses.
(1) Any use permitted in the Residence R-2 District subject to the
regulations of that district.
(2) Automatic coin laundry, dry cleaner or laundry.
(3) Bank, other than a drive-in bank.
(4) Club and lodge.
(5) Communication center.
(6) Dance hall, theater, bowling alley, billiard room and similar places
of recreation.
§ 200-14.1 TREES § 200-15
178:261
(7) Hotel and auto court.
(8) Manufacturing for sale exclusively on the premises at retail of food
products or hand-crafted items.
(9) Mortuary.
(10) Newspaper publishing and job printing.
(11) Offices.
(12) Personal service establishment.
(13) Restaurant and other places of food service.
(14) Stores and shops for the conduct of retail trade.
C. Permitted accessory uses.
(1) Any accessory use permitted in § 200-14.
(2) Accessory uses which customarily accompany and are a part of
permitted use.
(3) Business signs, in accordance with § 200-25.
D. Uses requiring a special permit in accordance with Article VII:
(1) Automobile repair garage.
(2) Bus station.
(3) Drive-in bank.
(4) Gasoline station.
(5) Motor vehicle sales room.
(6) Parking lot or garage for more than five vehicles.
E. Lot area requirements.
(1) Minimum lot area requirements: 4,000 square feet.
(2) Minimum lot area requirements, per family: 2,500 square feet.
F. Minimum lot width requirement: 40 feet.
G. Lot coverage and open space regulations.
(1) Maximum lot coverage permitted: 80%.
(2) Maximum floor area ratio permitted: 4%.
H. Yard requirements.
(1) Front yard, minimum depth: no requirement.
§ 200-15 PALMYRA CODE § 200-15
178:262
§ 200-16. General Commercial (C-2) Districts.
(2) Side yards, minimum width: none required, but if any is provided, it
shall be not less than three feet in width.
(3) Rear yard, minimum depth: 20 feet.
I. Height limitations.
(1) Maximum height of structure: 100 feet.
(2) Maximum height of building: 60 feet.
A. Purpose. In addition to the general purposes of this chapter, the
purpose of this section is to provide in suitable locations for the growth
and continued operation of distributive and other generally nuisancefree
industry, such uses being suitably restricted so as to protect the
general character of the Village and provide adequate protection for
neighboring residential and commercial uses.
B. Uses permitted.
(1) Any use permitted in the Central Commercial District, except
dwellings.
(2) Warehousing and wholesale business carried out entirely within
buildings.
(3) Manufacturing of goods, provided no air pollutant, noise, vibration
or glare is produced that exceeds the general level of such potential
nuisances at the boundary of the property, and that no unusual
hazard is involved in the character of materials used or in the
manufacturing process, as determined by the Zoning
Administrator.74
C. Permitted accessory uses.
(1) Uses customarily accessory to permitted uses when conducted
entirely within buildings.
(2) Signs in accordance with § 200-25 as follows:
(a) Any sign permitted in a Central Business District.
(3) A residence of a watchman or caretaker on the premises with a
permitted use.
D. Uses requiring a special permit in accordance with Article VII.
(1) Rear yard storage of goods.
(2) Gasoline service station. [Added 6-22-1970 by L.L. No. 2-1970]
74.Editor's Note: Original Subsection B(4), Gasoline service station, which immediately
followed this subsection, was repealed 6-22-1970 by L.L. No. 2-1970.
§ 200-15 TREES § 200-16
178:263
§ 200-17. Highway Commercial (C-3) Districts.
E. Lot area requirement. Minimum lot area required: 20,000 square feet.
F. Minimum lot width requirement: 100 feet.
G. Lot coverage and open space regulation.
(1) Maximum lot coverage permitted: 40%.
H. Yard requirements.
(1) Required front yard, minimum depth: 50 feet.
(2) Required side yards, minimum width: 10 feet.
(3) Rear yard requirement, minimum depth: 50 feet.
I. Height limitations.
(1) Maximum height of structure: 50 feet.
(2) Maximum height of building: 30 feet.
A. Purpose. In addition to the general purposes of the chapter, the purpose
of this section is to provide, in properly located areas, for uses relating
to the sale and service of motor vehicles and other mobile equipment
requiring considerable space, for uses providing services to motorists,
for specified uses involving the storage and sale of bulk commodities
and for specified uses normally approached primarily by automobile
and requiring considerable space. Such uses are permitted under
regulations designed to provide favorable conditions for their operation
while preserving the safety of the public streets, protecting the general
appearance of the Village and providing adequate protection for the
diverse uses within the district as well as abutting uses in residential
and other districts.
B. Permitted uses.
(1) Automobile repair garage.
(2) Automatic coin laundry, dry cleaner or laundry.
(3) Theater, bowling alley, skating rink and similar recreation
establishments enclosed within buildings. [Amended 4-7-1975 by
L.L. No 4-1975]
(4) Club or fraternal organization.
(5) Drive-in bank.
(6) Greenhouse, nursery, sale of garden and farm plants and supplies.
(7) Public uses.
§ 200-16 PALMYRA CODE § 200-17
178:264
(8) Restaurant and other food services, including drive-in restaurants.
(9) Sale or rental of new and used:
(a) Boats, boat trailers, marine accessories.
(b) Cargo trailers, camping trailers
(c) Construction equipment.
(d) Farm machinery.
(e) Passenger automobiles.
(f) Trucks.
(g) Mobile homes.
(10) Sale of new building materials and structures.
(11) Salesroom or shop of a builder, contractor or artisan, provided no
equipment is stored out-of-doors, unless enclosed and screened
from view by fences.
(12) Gasoline filling stations. [Added 6-22-1970 by L.L. No. 2-1970]
(13) Manufacturing for sale exclusively on the premises at retail of food
products or hand-crafted items. [Added 4-7-1975 by L.L. No.
4-1975]
(14) Offices. [Added 4-7-1975 by L.L. No. 4-1975]
(15) Personal service establishments. [Added 4-7-1975 by L.L. No.
4-1975]
(16) Stores and shops for the conduct of retail trade. [Added 4-7-1975
by L.L. No. 4-1975]
(17)Warehousing and wholesale business carried out entirely within
buildings. [Added 4-7-1975 by L.L. No. 4-1975]
C. Permitted accessory uses.
(1) Uses customarily accessory to permitted uses.
(2) Residence of properties, watchman or caretaker associated with a
permitted use.
(3) Signs, in accordance with § 200-25, as follows:
(a) Any sign permitted in § 200-13.
(b) Business signs.
(4) Vending machines when located on the buildable area of the lot.
D. Uses requiring a special permit in accordance with Article VII.
§ 200-17 TREES § 200-17
178:265
§ 200-18. Neighborhood Commercial (C-4) Districts. [Added
1-4-1988 by L.L. No. 1-1988]
(1) Veterinarian’s office.
(2) Animal hospital.
(3) Dog kennel.
(4) Automobile laundry.
(5) Motor freight terminal.
(6) Rear yard storage of goods. [Added 4-7-1975 by L.L. No.
4-1975]
E. Lot area requirements.
(1) Minimum lot area requirement: 30,000 square feet.
(2) Minimum lot area requirement, per family: 30,000 square feet.
F. Minimum lot width requirement: 200 feet.
G. Lot coverage and open space regulations.
(1) Maximum lot coverage permitted: 25%.
H. Yard requirements.
(1) Front yard, minimum depth:
(a) From lot line: 50 feet.
(b) From center street line: 100 feet.
(2) Side yards, minimum width:
(a) For interior lots: 10 feet.
(b) For corner lots, street side: 20 feet.
(3) Rear yard, minimum depth: 20 feet.
I. Height limitations.
(1) Maximum height of structure: 50 feet.
(2) Maximum height of building: 30 feet.
A. Purpose. In addition to the general purposes of this chapter, the
purpose of this section is to provide for low-traffic businesses in
suitable locations while protecting adjoining residential and/or
commercial areas.
B. Uses permitted.
§ 200-17 PALMYRA CODE § 200-18
178:266
(1) Motor vehicle sales.
(2) Automobile repair.
(3) Offices.
(4) Retail sales.
(5) Manufacture for sale exclusively on the premises at retail of food
products or hand-crafted items.
(6) Job printing and publishing.
(7) Furniture repair and refinishing.
C. Permitted accessory uses.
(1) Uses customarily accessory to permitted uses when conducted
entirely within buildings.
(2) Signs in accordance with § 200-25F as follows:
(a) Any sign permitted in Central Business District.
D. Uses requiring a special permit in accordance with Article VII.
(1) Rear yard storage of goods.
(2) Sale of liquor for off-premises consumption.
(3) Said of liquor for on-premises consumption.
(4) Restaurant.
(5) Retail grocery.
E. Lot area requirement. Minimum lot area required: 20,000 square feet.
F. Minimum lot width requirement: 100 feet.
G. Lot coverage and open space regulation.
(1) Maximum lot coverage permitted: 40%.
H. Yard requirements.
(1) Required front yard, minimum depth: 50 feet.
(2) Required side yards, minimum width: 10 feet.
(3) Rear yard requirement, minimum depth: 50 feet.
I. Height limitations.
(1) Maximum height of structure: 50 feet.
(2) Maximum height of building: 30 feet.
§ 200-18 TREES § 200-19
178:267
§ 200-19. Industrial (I) Districts.
A. Purpose. In addition to the general purposes of this chapter, the
purpose of this section is to provide, in suitable locations for the growth
and continued operation of industrial uses of a nonnuisance character,
such uses being suitably restricted so as to protect the general
character of the Village, provide adequate protection for neighboring
residential uses and provide an adequate environment for modern
industrial operations.
B. Permitted uses.
(1) Customary agricultural operations.
(2) Public utility storage and service.
(3) Manufacturing or processing of goods, provided no air pollutants,
noise, vibration or glare is produced that exceeds the general level
of such potential nuisance at the zoning district line, and that no
unusual hazard is involved in the character of materials involved or
in the manufacturing process as determined by the Zoning
Administrator.
(4) Any use permitted in a Highway Commercial District.
(5) Any public use.
C. Permitted accessory uses.
(1) Accessory uses which customarily are a part of permitted uses.
(2) Signs, in accordance with § 200-25 as follows:
(a) Any sign permitted in a Highway Commercial District.
D. Uses requiring a special permit in accordance with Article VII:
(1) Junkyard and automobile wrecking operation.
(2) Animal sales lot and storage barn.
(3) Rear yard storage of goods.
E. Lot area requirements. Minimum lot area required: 40,000 square feet.
F. Minimum lot width requirement: 150 feet.
G. Lot coverage and open space regulations.
(1) Maximum lot coverage by buildings permitted: 40%.
H. Yard requirements.
(1) Required front yard, minimum depth: 25 feet.
(2) Required side yards, minimum width: 20 feet.
§ 200-19 PALMYRA CODE § 200-19
178:268
§ 200-20. Office Park/Multiple-Family Overlay (OM) District. [Added
8-21-1995 by L.L. No. 3-1995]
§ 200-21. Business Overlay District. [Added 4-16-1994 by L.L. No.
1-1994]
(3) Rear yard, minimum depth: 50 feet.
I. Height limitations.
(1) Maximum height of structure: 100 feet.
(2) Maximum height of building: 50 feet.
A. Statement of purpose. It is the purpose of this section to provide, in
suitable locations, for the establishment of office park and multifamily
uses. The overlay district regulations are designed to limit and restrict
uses to those that will be compatible and have a minimum adverse
effect upon residential and commercial areas in close proximity.
B. The overlay district shall be located upon the Zoning Map, and mapped
in conjunction with the underlying district. The uses allowed in the
overlay district shall be those permitted in the primary district and
those permitted in the overlay district. Any overlay district so located
creates a separate district in accordance with § 7-702 of the Village Law
and regulated as such pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.
C. The following uses are permitted in the overlay district:
(1) Offices for business, administrative and professional entities,
corporate headquarters and government offices.
(2) Multiple-family dwellings and dwellings in groups, provided that
they shall not be more than 30 units in any one building; that all
buildings shall be separated from each other by a minimum
distance of 40 feet if within 30° of parallel and opposite, and 20 feet
if not; and, unless otherwise specified in the Uniform Code,75 that
there shall be a fire wall separating every eight units.
A. Purpose. In addition to general purposes of this chapter, the purposes of
this section are more specifically to provide for the development of the
central shopping center by prohibiting uses deleterious to a healthy,
efficient and attractive business climate.
B. Overlay district. The Business Overlay District shall not be
independently mapped upon the Zoning Map, but shall be mapped in
conjunction with an underlying district.
C. Uses permitted. Except as stated in Subsection D of this section, the
uses permitted and the dimensional requirements for the Business
75.Editor's Note: See Ch. 76, Building Construction and Fire Prevention.
§ 200-19 TREES § 200-21
178:269
Overlay District shall be determined by the regulations specified in this
chapter for the primary or underlying district.
D. Uses prohibited. Residential dwelling units are prohibited on the first
floor of any building or structure located in the Business Overlay
District.
E. Nonconforming uses. Article VI of this chapter shall apply to residential
uses heretofore established on the first floor of any building or
structure located in the Business Overlay District.
F. Overlay district location. The Business Overlay District is hereby
described to encompass the following area in the Village of Palmyra:
Description of Village Business “No Residence Area”
Commencing in the Village of Palmyra on the south right-of-way line of
New York State Route 21 and 31 at the northwest corner of tax account
parcel 644677;
(1) thence easterly along said south right-of-way line of New York
State Routes 21 and 31 to the northeast corner of tax account
parcel 650677;
(2) thence northerly across the right-of-way of New York State
Route 21 and 31 to the southwest corner of tax account parcel
661707;
(3) thence northerly along the western boundary of tax account
parcel 661707 to its northwest corner;
(4) thence northerly along the western boundary of tax account
parcel 663724 to its northwest corner;
(5) thence easterly along the northern boundary of tax account
parcel 663724 to its northeast boundary, said point being
located in the western right-of-way line of William Street;
(6) thence southerly along the eastern boundary of tax account
parcel 663724, said boundary also being the western boundary
of the William Street right-of-way to a point in said western
boundary intersecting the northerly boundary of tax account
parcel 679723 extended westerly across the William Street
right-of-way;
(7) thence easterly along said line of extension of the northerly
boundary of tax account parcel 679723 across the William
Street right-of-way to a point in the northwest corner of tax
account parcel 679723;
(8) thence easterly along the north boundary of tax account parcel
679723 to its northeast corner;
(9) thence southerly along the east boundary of tax account parcel
679723 to the northeast corner of tax account parcel 682718;
(10) thence southerly along the western boundary of tax account
parcel 700729 to its southwest corner;
§ 200-21 PALMYRA CODE § 200-21
178:270
(11) thence easterly along the southerly boundary of tax account
parcel 700729 as extended to the west right-of-way of Market
Street;
(12) thence southeasterly across the right-of-way of Market Street to
the southwest corner of tax account parcel 719713, said corner
also being a point in the east right-of-way line of Market Street;
(13) thence easterly along the south boundary of tax account parcel
719713 to its southeast corner;
(14) thence northerly to a point being the northwest corner of tax
account parcel 729708;
(15) thence easterly along the north boundary of tax account parcel
729708 to its northeast boundary;
(16) thence southerly along the eastern boundary of tax account
parcel 729708 to the point of intersection with the northwest
corner of tax account parcel 731699;
(17) thence easterly along the north boundary of tax account parcel
731669 to the northwest corner of tax account parcel of 733698;
(18) thence easterly along the north boundary of tax account parcel
733698 to its northeast boundary;
(19) thence southerly along the east boundary of tax account parcel
733698 to its southeast corner, said point also being in the
northerly right-of-way of New York State Routes 31 and 21;
(20) thence southwesterly across the New York State Route 31 and
21 right-of-way to the northeast corner of tax account parcel
724678;
(21) thence southerly along the east boundary of tax account parcel
724678 to its southeast corner;
(22) thence westerly along the south boundary of tax account parcel
724678 to its southwest corner;
(23) then westerly along the south boundary of tax account parcel
719675 to its southwestern corner, said corner also being a
point in the eastern right-of-way line of Fayette Street;
(24) thence southwesterly across the Fayette Street right-of-way to
the southeast corner of tax account parcel 709677;
(25) thence westerly along the southern boundary of tax account
parcel 709677 to the southwest corner of tax account parcel
709677;
(26) thence northerly along the western boundary of tax account
parcel 709677 to a point of intersection with the southeast
corner of tax account parcel 703679;
(27) thence westerly along the south boundary of tax account parcel
703679 to the southwest corner of tax account parcel 703679;
§ 200-21 TREES § 200-21
178:271
(28) thence westerly along the south boundary of tax account parcel
703683 to the southwest corner of tax account parcel 703683;
(29) thence northerly along the westerly boundary of tax account
number 703683 to the southeast corner of tax account parcel
701682;
(30) thence westerly along the south boundaries of tax account
parcels 701682, 698681 and 695681 to the eastern boundary of
tax account parcel 695673;
(31) thence southerly and easterly along the east boundary of tax
account parcel 695673 to its southeast corner;
(32) thence westerly along the south boundary of tax account parcel
695673 then northerly to the southeast corner of tax account
parcel 689678;
(33) thence westerly along the south boundary of tax account parcels
689678, 686680 and 680673 to the southwest corner of tax
account parcel 680673, said point also being in the eastern
right-of-way line of Cuyler Street;
(34) thence northwesterly from the southwest corner of tax account
parcel 680673, across the right-of-way of Cuyler Street to the
southeast corner of tax account parcel 656675;
(35) thence westerly along the south boundary of tax account parcel
656675 to its southwest boundary;
(36) thence southerly along the east boundary of tax account parcel
650677 to the southeast corner of tax account parcel 650677;
(37) thence westerly along the south boundary of tax account parcels
650677 and 644677 to the southwest corner of tax account
parcel 644677;
(38) thence northerly along the west boundary of tax account parcel
644677 to the northwest corner of tax account parcel 644677 to
the point and place of beginning.
§ 200-21 PALMYRA CODE § 200-21
178:272
ARTICLE V
Supplementary Regulations and Exceptions
§ 200-22. Applicability.
The supplementary regulations in this article covering general
requirements and exceptions shall apply to all districts or to such districts
as specified.
§ 200-23. Use regulations.
§ 200-24. Temporary uses.
The following uses are permitted as temporary uses in any district, or in
such district as may be designated, subject to the conditions stated.
A. Utility transmission lines. Utility transmission lines approved by
appropriate federal or state agencies may be located anywhere in the
Village and shall not be subject to height limitations.
B. Radio or television. Transmission or receiving lines and facilities, but
not studios or business offices, may be located on any lot if all
structures are located a distance from all property lines equal to their
height.
C. Agricultural fairgrounds in R-1 District. Buildings for the housing of
animals for purposes other than agricultural display shall contain not
more than 20 stalls and not more than 20 such animals shall be kept on
the agricultural fairgrounds at any time, with the exception of fair
week. Uses other than an agricultural fair or exhibition shall have prior
written approval of the Board of Trustees of the Village of Palmyra.
[Added 5-7-1979 by L.L. No. 4-1979]
A. Contractors’ sheds. Contractors’ buildings, trailers or sheds may be
erected on a construction site to serve as an office, workshop or storage
area during the construction of any authorized structure, following the
issuance of a building permit. Such building shall not remain longer
than 18 months unless a special permit for a longer period is granted by
the Board of Appeals in accordance with Article VII. They may not be
used as a residence, except as the quarters of a watchman.
B. Construction signs. Signs bearing information as to the nature of a new
or altered building and the name of the contractors, architects,
engineers and artisans engaged in the construction may be erected at
the site of any authorized construction project during the period of
construction only.
C. Fairs and carnivals. An outdoor fair or carnival may be conducted by a
church, civic organization or similar nonprofit group on the premises of
a building occupied by such organization for a period not exceeding
three days in any calendar year, in any district, subject to the granting
§ 200-22 TREES § 200-24
178:273
§ 200-25. Accessory signs. [Amended 4-8-1974 by L.L. No. 3-1974;
5-16-2005 by L.L. No. 4-2005]
of a special permit therefor by the Board of Appeals in accordance with
Article VII.
D. Special events. Any nonprofit, commercial or industrial operation in
other than a residential district may celebrate, during not more than six
days of any calendar year, or for any nonprofit operation not more than
one month in any calendar year, a special promotional event, upon the
granting of a special permit by the Board of Appeals in accordance with
Article VII. During such period, it may use such signs and other devices
as the Board shall find appropriate to the occasion and within the limits
of the sign regulations.
E. Agricultural fair or exhibition. An agricultural fair may be conducted
within the premises of an agricultural fairgrounds by a chartered
agricultural society during a period of not more than seven consecutive
days in any calendar year or such additional period of time as may be
required by state regulations in order to qualify for premium payment.
An exhibition of agricultural products and/or animals may be conducted
by a chartered agricultural society for not more than one day in any
week and for not more than nine weeks in any calendar year, unless the
Board of Trustees of the Village of Palmyra shall approve additional
events; such exhibition shall be conducted within the premises of an
agricultural fairgrounds. For purposes of this subsection, a “week” shall
mean a period of seven consecutive days commencing on Sunday and
ending on the following Saturday. [Added 5-7-1979 by L.L. No.
4-1979]
A. General regulations.76
(1) Sign types and the computation of sign area shall be as depicted in
Figures 200-25 A(1)(a) through 200-25 A(1)(d).
(2) Conformance to codes. Any sign hereafter erected shall conform to
the provisions of this section and of any other ordinance or
regulations within this jurisdiction.
(3) Signs in rights-of-way. No sign other than an official traffic sign or
similar sign shall be erected within two feet of the lines of any
street, or within any public way, unless specifically authorized by
other ordinances or regulations of this jurisdiction or by specific
authorization of the Code Official.
(4) Projections over public ways. Signs projecting over public
walkways shall be permitted to do so only subject to the projection
and clearance limits either defined herein or, if not so defined, at a
minimum height of 10 feet from grade level to the bottom of the
76.Editor's Note: Figures 200-25A(1)(a) through 200-25A(1)(d) are included at the end of
this chapter.
§ 200-24 PALMYRA CODE § 200-25
178:274
sign and a maximum projection from the face of the structure
not to exceed two feet. Signs, architectural projections or sign
structures projecting over vehicular access areas must conform
to the minimum height clearance limitations imposed by the
jurisdiction for such structures.
(5) Traffic visibility. No sign or sign structure shall be erected at the
intersection of any street in such a manner as to obstruct free and
clear vision, nor at any location where by its position, shape or
color it may interfere with or obstruct the view of or be confused
with any authorized traffic sign, signal or device.
(6) Computation of frontage. If a premises contains walls facing more
than one property line or encompasses property frontage bounded
by more than one street or other property usages, the sign area(s)
for each building wall or property frontage will be computed
separately for each building wall on property line facing a different
frontage. The sign area(s) thus calculated shall be permitted to
then be applied to permit signs placed on each separate wall or
properly line frontage.
(7) Changeable message signs. Signs, except as prohibited in
§ 200-25E, are permitted in commercial and industrial zones only.
Changeable signs, manually activated or electrically activated, are
permitted in all nonresidential zones.
(8) Maintenance, repair and removal. Every sign permitted by this
section shall be kept in good condition and repair. When any sign
becomes insecure, in danger of falling or is otherwise deemed
unsafe by the Code Official, or if any sips shall be unlawfully
installed, erected or maintained in violation of any of the provisions
of this section, the owner thereof or the person or firm using same
shall, upon written notice by the Code Official, forthwith in the case
of immediate danger, and in any case within not more than 10 days,
make such sign conform to the provisions of this section, or shall
remove it. If within 10 days the order is not complied with, the
Code Official shall be permitted to remove or cause such sign to be
removed at the expense of the owner and/or the user of the sign.
(9) Obsolete sign copy. Any sign copy that no longer advertises or
identifies a use conducted on the property on which said sign is
erected must have the sign copy covered or removed within 10
days after written notification from the Municipal Code Official,
and upon failure to comply with such notice, the code official is
hereby authorized to cause removal of such sign copy, and any
expense incident thereto shall be paid by the owner of the building,
structure or ground on which the sign is located.
(10) Nonconforming signs. The Code Enforcement Officer and/or his
agent shall prepare a survey of all nonconforming signs and send
written notice by registered mail to the recorded owner of the
§ 200-25 TREES § 200-25
178:275
property on which such sign is erected. Any sign legally existing at
the time of the passage of this section that does not conform in use,
location, height or size with the regulations of the zone in which
such sign is located, shall be considered a legal nonconforming use
or structure and shall be permitted to continue in such status until
such time as it is listed below.
(a) Portable signs shall be removed within 15 days of receipt of the
written notice described above.
(b) Other nonconforming signs that include features prohibited
under this section shall be modified to comply or must be
removed within one year after receipt of the written notice
described above.
(c) All other signs that are structural or a removable part of a
structure shall be made to comply with all provisions of this
section or be removed within one year of receipt of the written
notice as described above.
B. Exempt signs. The following signs shall be exempt from the provisions
of this chapter. No sign shall be exempt from § 200-25A.
(1) Official notices authorized by a court, public body or public safety
official.
(2) Directional, warning or information signs authorized by federal,
state or municipal governments.
(3) Memorial plaques, building identification signs and building
cornerstones when cut or carved into a masonry surface or when
made of noncombustible material and made an integral part of the
building or structure.
(4) The flag of a government or noncommercial institution, such as a
school.
(5) Religious symbols and seasonal decorations within the appropriate
public holiday season.
(6) Works of fine art displayed in conjunction with a commercial
enterprise where the enterprise does not receive direct commercial
gain.
C. Prohibited signs. The following devices and locations shall be
specifically prohibited:
(1) Signs located in such a manner as to obstruct or otherwise
interfere with an official traffic sign, signal or device, or obstruct or
interfere with a driver's view of approaching, merging or
intersecting traffic.
§ 200-25 PALMYRA CODE § 200-25
178:276
(2) Except as provided for elsewhere in this Code, signs encroaching
upon or overhanging public right-of-way. No sign shall be attached
to any utility pole, light standard, street tree or any other public
facility located within the public right-of-way.
(3) Signs that blink, flash or are animated by lighting in any fashion
that would cause such signs to have the appearance of traffic safety
signs and lights or municipal vehicle warnings from a distance.
(4) Portable signs except as allowed for temporary signs.
(5) Any sign attached to or placed on a vehicle or trailer parked on
public or private property, except for signs meeting the following
conditions:
(a) The primary purpose of such a vehicle or trailer is not the
display of signs.
(b) The signs are magnetic, decals or painted upon an integral part
of the vehicle or equipment as originally designed by the
manufacturer and do not break the silhouette of the vehicle.
(c) The vehicle or trailer is in operating condition, currently
registered and licensed to operate on public streets when
applicable, and actively unused or available for use in the daily
function of the business to which such signs relate.
(6) Vehicles and trailers are not used primarily as static displays,
advertising a product or service, nor utilized as storage, shelter or
distribution points for commercial products or services for the
general public.
(7) Balloons, streamers, sandwich board signs or pinwheels, except
those temporarily displayed as part of a special sale, promotion or
community event. For the purposes of this subsection,
"temporarily" means no more than 20 days in any calendar year.
D. Permits.
(1) Permits required. Unless specifically exempted, a permit must be
obtained from the Code Official for the erection and maintenance of
all signs erected or maintained within this jurisdiction and in
accordance with other ordinances of this jurisdiction. Exemptions
from the necessity of securing a permit, however, shall not be
construed to relieve the owner of the sign involved from
responsibility for its erection and maintenance in a safe manner
and in a manner in accordance with all the other provisions of this
section.
(2) Construction documents. Before any permit is granted for the
erection of a sign or sign structure requiring such permit,
construction documents shall be filed with the Code Official
showing the dimensions, materials and required details of
§ 200-25 TREES § 200-25
178:277
construction, including loads, stresses, anchorage and any other
pertinent data. The permit application shall be accompanied by the
written consent of the owner or lessee of the premises upon which
the sign is to be erected and by engineering calculations signed
and sealed by a registered design professional where required by
the International Building Code.
(3) Changes to signs. No sign shall be structurally altered, enlarged or
relocated except in conformity to the provisions herein, nor until a
proper permit, if required, has been secured. The changing or
maintenance of moveable parts or components of an approved sign
that is designed for such changes shall not be deemed a structural
alteration.
(4) Permit fees. Permit fees to erect, alter or relocate a sign shall be in
accordance with the fee schedule adopted within this jurisdiction.
E. Specific sign requirements.
(1) Permanent signs.
(a) Awning signs. Awning signs shall be permitted in all
nonresidential zoning districts, subject to the following
limitations:
[1] The copy area of awning signs shall not exceed an area
equal to 25% of the background area of the awning or
awning surface to which such a sign is affixed or applied,
or the permitted area for wall or fascia signs, whichever is
less.
[2] Neither the background color of an awning, nor any
graphic treatment or embellishment thereto such as
striping, patterns or valances, shall be included in the
computation of sign copy area.
(b) Canopy signs. Canopy signs shall be permitted in all
nonresidential zoning districts, subject to the following
limitations:
[1] The permanently affixed copy area of canopy signs shall
not exceed an area equal to 25% of the face area of the
canopy or architectural projection upon which such sign is
affixed or applied and shall not exceed total sign area
allowed.
[2] Graphic striping, patterns or color bands on the face of a
building, canopy or architectural projection shall not be
included in the computation of sign copy area.
(c) Directional signs. No more than two directional signs shall be
permitted per street entrance to any lot. There shall be no limit
to the number of directional signs providing directional
§ 200-25 PALMYRA CODE § 200-25
178:278
information interior to a lot. In residential zones, the maximum
total area for directional signs shall be four square feet. For all
other zones, the maximum area for any directional sign visible
from adjacent property or rights-of-way shall be four square
feet.
(d) Freestanding signs. Freestanding signs shall be permitted in
all nonresidential zoning districts, subject to the following
limitations:
[1] One permitted sign not over 30 square feet in area may be
located in that part of the front yard more than 20 feet
from the street line and not closer than 10% of the lot
width on any side lot line.
[2] The bottom of the sign body must be a minimum of 10 feet
above the finished grade of the front yard.
[3] The maximum height of the sign will be not higher than 25
feet above finished grade of the front yard.
(e) Identification signs.
[1] Residential identification signs denoting address and/or
occupant shall be limited to three square feet of total area
and do not require a sign permit.
[2] Commercial, industrial identification signs denoting
address, occupant or use shall be limited to six square feet
of total area. This square footage is in addition to the
allowable total sign area for a specific property.
(f) Menu boards. Menu boards shall be permitted in all
commercial zoning districts, subject to the following
limitations:
[1] Menu board signs shall not be permitted to exceed three
square feet.
(g) Projecting signs. Projecting signs shall be permitted in all
nonresidential zoning districts, subject to the following
limitations:
[1] Projecting signs shall be permitted in lieu of freestanding
signage on any street frontage, limited to one sign per
occupancy along any street frontage with public entrance
to such an occupancy, and shall be limited in height and
area to 1.5 square feet per each one lineal foot of building
frontage, except that no such sign shall exceed an area of
60 square feet.
[2] No such sign shall extend vertically above the highest
point of the building facade upon which it is mounted.
§ 200-25 TREES § 200-25
178:279
[3] Such signs shall not extend over a public sidewalk in
excess of two feet, measured from the face of the building
or supporting structure to the outside edge of the sign.
[4] Such signs shall maintain a clear vertical distance above
any public sidewalk a minimum of 10 feet measured from
grade to the bottom of the sign.
(h) Roof signs. Roof signs shall be permitted in all industrial, C2,
and C3 zoning districts, subject to the following limitations:
[1] Roof signs shall be permitted in certain commercial and all
industrial districts.
[2] Such signs shall not exceed the height of the roofline upon
which they are mounted.
[3] The sign area for roof signs shall be assessed against the
aggregate permitted area for wall signs on the elevation of
the building most closely parallel to the face of the sign.
(i) Under canopy signs. Under canopy signs shall be permitted in
all nonresidential zoning districts, subject to the following
limitations:
[1] Under canopy signs shall be limited to no more than one
such sign per public entrance to any occupancy and shall
be limited to an area not to exceed four square feet.
[2] Such signs shall maintain a clear vertical distance above
any sidewalk or pedestrianway a minimum of 10 feet.
(j) Wall signs. Buildings in all commercial and industrial zoning
districts may display wall signs per street frontage subject to
the following limitations. See Table 200.25A(1)e.77
[1] Total sign area not to exceed 1.5 square feet for each
linear foot of lot frontage.
[2] Minimum height shall be above the entrance door frame
top.
[3] Maximum height shall be the top of the face of the building
upon which the sign is mounted.
(k) Window signs. Window signs shall be permitted in all
nonresidential zoning districts, subject to the following
limitations:
[1] The aggregate area of all such signs shall not exceed 25%
of the window area on which such signs are displayed.
77.Editor's Note: Said table is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 200-25 PALMYRA CODE § 200-25
178:280
Window panels separated by mullions shall be considered
as one continuous window area.
[2] Window signs shall not be assessed against the sign area
permitted for other sign types.
[3] Any window sign hung or mounted within 12 inches of the
interior of the window will be assessed against the
allowable twenty-five-percent total window coverage area.
(2) Temporary signs.
(a) Development and construction signs. Signs temporarily
erected during construction to inform the public of the
developer, contractors, architects, engineers, the nature of the
project or anticipated completion dates shall be permitted in
all zoning districts, subject to the following limitations:
[1] Such signs on a single residential lot shall be limited to one
sign not greater than three feet in height and 12 square
feet in area.
[2] Such signs for a residential subdivision or multiple
residential lots shall be limited to one sign at each
entrance to the subdivision or on one of the lots to be built
upon and shall be no greater than six feet in height and 20
square feet in area.
[3] Such signs for commercial or industrial projects shall. be
limited to one sign per street front, not to exceed 10 feet in
height and 25 square feet for projects on parcels five acres
or greater.
[4] Development and construction signs may not be displayed
until after the issuance of construction permits by the
Building Official and must be removed not later than 24
hours following issuance of an occupancy permit for all or
any portion of the project.
(b) Political signs. Political signs shall be permitted in all zoning
districts, subject to the following limitations:
[1] Such signs shall not exceed a height of three feet nor an
area of four square feet.
[2] Such signs for election candidates or ballot propositions
shall be displayed only for a period of 40 days preceding
the election and shall be removed within five days after the
election, provided that signs promoting successful
candidates or ballot propositions in a primary election may
remain displayed until not more than five days after the
general election.
§ 200-25 TREES § 200-25
178:281
[3] Such signs shall not be placed in any public right-of-way or
obstruct traffic visibility.
(c) Portable signs. Portable signs shall be permitted only in
commercial and commercial districts, as designated in this
chapter, subject to the following limitations:
[1] No more than one such sign may be displayed on any
property and shall not exceed a height of eight feet nor an
area of 20 square feet.
[2] Such signs shall be displayed not more than 21 days in any
calendar year.
[3] Any electrical portable signs shall comply with the ICC
Electrical Code, as adopted in this jurisdiction.
[4] No portable sign shall be displayed prior to obtaining a
sign permit.
(d) Real estate signs. Real estate signs shall be permitted in all
zoning districts, subject to the following limitations:
[1] Real estate signs located on a single residential lot shall be
limited to one sign not greater than three feet in height
and 10 square feet in area.
[2] Real estate signs advertising the sale of lots located within
a subdivision shall be limited to one sign per entrance to
the subdivision, and each sign shall be no greater than 10
square feet in area and six feet in height. All signs
permitted under this section shall be removed within 10
days after sale of the last original lot.
[3] Real estate signs advertising the sale or lease of space
within commercial or industrial buildings shall be no
greater than 15 square feet in area nor 10 feet in height
and shall be limited to one sign per street front.
[4] Real estate signs advertising the sale or lease of vacant
commercial or industrial land shall be limited to one sign
per street front, and each sign shall be no greater than 10
feet in height and 25 square feet.
[5] Real estate signs shall be removed not later than 10 days
after execution of a lease agreement in the event of a lease
or the closing of the sale in the event of a purchase.
(e) Special event signs in public ways. Signs advertising a special
community event shall be permitted over public rights-of-way,
subject to approval by the Village Board and or the State
Department of Transportation as to the size, location and
method of erection. The Code Official may not approve any
§ 200-25 PALMYRA CODE § 200-25
178:282
special event signage that would impair the safety and
convenience of use of public rights-of-way or obstruct traffic
visibility.
(f) Special promotions; event and grand opening signs. Signs
temporarily displayed to advertise special promotions, events
and grand openings shall be permitted for all commercial and
industrial districts, subject to the following limitations:
[1] Such signs shall be limited to one sign per street front.
[2] Such signs may be displayed for not more than 30
consecutive days in any three-month period, and not more
than 60 days in any calendar year. The signs shall be
erected no more than five days prior to the event or grand
opening and shall be removed not more than one day after
the event or grand opening.
[3] The total area of all such signs shall not exceed 20 square
feet in any residential district and 30 square feet in any
commercial or industrial district.
F. Signs for development complexes.
(1) Master sign plan required. All landlord or single-owner-controlled
multiple-occupancy development complexes, such as shopping
centers, multiple-family housing units or planned industrial parks,
shall submit to the Code Official a master sign plan prior to
issuance of new sign permits. The master sign plan shall establish
standards and criteria for all signs in the complex that require
permits and shall address, at a minimum, the following:
(a) Proposed sign locations.
(b) Materials.
(c) Type of illumination.
(d) Design of freestanding sign structures.
(e) Size.
(f) Quantity.
(g) Uniform standards for nonbusiness signage, including
directional and informational signs.
(2) Development complex sign. In addition to the freestanding
business identification signs otherwise allowed by this section,
every multiple-occupancy development complex shall be entitled to
one freestanding sign per street front, at the maximum size
permitted for business identification freestanding signs, to identify
the development complex. No business identification shall be
permitted on a development complex sign. Any freestanding sign
§ 200-25 TREES § 200-25
178:283
§ 200-26. Private swimming pools as accessory use.
A private swimming pool installed or maintained as an accessory use in a
residential district shall meet the following requirements:
otherwise permitted under this section may identify the name of
the development complex.
(3) Compliance with master sign plan. All applications for sign permits
for signage within a multiple-occupancy development complex shall
comply with the master sign plan.
(4) Amendments. Any amendments to a master sign plan must be
signed and approved by the owner(s) within the development
complex before such amendment will become effective.
A. It shall be used only as an accessory use to a dwelling or to a special
permit use in a residence district for the private use of the owner or
occupant of such dwelling or building and his or her family, guests, or
employees.
B. Any such pool shall be completely enclosed by a security fence not less
than four feet in height, with all gates or doors opening through such
enclosure equipped with self-closing and self-latching devices of a type
approved by the Zoning Administrator, designed to keep and capable of
keeping such gates or doors securely closed at all times when not in
actual use.
C. Such pool shall be maintained in a manner sufficient to meet the
bacterial standards established by the provisions of the New York State
Sanitary Code relating to public swimming pools.
D. Such pool shall be equipped with an integral filtration system and filter
pumps or other mechanical devices which shall be so located and
constructed as not to interfere with the peace, comfort and repose of
the occupants of any adjoining property.
E. No permission shall be granted for the installation of any swimming
pool until the owner has filed with the Zoning Administration a
statement by the Village Water and Sewerage Superintendent that
provisions for the drainage of such pool are adequate and will not
interfere with the public water supply system or existing sanitary
facilities.
F. Any electrical installations necessary for the erection of a swimming
pool must be inspected by the Board of Fire Underwriters or other
qualified inspection agency approved by the Village. [Added
4-15-1991 by L.L. No. 1-1991; amended 11-17-2003 by L.L. No.
2-2003]
G. Any swimming pool erected must comply with all setback and yard
requirements for the district in which it is located. The dimensions used
§ 200-25 PALMYRA CODE § 200-26
178:284
§ 200-27. Lot area requirements.
§ 200-28. Yard requirements.
in any calculations must include decks or walkways that are adjacent to
the pool. [Added 4-15-1991 by L.L. No. 1-1991]
H. The above regulations pertain to all types of swimming pools
(aboveground or in-ground) and a building permit must be granted
prior to its installation. [Added 4-15-1991 by L.L. No. 1-1991]
A. Area measurement. For purposes of measuring lot area, only that part
of the depth which is no more than three times the average width of the
lot may be utilized in calculations.
B. Lot area per family when other uses present. In computing the lot area
available for residential use on a lot which has other uses, such as a
dwelling use in addition to a retail use, the lot area occupied by the
building containing the other use, together with the area of any
required parking or off-street loading, shall first be deducted from the
total lot area.
C. Substandard lots of record. Other provisions of this chapter
notwithstanding, any parcel of land having access to a street and
having an area or a width less than those prescribed for the district in
which such parcel is situated may be used as a lot for any purpose
permitted in such district, provided all of the following requirements
are met:
(1) Such parcel has an area of at least 50% of the required area and a
frontage width of at least 50% of the required frontage width.
(2) Such parcel was under the ownership at the effective date of this
chapter and the owner thereof at that time did not then own and
has at no time since then owned any land adjoining such parcel.
D. Variation of requirement for large-scale housing development. The
Village Zoning Board of Appeals/Planning Board is hereby empowered,
as provided in § 7-738 of the Village Law, simultaneously with the
approval of any subdivision, to confirm the zoning regulations of the
land so platted or to make any reasonable change therein, in
accordance with the procedures and safeguards set forth in § 7-738,
providing no change is made in the overall density for the land so
platted. [Amended 11-17-2003 by L.L. No. 2-2003; 8-1-2016 by
L.L. No. 2-2016]
A. Exceptions to yard requirements. The following may project into
required yards: steps or stoops not exceeding 24 square feet in area;
eaves, cornices and belt courses not exceeding two feet; and open fire
escapes not exceeding four feet six inches, except that no required side
yard in a residential district shall be reduced to less than six feet by
such fire escape extension.
§ 200-26 TREES § 200-28
178:285
§ 200-29. Height of structures and buildings; exceptions.
The height limitations for buildings shall not apply to church spires, belfries,
domes or similar projections not used for human occupancy, nor to
chimneys, air-conditioning equipment, water tanks, antennae and other
necessary mechanical apparatus usually carried above roof level, all of
B. Side yards on lots nonconforming in width. On a lot of record on the
effective date of this chapter that is narrower than required in its
zoning district, the side yard requirements may be reduced to the same
percentage of the lot width that is required for a minimum width
conforming lot; for example, if the yard required for one side is six feet
on a sixty-foot lot, the yard may be reduced to five feet on a fifty-foot lot.
However, in no event shall the side yard be less than five feet.
C. Fences. Except as provided in Subsection D, the requirements of this
chapter shall not be deemed to prohibit any otherwise lawful fence or
wall, provided that in any residential district no fence or wall shall
exceed six feet in height.
D. Visibility at intersections. On a corner lot in any residential district, no
structure, fence, wall, hedge or other planting shall be erected, placed
or maintained at a height of between three and six feet above the
curbline within the triangle formed by the street lines and a straight
line joining said street lines at points 20 feet from the point of
intersection.
E. Transition areas. When a lot in a Commercial, Highway Commercial or
Industrial District abuts a lot in a residential district, there shall be
provided on such Commercial, Highway Commercial or Industrial
District lots on the side abutting the residential lot, an open space not
less than 20 feet in width to serve as a buffer. Such yard shall not be
used for any purposes other than landscaping. Alternately, there may be
provided on the property line, an unpierced masonry wall not less than
six nor more than 10 feet in height, which wall may be the wall of a
building in which instance no yard shall be required, but no window,
roof vent door or other building opening may be located within 20 feet
of the residential zone lot line and no outdoor loading, commercial or
industrial activities may take place in such restricted area.
F. Private garage in rear yard. A detached private garage, when otherwise
permitted, may be erected in a rear yard but not closer to a street line
than the buildable area of the lot nor closer than three feet to other rear
or side lot lines, and it shall not occupy more than 1/3 of the required
rear yard.
G. Utility sheds, prefabricated or stick-built, as stated in § 200-13C, may
be located in the rear yard no closer than three feet to the rear or side
lot lines or five feet to an existing building. The structure shall not
exceed 150 square feet in area and its height shall not exceed 10 feet at
its highest point. [Added 4-15-1991 by L.L. No. 1-1991]
§ 200-28 PALMYRA CODE § 200-29
178:286
which apparatus shall be considered as structures and be subject to
structural height limitations contained herein.
§ 200-30. Off-street parking.
A. Purpose. The purposes of this section, in addition to the general
purposes of this chapter, are more specifically:
(1) To require installation of off-street parking in sufficient quantity to
meet the normal needs of all uses in all districts, except the Central
Commercial District, in which district other means of providing
parking are considered more appropriate.
(2) To permit, in suitable areas, provisions of additional parking space
to serve the needs of the Central Commercial District and other
requirements not adequately provided for.
(3) In requiring and regulating the development and maintenance of
parking areas, to provide measures to protect the safety of
pedestrians on the sidewalks and traffic in the street and the quiet
enjoyment of other uses, particularly residential uses, in close
proximity to the parking areas and to preserve and enhance the
attractiveness of the Village.
B. Required parking.
(1) When required. Permanent off-street automobile parking space
shall be provided as specified hereinafter at the time of erecting
any structure, at the time any structure is enlarged or increased in
capacity by adding dwelling or rooming units, seats, floor area or
other elements on which parking requirements are based or before
conversion from one zoning use or occupancy to another.
(2) Parking units required. For every building or structure hereafter
erected or altered, or use hereafter established, except in the
Central Commercial District, there shall be provided off-street
parking as set forth below:
(a) For each dwelling unit: one.
(b) For each roomer, boarder or transient guest: one each.
(c) For each professional person maintaining office hours: three
plus one for each employee.
(d) For each home occupation: one.
(e) For each place of worship or parish house, auditorium or hall,
theater or other place of public assembly: one for each three
units of seating capacity.
(f) For each rectory, parsonage or church office: two plus one for
each employee.
§ 200-29 TREES § 200-30
178:287
(g) For rentable office space: one for each 100 square feet of
rental floor area.
(h) For retail or personal service uses: for the first 1,000 square
feet of space, one for each 250 square feet of floor space; for all
additional space, one for each 150 square feet of floor space
plus space for all vehicles usually used in the business.
(i) For restaurants or other places serving beverages or
refreshments, except for drive-in uses: one unit for each two
seats.
(j) For mortuaries or funeral homes: 20 units.
(k) For industrial or warehouse uses: one space for each two
employees.
(l) For hospitals: one for each bed.
(m) For nursing homes: one for each four beds and one for each
employee.
(n) For bowling alleys: five per alley plus required space for any
bar, restaurant or other use on the premises.
(o) For drive-in uses: sufficient spaces to accommodate all
customers. Customers shall not be served on the public rightof-
way.
(p) For motor vehicles salesrooms: five units plus one space for
each employee. In the case of a salesroom with repair garage
and used car lot, the number of spaces required shall be the
total of requirements for each use.
(q) For new and used car lots: five units plus one additional unit
for each 10 cars or major fraction thereof on display.
(r) For motor vehicle garages and repair shops: one unit for each
500 square feet of floor space.
(s) For agricultural fairgrounds: sufficient spaces to accommodate
all patrons and visitors. [Added 5-7-1979 by L.L. No.
4-1979]
(3) Location as related to use. All required parking space provided
pursuant to this section shall be on the same lot with the related
use, except that the Board of Appeals may grant a special permit
for the parking space to be on any lot within 300 feet of the use if it
is determined that it is impractical to provide space on the same lot
with the use in accordance with the provisions.
(4) The required parking space for any number of separate uses may
be combined in one lot, but the required space assigned to one use
may not be assigned to another use at the same time, except that 1/
§ 200-30 PALMYRA CODE § 200-30
178:288
2 of the parking space required for churches, theaters or assembly
halls whose peak attendance will be at night or on Sunday may be
assigned to a use which will normally be closed at night and on
Sunday as determined by the Zoning Administrator.
C. Permitted parking.
(1) As a principal use. Parking as a principal use is permitted only in
the following instances:
(a) In a Commercial or Industrial District.
(b) In a Residence 2 District adjacent to a Commercial or
Industrial District as a special permit use.
(2) As an accessory use. Parking units in excess of those required may
be installed for the use of occupants, patrons or visitors of a
permitted use, subject to compliance with all other provisions of
this chapter, but not to exceed twice the required spaces in any
residence district.
D. Use of front yards restricted.
(1) In residence districts. No required front yard or portion thereof in
any residential district shall be utilized to provide parking space
required in this chapter.
(2) In Industrial Districts. In any Industrial District, up to 25% of any
front yard, or of any side yard abutting a street, may be used for
parking, provided not less than 60% of the yard is developed and
maintained as a landscaped area from which vehicle entry is
effectively barred by a raised curb or other barrier.
E. Design and installation of parking areas. Any area used for off-street
parking for more than five cars shall be designed, installed and
maintained in accordance with the following standards:
(1) Plan required. A plan shall be submitted with the application for a
use permit in accordance with § 200-34 and all installations shall be
made and maintained in accordance with such plan.
(2) Access drives to parking lots with more than five units.
(a) Location and design. Every required parking unit shall have
direct access to a driveway of not less than eight nor more than
24 feet in width connecting with a public street. A driveway
shall not be located closer than six feet of any residential
structure or within two feet of any side lot lines, except that a
driveway built as a joint venture to serve two abutting
properties may be built on a lot line.
(b) Number and entry into street: as provided in § 200-34.
(c) Improvement: as provided in § 200-34.
§ 200-30 TREES § 200-30
178:289
§ 200-31. Off-street loading.
(d) Use for parking. Required driveways may not be used for
parking so as to block access to any parking unit.
A. Purpose. The purposes of this section, in addition to the general
purposes of this chapter, are more specifically:
(1) To require the installation of off-street loading areas sufficient to
meet the normal needs of uses regularly attracting truck traffic.
(2) To permit truck loading area in excess of that required where
consistent with other purposes of this chapter.
(3) To require, in connection with the installation of such off-street
loading, measures necessary to protect the safety of pedestrian and
vehicular traffic and to preserve the quiet enjoyment of other uses,
particularly residential uses in the immediate area, and to preserve
the attractiveness of the Village.
B. Required loading.
(1) When required. Permanent off-street parking space, in accordance
with the requirements hereinafter stated, shall be provided for all
uses regularly involving the receipt or distribution of merchandise
or material as specified hereinafter at the time of erection or
enlarging any structure, or in the case of use of land not involving a
structure, at the time of occupancy or enlargement of such use.
(2) Off-street loading units required. Off-street loading units shall be
provided as follows:
(a) Multifamily dwellings or dwellings in groups with more than 12
dwelling units: one loading unit.
(b) For every freight terminal, hospital, industrial plant, retail
establishment, warehouse and wholesale establishment: one, if
3,000 to 20,000 square feet in floor area, and one for each
additional 50,000 square feet.
(c) For every place of public assembly over 3,000 square feet in
area such as restaurants, funeral homes or hotels: one loading
unit.
(d) For any use not mentioned, the Zoning Administrator shall
determine the requirements in relation to that required for
similar uses.
C. Collective provisions permitted. The collective provision and utilization
of loading space may be accomplished, provided it is within the same
block and not over 100 feet walking distance from a delivery entrance
of all uses involved and provisions suitable to the Zoning Administrator
are made to assure the continued provision of such use for all involved.
§ 200-30 PALMYRA CODE § 200-31
178:290
§ 200-32. Gasoline station requirements.
D. Exception for small lots. The provisions of this section shall not apply to
a use on a lot less than 100 feet in either width or depth in a Central
Commercial District when no alley, street, common driveway or other
means of access is available other than on the frontage of the property.
E. Front yard use prohibited. Use of a required front yard for loading area
shall not be permitted.
F. Design and installation of off-street loading areas. All off-street loading
areas shall be designed, installed and maintained in accordance with
standards for automobile access areas contained in § 200-34.
A. Purpose. In addition to the general purposes of this chapter, the specific
purposes of this section are established in recognition of the general
character of gasoline stations and their operations, to provide suitable
measures for gasoline station design, construction and operation so as
to adequately provide for public safety and convenience, preserve the
convenient and efficient use of abutting properties and protect and
enhance the attractiveness of the Village.
B. Lot area. There shall be an area not less than 10,000 square feet and
not less than 100 feet in width devoted exclusively to the gasoline
station use.
C. Yards.
(1) Side and rear yards. Side and rear yards shall not be less than 10
feet nor such greater width as required for the zoning district. Such
yards shall not be used for purposes other than landscaping and
shall not be paved.
(2) Front yards. Front yards shall not be less than 25 feet nor such
greater depth as required by district regulations, shall not be used
for any purposes other than necessary driveways and landscaping
and shall not be paved, except that the paved apron of the station
may extend into such area but shall not extend closer than 15 feet
to any street line, nor shall more than 1/3 of the required front yard
be accessible to automobiles or paved. No temporary or permanent
structures, racks, signs or other devices, parking of vehicles or
display of merchandise shall be permitted in any required yard with
the following exceptions:
(a) Traffic direction signs.
(b) One business sign per street frontage, provided it shall not be
over 25 square feet in area, and no part of such sign shall be
less than 16 feet above grade or closer than 15 feet to any
street line.
§ 200-31 TREES § 200-32
178:291
§ 200-33. Parking and storage of abandoned vehicles. [Added
1-17-1972 by L.L. No. 1-1972]
(c) One portable sign per street frontage carrying fuel prices,
provided such sign is less than six square feet in area, less than
three feet in height and not set closer than five feet to the
street line.
D. Additional use regulations.
(1) In the Central Commercial District or General Commercial
Districts, any gasoline station shall be subject to the following
additional regulations:
(a) Permitted accessory uses:
[1] Maintenance and repair of automobiles, but not involving
removal of engine, transmission or differential, body or
fender work or painting.
[2] Sale of packaged refreshments in vending machines.
[3] Sale of automobile accessories and convenience goods for
motorists, provided that the total floor area used for such
sales does not exceed 200 square feet.
(2) In a Highway Commercial or Industrial District where the area of a
lot occupied by a gas station exceeds 15,000 square feet, a plan
may be filed with the Zoning Administrator assigning 15,000
square feet to gasoline station use, in which instance any remaining
portion of the buildable area of the lot may be used for any use
permitted in the Highway Commercial District which involves the
sale, rental or maintenance of wheeled vehicles.
E. Inoperative vehicles. No inoperative vehicle shall be kept on the
premises for longer than two weeks unless required for legal or
insurance proceedings.
F. Storage. All supplies and material and waste material will be stored
within structures or enclosed within fencing so as not to be visible from
off the property.
G. Design of vehicle access areas. Design, installation and maintenance of
driveways and vehicular access areas shall be in accordance with
§ 200-34.
A. Purpose. Abandoned, junked, discarded and unregistered motor
vehicles upon privately owned property within the Village of Palmyra
are detrimental to the safety, health and public welfare. They constitute
a nuisance to children and are a peril to their safety. They are a fire
hazard and a source of fire and explosions. They depreciate the value of
the neighboring properties.
§ 200-32 PALMYRA CODE § 200-33
178:292
§ 200-34. Standards for automobile access areas.
B. Notice. If the provisions of these supplementary regulations relating to
the parking and storage of certain automotive vehicles is violated, the
Zoning Enforcement Officer or the Village Police Department shall
serve written notice, either personally or by mail, upon the owner,
occupant or person having charge of any such land, upon which any
such motor vehicle is deposited, parked or stored.
C. Placement of motor vehicles on private lands. It shall be unlawful for
any person, firm or corporation, either as owner, occupant, lessee,
agent, tenant or otherwise to deposit, or cause or permit to be
deposited, an abandoned, junked, discarded or unregistered motor
vehicle on any private land within the corporate limits of the Village of
Palmyra. Unregistered motor vehicles may be stored or displayed in
areas of the Village that are zoned for this purpose and in areas where
such use is a preexisting use. In residentially zoned property, the
storing or parking of unlicensed or inoperable motor vehicles shall be
permitted in completely enclosed buildings.
D. Penalty. Any owner, occupant, lessee, agent or tenant who shall neglect
and refuse to remove said abandoned, junked, discarded and
unlicensed motor vehicle or vehicles, as directed by law, or who shall
fail or refuse to comply with the provisions of any notice herein
provided for, or who shall violate any of the provisions of this section or
who shall resist or obstruct authorized agents, servants, officers or
employees of the Village of Palmyra in the removal of any motor
vehicles, shall be deemed violating this section and shall be subject to a
penalty not exceeding $250 or a term of imprisonment not exceeding 15
days, or both, for each and every violation.78
E. Effective date. This section shall take effect immediately upon its
adoption and filing in accordance with the provisions of the statutes of
the State of New York.
A. Permit required. No work, other than site clearance and grading, may
be performed in the installation or altering of any of the following
vehicle access areas, except on the written approval of plans therefor
by the Zoning Administrator in conjunction with the issuance of a
building or use permit:
(1) Parking areas for more than five cars.
(2) Off-street loading areas.
(3) Automobile access areas at gasoline stations and other drive-in
uses.
(4) Outdoor display area for vehicles equipped to operate on the public
highways.
78.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 200-33 TREES § 200-34
178:293
B. Plan required. A plan for proposed improvements shall be prepared at a
scale of not more than 50 feet to one inch in a manner specified by the
Zoning Administrator. Such plan shall show, at a minimum, the
following information, both as existing and proposed for the entire area
within 100 feet of the point of entry of access drives or 50 feet from any
part of the proposed improvements:
(1) Major drainage features (culverts, bridges, streams, ditches, etc.).
A topographic map shall be required by the Zoning Administrator
where necessary to determine drainage requirements.
(2) Lot lines.
(3) Street pavement, curb, drainage inlets, utility poles and fire
hydrants.
(4) Paved areas.
(5) Location and type of traffic barriers.
(6) Structures.
(7) Layout of parking units and loading units.
(8) Landscaping.
C. Design standards for vehicle access areas.
(1) Driveway location standards:
(a) Sight distance. Driveways shall not be permitted where there
is inadequate sight distance for safety, either for traffic on the
street or by vehicles leaving the driveway.
(b) Distance from schools. Driveways shall not be located within
200 feet of a principal entrance of any elementary or secondary
school, playground or church.
(c) Only two driveways shall be permitted on any street frontage
of less than 300 feet and not more than one additional
driveway for each additional 300 feet.
(d) A driveway shall not cross a street right-of-way line within 40
feet of the street right-of-way line of an intersecting street,
within five feet of a fire hydrant or catch basin or within 50 feet
of a driveway on the same lot where lot width permits.
(e) A driveway shall not exceed 30 feet in width within 10 feet of
the street right-of-way line.
(2) Parking and maneuvering area standards.
(a) Areas shall be so designed as to preclude any necessity for
vehicles to back across sidewalks or into any public right-ofway.
§ 200-34 PALMYRA CODE § 200-34
178:294
§ 200-35. Dwellings.
(b) Parking areas shall not extend more than 120 feet in any
direction unless interrupted by a planting area not less than six
feet in width and protected from vehicular encroachment. The
improved parking area shall be surrounded by a landscaped
area not less than six feet in width if protected by a wheel stop,
or three feet in width if protected by a bumper stop.
(c) Areas may be lighted, but any lighting shall be suitably located
and shielded to protect surrounding properties from glare.
(d) No parking space shall be provided within 10 feet of a building
used in part or entirely for human occupancy.
(3) Standards for improvement.
(a) Grading and drainage. Vehicle access areas shall be suitably
graded so as to drain and provisions made for the handling of
storm drainage so as to prevent stormwater flow across a
public sidewalk.
(b) Paving. Vehicle access areas shall be paved and maintained
with an all-weather dust-free surfacing of sufficient strength to
carry loads imposed, except that the Board of Appeals may
grant a special permit waiving this requirement for any area
more than 100 feet removed from any lot line or for areas used
only seasonally or occasionally or under such conditions as to
make the paving unnecessary, in accordance with the
provisions of Article VII.
A. Minimum floor area. No single-family dwelling shall henceforth be
constructed, nor shall any existing single dwelling be reduced in area,
so as to contain less than 800 feet of floor area usable for living
purposes and 300 square feet of storage area usable for storage. No
dwelling unit in a two-family or multiple-family dwelling shall
henceforth be constructed, nor shall an existing dwelling unit in such
building be reduced in area, so as to contain less than 600 square feet
of floor area usable for living purposes and 100 square feet of floor area
usable for storage purposes.
B. Usable open space. No multiple-family dwelling or dwelling group shall
be constructed as a separate use or as part of a building containing
commercial or other uses, except there be provided 500 square feet of
usable open space on the lot for each dwelling unit.
C. Community open space. On any lot containing more than 12 dwelling
units, there shall be provided a community open space containing not
less than 200 square feet of land area per dwelling unit. This space may
be counted as part of the required usable open space.
§ 200-34 TREES § 200-35
178:295
§ 200-36. Public properties and utilities.
Nothing in this chapter shall restrict the construction, use or maintenance
of public buildings, structures or facilities, parks or other publicly owned
properties, nor the installation and maintenance of such public utilities
and facilities other than generating plants, electrical substations, telephone
exchanges and gas transmission facilities as may be essential to the
servicing of any district or area in which it is installed.
§ 200-37. Excavation and filling of natural materials.
D. Cellar occupancy prohibited. It shall be unlawful to occupy all or any
part of a cellar for sleeping purposes.
E. Basement occupancy. Any basement area used for living purposes shall
have not less than two means of egress, at least one of which shall be a
door giving access to an open area whose surface is at least eight
inches below the level of the door. Each basement room used for living
purposes shall have a window area, opening to the outside, equal to not
less than 0.1 of the floor area of such room.
F. Room size. No dwelling unit shall henceforth be constructed unless it
shall have at least one room having a floor area of not less than 132
square feet, a clear height of seven feet and a clear horizontal
dimension of at least eight feet. No existing dwelling unit shall be
altered so as to provide less than the above standard.
G. Slope of yards. No building containing dwelling units shall henceforth
be constructed, nor shall any existing building be altered, so as to
contain dwelling units unless the surface grade of the front yard at the
front wall of such building be more than one foot above the established
grade of the sidewalk. Where a sidewalk grade has not been
established, the surface grade of the front at the front wall of the
dwelling shall be not less than one foot above the center line of the
street measured at the midpoint between the side lot lines of the lot.
Where there is unusual difficulty in meeting this provision, the Zoning
Administrator may accept a substitute gradient, provided that no minus
gradient is established within 15 feet of the front wall or within six feet
of either side of the rear wall of the dwelling.
A. Stripping of topsoil. No person shall strip, excavate or otherwise
remove topsoil for sale or for use other than on the premises from
which such topsoil was taken, except in connection with the
construction or alteration of a building or structure on such premises
for which a building permit has been issued.
B. Major excavating, grading or filling. Major excavating, grading or filling
as defined herein shall not take place in any district, except by a duly
constituted public body, unless a special permit therefor has been
granted by the Board of Appeals.
§ 200-35 PALMYRA CODE § 200-37
178:296
ARTICLE VI
Nonconforming Uses
§ 200-38. Continuation of lawful uses.
Except as otherwise provided in this section, the lawful uses of land or
buildings existing at the time of adoption of this chapter may be continued,
even though such use does not conform to the regulations specified by this
chapter for the district in which such land is located. Any lawful use existing
at the time of the adoption of this chapter or any amendment thereof which,
if such existing lawful use would require a special permit in the district in
which it is situated if it had been newly created while this chapter was in
effect, may be continued and shall be deemed to be a nonconforming use,
but any modification, change or extension thereof, except as specifically
permitted, shall be subject to the issuance of a special permit as provided
in this chapter.
§ 200-39. Regulations for nonconforming uses of land.
§ 200-40. Regulations for nonconforming uses of structures and
buildings.
A. Enlargement. No nonconforming use shall be enlarged or extended off
the lot or lots of record occupied by such use at the time of the adoption
of this chapter nor shall a nonconforming use be enlarged or extended
on the lot, except within the confines of an existing building.
B. Change of use. No nonconforming use may be changed by the addition
or substitution of other processes or operations, except on the granting
of a special permit by the Board of Appeals in accordance with Article
VII.
C. Movement. No nonconforming use or building shall be moved in whole
or in part to any other portion of the lot occupied at the time of the
adoption of this chapter, except on the granting of a special permit by
the Board of Appeals in accordance with Article VII.
D. Cessation of land use. If any nonconforming use of land ceases for any
continuos period of not less than one year for any reason other than
direct participation of the owner or tenant in military service, any
subsequent use of such land shall be in conformity to the regulations
specified by this chapter for the district in which such land is located.
A. Change to other nonconforming use. A nonconforming use of building
may be changed to another nonconforming use, which, on the granting
of a special permit in a determination of the Board of Appeals, is of the
same nature or conforms more closely to the character of the
neighborhood in accordance with Article VII.
B. Cessation of building use. If any nonconforming use of a building ceases
for any reason, other than direct participation of the owner or tenant in
§ 200-38 TREES § 200-40
178:297
military service for a continuous period of not less than two years, or
if the building in or on which such use is conducted or maintained
is moved for any distance whatsoever, then any future use of such
building shall be in conformity to the regulations specified by this
chapter for the district in which such building is located. If any building
in or on which any nonconforming use is conducted or maintained is
hereafter removed, the subsequent location and use of any building
thereon shall be in conformity to the regulations specified by this
chapter for the district in which such land is located.
C. Destruction of nonconforming building. If at any time any building in
existence or maintained at the time of the adoption of this chapter and
not conforming to the regulations for the district in which it is located
shall be destroyed by any means to an extent that the remaining value is
less than 50% of the market value, the immediate area occupied by said
building shall thenceforth be subject to all the regulations specified by
this chapter for the district in which such land and buildings are
located.
§ 200-40 PALMYRA CODE § 200-40
178:298
ARTICLE VII
Zoning Board of Appeals and Planning Board
[Amended 4-8-1974 by L.L. No. 3-1974; 1-2-1979 by L.L. No. 1-1979;
1-4-1988 by L.L. No. 1-1988; 4-15-1991 by L.L. No. 1-1991; 5-2-1994
by L.L. No. 2-1994]
§ 200-41. Establishment of Zoning Board of Appeals.
A. Zoning. The Board of Appeals, heretofore created pursuant to the
provisions of the Village Law, is hereby continued as now constituted.
Each member of the Board of Appeals shall continue to hold office to the
expiration of his present term, at which time the Village Board of
Trustees shall appoint a successor as provided by law.
B. Appointment of members. The Board of Trustees shall designate the
Chairperson thereof. In the absence of a Chairperson, the Board of
Appeals may designate a member to serve as Acting Chairperson. The
Village Board of Trustees may provide for compensation to be paid to
experts, clerks and a secretary and provide for such other expenses as
may be necessary and proper, not exceeding the appropriation made by
the Village Board of Trustees for such purpose.
C. Term of office. Members of the Board of Appeals shall be appointed for
a five-year term. The Chairperson shall be appointed annually. No
member of the Board of Appeals may serve more than two consecutive
terms of five years.
D. Vacancy in office. Appointments to fill vacancies shall be for the
unexpired term of the member or members whose term or terms
become vacant. Appointments to fill such vacancies shall be made in the
same manner as the original appointment.
E. Vacature of office. A member of the Board of Appeals who has failed to
attend three consecutive meetings, unless excused by the Chairman or
Acting Chairman, shall be considered to have vacated his office unless
otherwise ordered by the Board of Trustees.
F. General grant of power. The Board of Appeals shall perform all the
duties and have all the powers prescribed by the laws of the State of
New York.
G. Meetings, minutes, and records. Meetings of the Board of Appeals shall
be open to the public to the extent provided in Article 7 of the Public
Officers Law. The Board of Appeals shall keep minutes of its
proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon every question, or
if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact, and shall also keep
records of its proceedings and other official actions.
H. Filing requirements. Every rule, regulation, every amendment or repeal
thereof, and every order, requirement, decision, or determination of the
§ 200-41 TREES § 200-41
178:299
§ 200-42. Powers and duties of Zoning Board of Appeals/Planning
Board. [Amended 8-1-2016 by L.L. No. 2-2016]
§ 200-43. Appeal from Zoning Administrator.
Board of Appeals shall be filed in the Village Clerk’s office and shall be
a public record.
I. Assistance to Board of Appeals. The Board of Appeals shall have the
authority to call upon any department, agency, or employee of the
Village for such assistance as shall be deemed necessary and as shall be
authorized by the Board of Trustees.
A. Jurisdiction of Zoning Board of Appeals/Planning Board. Except as
otherwise provided in this chapter, and in Chapter 167, entitled
Subdivision of Land, the jurisdiction of the Zoning Board of Appeals/
Planning Board, in addition to the authority set forth below, shall be
appellate and shall consist of hearing and deciding appeals from and
reviewing any order, requirement, decision, interpretation, or
determination made by the Zoning Administrator.
B. Votes necessary for decision. The concurring vote of a majority of the
members of the Zoning Board of Appeals/Planning Board shall be
necessary to reverse any order, requirement, decision or determination
of the Zoning Administrator or to grant a use or area variance.
C. In addition to the hearing of appeals, the Zoning Board of Appeals/
Planning Board shall have the authority:
(1) To prepare and from time to time make changes to the Master or
Comprehensive Plan for the development of the Village.
(2) To review proposals to approve or disapprove the laying out,
closing off, abandonment or changes in line of streets, highways
and public areas and to make recommendations to the Village
Board of Trustees.
(3) To make investigations, maps, reports and recommendations
relating to the planning and development of the Village as it deems
desirable. This shall include but not be limited to changes in
boundaries of districts, recommended changes in the provisions of
this chapter, and other land use and development matters, and to
act on any matter lawfully referred to it by the Village Board of
Trustees.
(4) To review, act on or provide advisory reports as specified by this
chapter.
(5) To make referrals to other Village departments, boards and/or
officials to request advisory opinions to assist the Board in making
decisions which affect the development of the Village.
§ 200-41 PALMYRA CODE § 200-43
178:300
A. Standing to appeal. An appeal to the Board of Appeals from any ruling
of the Zoning Administrator may be taken by any person aggrieved, or
by an officer, board, or bureau of the Village of Palmyra affected
thereby.
B. Time for appeal. Such an appeal shall be taken within 60 days after the
filing of any order, requirement, decision, interpretation, or
determination of the Zoning Administrator by filing with the Zoning
Administrator a notice of appeal, specifying the grounds thereof and the
relief sought.
C. Contents of appeal. All appeals made to the Board of Appeals shall be in
writing on forms supplied by the Zoning Administrator. Every appeal
shall refer to the specific provision of this chapter, and shall exactly set
forth the interpretation that is claimed, the plans for a special use, or
the details of the variance that is applied for, in addition to the following
information:
(1) The name and address of the applicant.
(2) The name and address of the owner of the district lot to be affected
by such proposed variance or appeal.
(3) A brief description and location of the district lot to be affected by
such proposed variance or appeal.
(4) A statement of the present zoning classification of the district lot in
question, the improvements thereon and the present use thereof.
(5) A reasonably accurate description of the present improvements
and the additions or changes intended to be made under the
application, indicating the size of such proposed improvements,
material and general construction thereof. In addition, there shall
be attached a plot plan of the real property to be affected,
indicating the location and size of the lot and size of improvements
thereon and proposed to be erected thereon.
D. Procedure for Zoning Administrator. Upon receipt of an appeal
complying with the provisions of this section, the Zoning Administrator
shall transmit to the Board of Appeals all papers constituting the record
upon which the action appealed from was taken. All fees due from the
appealing party shall be paid prior to such transmittal.
E. Stay upon appeal. An appeal shall stay all proceedings in furtherance of
the action appealed from unless the Zoning Administrator certifies to
the Board of Appeals, after the notice of appeal shall have been filed
with the Zoning Administrator, that, by reason of facts stated in the
certificate, a stay would, in his or her opinion, cause imminent peril to
life or property, in which case proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise
than by a restraining order which may be granted by the Board of
Appeals or by a court of record on application, on notice to the Zoning
Administrator and on due cause shown.
§ 200-43 TREES § 200-44
178:301
§ 200-44. Procedure for Zoning Board of Appeals/Planning Board.
[Amended 8-1-2016 by L.L. No. 2-2016]
§ 200-45. Permitted action by Board of Appeals.
A. Hearing of appeals. The Zoning Board of Appeals/Planning Board shall
fix a reasonable time for the hearing of the appeal or other matter
referred to it and give public notice thereof by the publication in a
paper of general circulation in the Village of a notice of such hearing, at
least five days prior to the date thereof. In case of an appeal, alleging
error or misinterpretation in any order or other action by the Zoning
Administrator, the following persons shall be notified: the applicant and
the person or persons, if any, who benefit from the order, requirement,
regulation, or determination.
B. County Planning Board referral. At least five days before a hearing, the
Zoning Board of Appeals/Planning Board shall mail notice of the appeal
to the Wayne County Planning Board, if required by § 239-m of the
General Municipal Law, which notice shall be accompanied by a full
statement of the matter under consideration, as set out in § 239-m,
Subdivision 1, of the General Municipal Law. The Zoning Board of
Appeals/Planning Board shall defer any decision until 30 days after the
referral or receipt of the report of the County Planning Board,
whichever is earlier.
C. Compliance with SEQRA. The Zoning Board of Appeals/Planning Board
shall comply with the provisions of the State Environmental Quality
Review Act under Article 8 of the Environmental Conservation Law and
regulations promulgated thereunder, codified in Title 6, Part 617, of the
New York Codes, Rules and Regulations.
D. Time of decision. The Zoning Board of Appeals/Planning Board shall
decide upon the appeal within 62 days after the conduct of the hearing.
The time within which the Zoning Board of Appeals/Planning Board
must render its decision may be extended by mutual consent of the
applicant and the Board.
E. Filing of decision and notice. The decision of the Zoning Board of
Appeals/Planning Board on the appeal shall be filed in the office of the
Village Clerk within five business days after the date such decision is
rendered, and a copy thereof mailed to the applicant.
F. Expiration of appeal decision. Unless otherwise specified by the Zoning
Board of Appeals/Planning Board, a decision on any appeal for a
variance or special use permit shall expire if the applicant fails to obtain
any necessary building permit or comply with the conditions of said
authorization permit within six months from the date of authorization.
A. Interpretations; requirements; decisions; determinations. The Board of
Appeals may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the
order, requirement, decision, interpretation or determination appealed
§ 200-44 PALMYRA CODE § 200-45
178:302
from and shall make such order, requirement, decision, interpretation
or determination as in its opinion ought to have been made in the
matter by the Zoning Administrator and to that end shall have all the
powers of the Zoning Administrator from whose order, requirement, or
decision the appeal is taken.
B. Use variances.
(1) The Board of Appeals, on appeal from the decision or determination
of the Zoning Administrator, shall have the power to grant use
variances, authorizing a use that otherwise would not be allowed or
would be prohibited by the terms of this chapter. No such use
variance shall be granted by the Board of Appeals without a
showing by the applicant that applicable zoning regulations and
restrictions have caused unnecessary hardship. In order to prove
such unnecessary hardship, the applicant shall demonstrate to the
Board of Appeals that:
(a) Under the applicable zoning regulations, the applicant cannot
realize a reasonable return, provided that lack of return is
substantial as demonstrated by competent financial evidence;
(b) That the alleged hardship relating to the property in question
is unique, and does not apply to a substantial portion of the
district or neighborhood;
(c) That the requested use variance, if granted, will not alter the
essential character of the neighborhood; and
(d) That the alleged hardship has not been self-created.
(2) The Board of Appeals, in the granting of use variances, shall grant
the minimum variance that it shall deem necessary and adequate to
address the unnecessary hardship proven by the applicant, and at
the same time preserve and protect the character of the
neighborhood and the health, safety, and welfare of the community.
C. Area variances.
(1) The Board of Appeals shall have the power, upon an appeal from a
decision or determination of law, to grant area variances from the
area or dimensional requirements of this chapter. In making its
determination, the Board of Appeals shall take into consideration
the benefit to the applicant if the variance is granted, as weighed
against the detriment to the health, safety, and welfare of the
neighborhood or community by such grant. In making such
determination the Board shall also consider:
(a) Whether an undesirable change will be produced in the
character of the neighborhood or a detriment to nearby
properties will be created by the granting of the area variance;
§ 200-45 TREES § 200-45
178:303
(b) Whether the benefit sought by the applicant can be achieved
by some method feasible for the applicant to pursue, other
than an area variance;
(c) Whether the requested area variance is substantial;
(d) Whether the proposed variance will have an adverse effect or
impact on the physical or environmental conditions in the
neighborhood or district; and
(e) Whether the alleged difficulty was self-created, which
consideration shall be relevant to the decision of the Board of
Appeals, but shall not necessarily preclude the granting of the
area variance.
(2) The Board of Appeals, in the granting of area variances, shall grant
the minimum variance that it shall deem necessary and adequate
and at the same time preserve and protect the character of the
neighborhood and the health, safety, and welfare of the community.
D. Special permit. In any instance in which the Board of Appeals is
required to consider a proposed special permit, it shall not authorize or
approve the proposed permit unless and until it shall first:
(1) Assure itself that the proposed permit is consistent with the spirit,
purpose or intent of this chapter and any additional statement of
purpose applying to the particular section.
(2) Determine that the proposed permit meets the conditions
prescribed therefor in the text of this chapter.
(3) Determine that the proposed special permit will not substantially
detract from the use of adjoining property and require such
provisions as may be necessary to afford adequate protection for
such adjoining property.
(4) Determine that the streets serving the use are adequate for the
requirements, and conditions of traffic will not be created that will
adversely affect the neighborhood.
(5) Consider the effect of the proposed change upon the logical,
efficient and economical provision of public services and facilities
such as public water, sewers, police and fire protection, public
schools and streets.
(6) Determine that any special standards set forth herein for the
particular use are fully met.79
(7) Impose such conditions, in addition to those required, as are
necessary to assure that the intent of this chapter is complied with,
which conditions may include but are not limited to harmonious
79.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 200-45 PALMYRA CODE § 200-45
178:304
§ 200-46. Establishment of Planning Board.
design of buildings; planting and its maintenance as a sight or
sound screen; the minimizing of noxious, offensive or hazardous
elements; adequate standards of parking, lighting and sanitation.
A. Establishment. The Planning Board, heretofore created pursuant to the
provisions of the Village Law, is hereby continued as now constituted.
Each member of the Planning Board shall continue to hold office to the
expiration of his present term, at which time the Village Board of
Trustees shall appoint a successor as provided by law.
B. Powers and duties. The Planning Board shall have the following powers
and duties:
(1) To prepare and from time to time change the master or
comprehensive plan for the development of the Village.
(2) To review proposals to approve or disapprove the laying out,
closing off, abandonment or changes in lines of streets, highways
and public areas and to make recommendations to the Village
Board of Trustees.
(3) To make investigations, maps, reports and recommendations
relating to the planning and development of the Village as it seems
desirable. This shall include but not be limited to changes in
boundaries of districts, recommended changes in the provisions of
this chapter, other land use and development matters of
importance to the Planning Board, and to act on any matter lawfully
referred to it by the Village Board of Trustees.
(4) To review, act on or provide advisory reports as specified by this
chapter.
(5) To make referrals to other Village Departments, Boards and/or
officials to request advisory opinions to assist the Planning Board in
making decisions which affect the development of the Village.
(6) All such powers as are conferred upon Village Planning Boards by
the provisions of the Village Law as now or hereafter in effect.
C. Appointment of members. The members and Chairperson shall be
appointed as provided in § 7-718 of the Village Law. The Board of
Trustees may provide for compensation to be paid to experts, clerks,
and a secretary, and provide for such other expenses as may be
necessary and proper, not exceeding the appropriation made by the
Board of Trustees for such purpose.
D. Terms of office. Members of the Planning Board shall be appointed for
five-year terms. The Chairperson shall be appointed annually. No
member of the Planning Board may serve more than two consecutive
terms of five years each.
§ 200-45 TREES § 200-46
178:305
§ 200-47. Alternate members of Zoning Board of Appeals/Planning
Board. [Amended 8-1-2016 by L.L. No. 2-2016]
E. Vacancy in office. Appointments to fill vacancies shall be for the
unexpired term of the member or members whose term or terms
become vacant. Appointments to fill such vacancies shall be made in the
same manner as the original appointment.
F. Vacature of office. A member of the Board of Appeals who has failed to
attend three consecutive meetings, unless excused by the Chairman or
Acting Chairman, shall be considered to have vacated his office unless
otherwise ordered by the Board of Trustees.
A. The positions of alternate members of the Zoning Board of Appeals/
Planning Board are hereby established. There shall be two such
alternate members for the Zoning Board of Appeals/Planning Board.
B. The alternate members of the Zoning Board of Appeals/Planning Board
shall serve in the absence, unavailability, or inability of a regular
member of such Board to serve. Copies of notices sent to regular
members of the Zoning Board of Appeals/Planning Board shall be sent
to the respective alternate members. When a meeting of the Zoning
Board of Appeals/Planning Board shall be duly noticed and called for
discussion, if it shall become apparent that a regular member(s) of the
Board will be unable to hear and deliberate upon an application, then
the alternate member(s) of the Board, at the call of the Chairman or
Clerk of the Board, shall be duly authorized to hear any application, to
deliberate and to vote with full force and effect as if duly appointed a
regular member of the Board.
C. The alternate members of the Zoning Board of Appeals/Planning Board
shall be appointed for the same term and in the same manner as
regularly appointed members.
§ 200-46 PALMYRA CODE § 200-47
178:306
ARTICLE VIII
Administration and Enforcement
§ 200-48. Zoning Administrator.
§ 200-49. Permits required.
A. Office and appointment. There is hereby established the position of
Zoning Administrator who shall be appointed by the Village Board and
may hold other appointive office. In the event a Code Enforcement
Officer is appointed, he may be given the additional function of Zoning
Administrator.
B. Powers and duties. It shall be the duty of the Zoning Administrator to
enforce the provisions of this chapter. He shall examine all applications
for permits and issue permits only for construction and uses which are
in accordance with the requirements of this chapter and also other
ordinances, rules and regulations of the Village of Palmyra enforced at
the time of application, and also in compliance with such laws of the
State of New York enforced at the time of application. Permits for
construction and uses which require approval from the Board of
Appeals shall be issued only upon written order of that Board.
C. Records and reports. The Zoning Administrator shall maintain in the
office of the Village Clerk records and files of all applications for
permits with any accompanying plans and documents, which shall be
matters of public record. He shall make such reports as the Village
Board requires and shall report to the Village Board on all problems
which arise in the administration of this chapter.
D. Entry. The Zoning Administrator shall have the right at any reasonable
time to enter any premises in the presence of the owner or occupant for
the purpose of making an inspection of the buildings or premises
necessary to carry out his duties.
E. Stop-work order. Whenever any construction work is being done
contrary to the provisions of this chapter or a permit issued under it,
the Zoning Administrator may order the work stopped by notice in
writing served on anyone engaged in such work or causing such work to
be done and such person shall forthwith stop such work until notice is
received in writing that such stop-work order has been withdrawn or
canceled.
A. Building permit.
(1) Permit requirement. A building permit shall be required prior to
the erection, alteration of or addition to any building or structure.
It shall be unlawful for any person to commence work requiring a
building permit until such permit has been duly issued. In the event
a Building Code is adopted,80 only one permit shall be required
which shall cover both the Building Code and this chapter and shall
§ 200-48 TREES § 200-49
178:307
be issued by the Code Enforcement Officer only after approval of
the Zoning Administrator, if a separate official.
(2) Application. Every application for a building permit shall be
accompanied by a plan drawn to scale showing:
(a) The lot upon which the building is proposed to be erected or on
which an existing building is to be modified, together with lot
dimensions, street address and map numbers; the names of
abutting streets; the location, dimensions and uses of any
existing buildings on the lot.
(b) The location, dimensions and proposed use of buildings for
which the permit is sought.
(c) North point and scale.
(3) Review and action. No building permit shall be issued until the
Zoning Administrator has certified that the proposed action
complies with the provisions of this chapter. In the event an
application is denied by the Zoning Administrator, he shall issue to
the applicant a written statement containing the reasons therefor.
In granting a building permit, the Zoning Administrator or Code
Enforcement Officer shall provide a building permit card to be
posted on the site, which card shall be posted on the site of
operation, visible from the street and open to inspection during the
entire time of the prosecution of the work.
(4) Time limit. If the work for which a building permit has been issued
is not commenced within 60 days after the date of issuance of the
permit, or if commenced, ceases for a period exceeding 60 days or
such longer period as the Zoning Administrator may authorize in
writing in recognition of the occurrence of conditions unforeseen at
the time of issuance of the permit, the permit shall expire and a
new permit shall be required before such work is commenced.
B. Certificate of occupancy for a building where a building permit is
required.
(1) Requirement. No buildings or structures hereafter erected, altered
or extended shall be used or changed in use until a certificate of
occupancy shall have been issued by the Zoning Administrator,
except that no occupancy permit shall be required for a permitted
sign three square feet or less in area. A certificate of occupancy,
however, shall not be required for the occupancy or use of a one- or
two-family dwelling and its accessory structures when located in a
residential use district and used exclusively for residence purposes.
(2) Application. Application for a certificate of occupancy shall be
made coincidentally with the application for a building permit and
80.Editor's Note: See Ch. 76, Building Construction and Fire Prevention.
§ 200-49 PALMYRA CODE § 200-49
178:308
§ 200-50. Notice of violations.
no building permit shall be issued until application shall have been
made for a certificate of occupancy.
(3) Review and action. Request for the issuance of a certificate of
occupancy may be made upon completion of the erection, addition
or alteration of any building, structure or portion thereof. If the
Zoning Administrator finds that the construction has been
completed, or has progressed to an extent that compliance with the
terms of the building permit is finally ascertainable, finds that the
building may be safely occupied and finds that provisions for use
are in conformity with the provisions of this chapter, he shall issue
the certificate of occupancy. If the request is denied, the Zoning
Administrator shall issue to the applicant a written statement
containing the reasons for such denial.
C. Certificate of occupancy for use of land.
(1) Requirement. No land or existing building shall be put to a different
type of use than that existing immediately previous until a
certificate of occupancy has been granted by the Zoning
Administrator, nor shall a nonconforming use be changed or
extended without a certificate of occupancy.
(2) Application. Written application to the Zoning Administrator shall
be made in the same manner as for use of a building.
(3) Review and action. If the Zoning Administrator shall find that a
requested use for which a certificate is requested is in conformity
with the provision of this chapter and all other applicable laws and
ordinances, he shall issue such permit. If such request is denied,
the Zoning Administrator shall issue to the applicant a written
statement containing the reasons for such denial.
D. Fees. A schedule of fees shall be adopted by the Village Board and shall
be available from the Village Code Enforcement Officer and the Village
Clerk. [Amended 4-15-1991 by L.L. No. 1-1991]
E. Duplicate copies. Duplicate copies of every certificate of occupancy and
of every use permit shall be kept in the office of the Village Clerk.
Copies shall be furnished on request and upon payment of copying costs
to any person having a proprietary or tenancy interest in the building or
land affected.
A. The use or occupancy of any building, structure or land contrary to the
terms herein and any other applicable laws or ordinances shall not be
permitted. Upon notice of such unlawful use or occupancy, the Zoning
Administrator shall serve a written notice of such violation upon the
owner, agent, occupant, contractor or builder to cease or desist such
unlawful use or occupancy or remove said violation within five days
from the date of such notice. In the event that such violation is removed
§ 200-49 TREES § 200-50
178:309
§ 200-51. Penalties for offenses.81
For any and every violation of the provisions of this chapter, the owner,
general agent, contractor, lessee or tenant of any entire building or entire
premises where such violation has been committed or shall exist, and
the general agent, architect, building contractor or any other person who
knowingly commits, takes part or assists in any such violation or who
maintains any building or premises in which any such violation shall exist,
shall be liable, upon conviction thereof, to a penalty not exceeding $250 or
a term of imprisonment not exceeding 15 days, or both, for each and every
offense; and whenever such person shall have been notified by the Zoning
Administrator by service of a summons in a prosecution, or in any other way,
that he is committing such violation of this chapter, each day that he shall
continue such violation after such notification shall constitute a separate
offense punishable by a like fine or penalty. Such fines or penalties shall be
collected as like fines or penalties are now by law collected.
§ 200-52. Remedies.
In case any building, sign or structure is erected, constructed,
reconstructed, altered, repaired, converted or maintained, or any building,
sign, structure or land is used, or any hedge, tree, shrub or other growth
is maintained in violation of this chapter, or of any regulations pursuant
hereto, in addition to other remedies provided by law, any appropriate
action or procedure may be instituted or taken to prevent such unlawful
erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, repair, conversion,
maintenance or use, to restrain, correct or abate such violation, to prevent
the occupancy of said building, structure or land or to prevent any illegal
act, conduct, business or use in or about such premises.
§ 200-53. Other remedies not excluded.
The various remedies provided herein are cumulative and not exclusive and
shall be in addition to any other remedies provided by law.
within said period to the satisfaction of said officer serving such notice,
he shall note the same accordingly upon his copy of such notice.
B. In the event such violation or unlawful use is not terminated within said
period, the occupancy or use permit for such property shall become null
and void and a new certificate of occupancy or use permit shall be
required for any further occupancy or use of such building or land.
C. In the opinion of the Zoning Administrator, if such violation or unlawful
use tends to jeopardize health, life or limb, he may order its use to cease
and desist forthwith and any further use or occupancy of such property
shall be unlawful until the violation or unlawful use is terminated and a
new certificate of occupancy or use permit is issued.
81.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 200-50 PALMYRA CODE § 200-53
178:310
ARTICLE IX
Amendments
§ 200-54. Application.
The Village Board may from time to time amend, supplement, change,
modify or repeal the provisions of this chapter, including the Zoning Map
attached thereto, in the manner specified in the Village Law.
§ 200-55. Initiation of proposed amendment. [Amended 8-1-2016 by
L.L. No. 2-2016]
A proposed amendment to or change of this chapter shall be initiated by
motion of the Village Board, or by recommendation of the Zoning Board of
Appeals/Planning Board to the Village Board, or by petition of a property
owner to the Village Board in accordance with § 200-56 of this chapter.
§ 200-56. Petition to Village Board.
§ 200-57. through § 200-59. (Reserved)82
A. A petition for amendment to this chapter may be presented to the
Village Board by the owner of any property in the Village who desires a
change in the provisions of this chapter affecting his property and/or
related property.
B. If the petition shall be accompanied by a proposed amendment to this
chapter, it shall be written in a form compatible with the form of this
chapter, and satisfactory to the Village Attorney.
C. If the change is in the Zoning Map, the amendment shall read as
follows:
“The Zoning District Map of the Village of Palmyra attached to the
Village Zoning Local Law and made a part thereof by § 200-11 of that
local law is hereby amended by changing from (list present zoning
district or districts) to (list proposed zoning district) of that land
described as follows...
Such land being further described and bounded by a map
accompanying this amendment and hereby made a part thereof.”
D. The required map shall be drawn to scale and shall give the scale and
North point, the names of all streets and, for areas smaller than a block
in a zoning change, all property lines as shown on the Village Tax Map.
Existing zoning shall be shown in blue and proposed changes outlined
and designated in red.
82.Editor’s Note: Former §§ 200-57 through 200-59, Report by Planning Board, Contents of
report and recommendation, and Public hearing by Village Board, were repealed 8-1-2016
by L.L. No. 2-2016.
§ 200-54 TREES § 200-60
178:311
§ 200-60. Advertising costs.
When a proposed amendment or change is initiated by petition pursuant
to § 200-56, the expenses of advertising notice of a public hearing of such
proposal shall be paid by the petitioner.
§ 200-61. Content of notice of public hearing.
Each notice of public hearing shall state the general nature of the proposed
amendment or change as well as the text thereof. In the instance of map
change, the map need not be published but shall be placed on display at the
office of the Village Clerk and suitable reference made thereto in the notice.
§ 200-62. Zoning of annexed areas. [Amended 8-1-2016 by L.L. No.
2-2016]
Any area annexed to the Village after the effective date of this chapter shall,
immediately upon such annexation, automatically be classified as an R-1
District until a zoning plan for said area has been adopted by the Village
Board. The Zoning Board of Appeals/Planning Board shall recommend to
the Village Board appropriate zoning for the annexed area within not more
than two months after the effective date of annexation. During the period
between the date of annexation and until the Board has adopted said zoning
plan, the provisions of Article VII, relative to nonconformity termination,
shall not apply to any such annexed area.
§ 200-60 PALMYRA CODE § 200-62
178:312
Appendix
Chapter A205
INVESTMENT POLICY
§ A205-1. Scope.
This investment policy applies to all moneys and other financial resources
available for investment on its own behalf or on behalf of any other entity or
individual.
§ A205-2. Objectives.
The primary objectives of the local government’s investment activities are,
in priority order:
§ A205-3. Delegation of authority.
The governing board’s responsibility for administration of the investment
program is delegated to the Village Treasurer who shall establish written
procedures for the operation of the investment program consistent with
these investment guidelines. Such procedures shall include an adequate
internal control structure to provide a satisfactory level of accountability
based on a database or records incorporating description and amounts
of investments, transaction dates, and other relevant information, and
regulate the activities of subordinate employees.
§ A205-4. Prudence.
A. To conform with all applicable federal, state and other legal
requirements (legal);
B. To adequately safeguard principal (safety);
C. To provide sufficient liquidity to meet all operating requirements
(liquidity); and
D. To obtain a reasonable rate of return (yield).
A. All participants in the investment process shall seek to act responsibly
as custodians of the public trust and shall avoid any transaction that
might impair public confidence in the Village of Palmyra to govern
effectively.
B. Investments shall be made with judgment and care, under
circumstances then prevailing, which persons of prudence, discretion
and intelligence exercise in the management of their own affairs, not
for speculation, but for investment, considering the safety of the
principal as well as the probable income to be derived.
§ 200-62 INVESTMENT POLICY § A205-4
A205:313
§ A205-5. Diversification.
It is the policy of the Village of Palmyra to diversify its deposits and
investments by financial institution, by investment instrument, and by
maturing scheduling.
§ A205-6. Internal controls.
§ A205-7. Designation of depositaries.
The banks and trust companies authorized for the deposit of moneys up to
the maximum amounts are:
Depository Name Maximum Amount Officer
HSBC None
M&T None
Ontario National None
Chase Manhattan None
Charter One None
§ A205-8. Collateralizing of deposits.
In accordance with the provisions of General Municipal Law (GML) § 10,
all deposits of the Village of Palmyra, including certificates of deposit and
special time deposits, in excess of the amount insured under the provisions
of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act shall be secured:
C. All participants involved in the investment process shall refrain from
personal business activity that could conflict with proper execution of
the investment program, or which could impair their ability to make
impartial investment decisions.
A. It is the policy of the Village of Palmyra for all moneys collected by any
officer or employee of the government to transfer those funds to the
Village Treasurer within three days of deposit, or within the time period
specified in law, whichever is shorter.
B. The Treasurer is responsible for establishing and maintaining an
internal control structure to provide reasonable, but not absolute,
assurance that deposits and investments are safeguarded against loss
from unauthorized use or disposition, that transactions are executed in
accordance with management’s authorization and recorded properly,
and are managed in compliance with applicable laws and regulations.
A. By a pledge of “eligible securities” with an aggregate “market value” as
provided by GML § 10, equal to the aggregate amount of deposits from
the categories designated in Appendix A to the policy.
B. By an eligible “irrevocable letter of credit” issued by a qualified bank
other than the bank with the deposits in favor of the government for a
§ A205-4 PALMYRA CODE § A205-8
A205:314
§ A205-9. Safekeeping and collateralization.
§ A205-10. Permitted investments.
term not to exceed 90 days with an aggregate value equal to 140%
of the aggregate amount of deposits and the agreed upon interest,
if any. A qualified bank is one whose commercial paper and other
unsecured short-term debt obligations are rated in one of the three
highest rating categories by a least one nationally recognized statistical
rating organization or by a bank that is in compliance with applicable
federal minimum risk-based capital requirements.
C. By an eligible surety bond payable to the government for an amount at
least equal to 100% of the aggregate amount of deposits and the agreed
upon interest, if any, executed by an insurance company authorized to
do business in New York State, whose claims-paying ability is rated in
the highest rating category by at least two nationally recognized
statistical rating organizations.
A. Eligible securities used for collateralizing deposits shall be held by the
depositary bank or trust company subject to security and custodial
agreements.
B. The security agreement shall provide that eligible securities are being
pledged to secure local government deposits together with agreed upon
interest, if any, and any costs or expenses arising our of the collection of
such deposits upon default. It shall also provide the conditions under
which the securities may be sold, presented for payment, substituted or
released and the events which will enable the local government to
exercise its rights against the pledged securities. In the event that the
securities are not registered or inscribed in the name of the local
government, such securities shall be delivered in a form suitable for
transfer or with an assignment in blank to the Village of Palmyra or its
custodial bank.
C. The custodial agreement shall provide that securities held by the bank
or trust company, or agent of and custodian for the local government,
will be kept separate and apart from the general assets of the custodial
bank or trust company and will not, in any circumstances, be
commingled with or become part of the backing for any other deposit or
other liabilities. The agreement should also describe that the custodian
shall confirm the receipt, substitution or release of the securities. The
agreement shall provide for the frequency of revaluation of eligible
securities and for the substitution of securities when a change in the
rating of a security may cause ineligibility. Such an agreement shall
include all provisions necessary to provide the local government a
perfected interest in the securities.
A. As authorized by General Municipal Law § 11, the Village of Palmyra
authorizes the Treasurer to invest moneys not required for immediate
§ A205-8 INVESTMENT POLICY § A205-10
A205:315
§ A205-11. Authorized financial institutions and dealers.
The Village of Palmyra shall maintain a list of financial institutions and
dealers approved for investment purposes and establish appropriate limits
to the amount of investments which can be made with each financial
institution or dealer. All financial institutions with which the local
government conducts business must be credit worthy. Banks shall provide
their most recent Consolidated Report of Condition (Call Report) at the
request of the Village of Palmyra. Security dealers not affiliated with a
bank shall be required to be classified as reporting dealers affiliated with
the New York Federal Reserve Bank, as primary dealers. The Treasurer is
responsible for evaluating the financial position and maintaining a listing of
proposed depositaries, trading partners and custodians. Such listing shall
be evaluated annually.
expenditure for terms not to exceed its projected cash-flow needs in the
following types of investments:
(1) Special time deposit accounts;
(2) Certificates of deposit;
(3) Obligations of the United States of America;
(4) Obligations guaranteed by agencies of the United States of
America where the payment of principal and interest are
guaranteed by the United States of America;
(5) Obligations of the State of New York;
(6) Obligations issued pursuant to Local Finance Law (LFL) § 24.00
(with approval of the State Comptroller) by any municipality, school
district or district corporation other than the Village of Palmyra;
(7) Obligations of public authorities, public housing authorities, urban
renewal agencies and industrial development agencies where the
general state statutes governing such entities or whose specific
enabling legislation authorizes such investments;
(8) Certificates of participation (COPs) issued pursuant to GML
§ 109-b;
(9) Obligations of this local government, but only with moneys in a
reserve fund established pursuant to GML § 6-c, 6-d, 6-e, 6-g, 6-h,
6-j, 6-k, 6-l, 6-m, or 6-n.
B. All investment obligations shall be payable or redeemable at the option
of the Village of Palmyra within such times as the proceeds will be
needed to meet expenditures for purposes for which the moneys were
provided and, in the case of obligations purchased with the proceeds of
bonds or notes, shall be payable or redeemable at the option of the
Village of Palmyra within two years of the date of purchase.
§ A205-10 PALMYRA CODE § A205-12
A205:316
§ A205-12. Purchase of investments.
§ A205-13. Repurchase agreements.
Repurchase agreements are authorized subject to the following restrictions:
A. The Treasurer is authorized to contract for the purchase of
investments:
(1) Directly, including through a repurchase agreement, from an
authorized trading partner.
(2) By participation in a cooperative investment program with another
authorized governmental entity pursuant to Article 5G of the
General Municipal Law where such program meets all the
requirements set forth in the Office of the State Comptroller
Opinion No. 88-46, and the specific program has been authorized
by the governing board.
(3) By utilizing an ongoing investment program with an authorized
trading partner pursuant to a contract authorized by the governing
board.
B. All purchased obligations, unless registered or inscribed in the name of
the local government, shall be purchased through, delivered to and held
in the custody of a bank or trust company. Such obligations shall be
purchased, sold, or presented for redemption or payment by such bank
or trust company only in accordance with prior written authorization
from the officer authorized to make the investment. All such
transactions shall be confirmed in writing to the Village of Palmyra by
the bank or trust company. Any obligation held in the custody of a bank
or trust company shall be held pursuant to a written custodial
agreement as described in General Municipal Law § 10.
C. The custodial agreement shall provide that securities held by the bank
or trust company, as agent of and custodian for the local government,
will be kept separate and apart from the general assets of the custodial
bank or trust company and will not, in any circumstances, be
commingled with or become part of the backing for any other deposit or
liabilities. The agreement shall describe how the custodian shall
confirm the receipt and release of the securities. Such agreement shall
include all provisions necessary to provide the local government a
perfected interest in the securities.
A. All repurchase agreements must be entered into subject to a master
repurchase agreement.
B. Trading partners are limited to banks or trust companies authorized to
do business in New York State and primary reporting dealers.
§ A205-12 INVESTMENT POLICY § A205-13
A205:317
§ A205-14. Schedule of Eligible Securities.
The Schedule of Eligible Securities is as follows:
Chapter A206
PROCUREMENT POLICY
§ A206-1. Adoption and intent.
The Village of Palmyra does hereby adopt the following procurement policy
which is intended to apply to all goods and services which are not required
by law to be publicly bid.
§ A206-2. Procurement procedure.
C. Obligations shall be limited to obligations of the United States of
America and obligations guaranteed by agencies of the United States of
America.
D. No substitution of securities will be allowed.
E. The custodian shall be a party other than the trading partner.
A. Obligations issued, or fully insured or guaranteed as to the payment of
principal and interest, by the United States of America, an agency
thereof or a United States government sponsored corporation.
B. Obligations issued or fully insured or guaranteed by the State of New
York, obligations issued by a municipal corporation, school district or
district corporation of such State or obligations of any public benefit
corporation which under a specific state statute may be accepted as
security for deposit of public moneys.
C. Obligations issued by states (other than the State of New York) of the
United States rated in one of the three highest rating categories by a
least one nationally recognized statistical rating corporation.
A. Price quotation and proposal requirements.
(1) Purchases.
Estimated Amount of
Purchase
Method
$250 to $999 2 verbal quotes
$1,000 to $9,999 3 written/fax quotations or written
request for proposals
(2) Public works contracts.
§ A205-13 PALMYRA CODE § A206-2
A206:318
§ A206-3. Procedures waived under certain circumstances.
Pursuant to General Municipal Law § 104-b, Subdivision 2f, the
procurement policy may contain circumstances when, or types of
procurements for which, in the sole discretion of the governing body, the
solicitation of alternative proposals or quotations will not be in the best
interest of the municipality. In the following circumstances it may not be in
the best interests of the Village of Palmyra to solicit quotations or document
the basis for not accepting the lowest bid:
Estimated Amount of
Public Works Contract
Method
$250 to $999 2 verbal quotes
$1,000 to $4,999 2 written/fax quotes
$5,000 to $19,999 3 written/fax quotes or written
request for proposals
B. A good faith effort shall be made to obtain the required number of
proposals or quotations. If the purchaser is unable to obtain the
required number of proposals or quotations, the purchaser will
document the attempt made at obtaining the proposals. In no event
shall the failure to obtain the proposals be a bar to the procurement.
C. Documentation is required of each action taken in connection with each
procurement.
D. Documentation and an explanation is required whenever a contract is
awarded to other than the lowest responsible offeror. This
documentation will include an explanation of how the award will
achieve savings or how the offeror was not responsible. A
determination that the offeror is not responsible shall be made by the
purchaser and may not be challenged under any circumstances.
A. Professional services or service requiring special or technical skill,
training or expertise. The individual or company must be chosen based
on accountability, reliability, responsibility, skill, education and training,
judgement, integrity, and moral worth. These qualifications are not
necessarily found in the individual or company that offers the lowest
price and the nature of these services are such that they do not readily
lend themselves to competitive procurement procedures. In
determining whether a service fits into this category the Board of
Trustees shall take into consideration the following guidelines: whether
the services are subject to state licensing or testing requirements;
whether substantial formal education or training is a necessary
prerequisite to the performance of the services; and whether the
services require a personal relationship between the individual and
municipal officials. Professional or technical services shall include but
not be limited to the following: services of an attorney, services of a
physician, technical services of an engineer engaged to prepare plans,
§ A206-2 PROCUREMENT POLICY § A206-3
A206:319
§ A206-4. When effective.
The policy shall go in effect immediately.
Disposition List
Chapter DL
DISPOSITION LIST
§ DL-1. Disposition of legislation.
L.L. No. Adoption
Date
Subject Disposition
2-2003 11-17-2003 Adoption of Code Ch. 1, Art. I
maps and estimates; securing insurance coverage and/or services of an
insurance broker; services of a certified public accountant, investment
management services; printing services involving extensive writing,
editing or art work, management of municipality owned property; and
computer software or programming services for customized programs,
or services involved in substantial modification and customizing of
prepackaged software.
B. Emergency purchases pursuant to § 103, Subdivision 4, of the General
Municipal Law. Due to the nature of this exception, these goods or
services must be purchased immediately and a delay in order to seek
alternate proposals may threaten the life, health, safety or welfare of
the residents. This does not preclude alternate proposals if time
permits.
C. Purchases of surplus and secondhand goods. If alternate proposals are
required, the Village is precluded from purchasing surplus and
secondhand goods at auctions or through specific advertised sources
where the best prices are usually obtained. It is also difficult to try to
compare prices of used goods and a lower price may indicate an older
product.
D. Goods and services under $250. The time and documentation required
to purchase through this policy may be more costly than the item itself
and would therefore not be in the best interests of the taxpayer. In
addition, it is not likely that such de minimis contracts would be
awarded based on favoritism.
E. Purchase orders. Goods and services valued at $250 or above will be
contracted for through the use of a purchase order. A blanket purchase
order will be issued for no more than $500.
§ A206-3 PALMYRA CODE § DL-1
A206:320
L.L. No. Adoption
Date
Subject Disposition
1-2004 11-5-2004 Streets and
sidewalks
amendment
Ch. 163
2-2004 12-6-2004 Snowplowing
amendment
Ch. 155
3-2004 12-20-2004 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 183
1-2005 4-4-2005 Zoning Map
amendment
NCM
2-2005 6-6-2005 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 183
3-2005 7-5-2005 Zoning Map
amendment
NCM
4-2005 5-16-2005 Zoning amendment Ch. 200
5-2005 5-16-2005 Water amendment Ch. 189
6-2005 10-3-2005 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 183
1-2006 12-18-2006 Nuisance abatement Ch. 130
1-2007 10-15-2007 Water: rules,
regulations and rates
amendment
Ch. 189, Art. I
2-2007 10-15-2007 Parks and recreations
areas: use of parks
and cemeteries
Ch. 132, Art. I
3-2007 10-15-2007 Noise amendment Ch. 127
4-2007 11-5-2007 Historic preservation Repealed by L.L. No.
3-2013
1-2008 8-4-2008 Animals Ch. 67
2-2008 8-4-2008 Curfew Ch. 84
3-2008 8-4-2008 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 183
4-2008 9-15-2008 Sex offenders Ch. 149
1-2009 10-21-2009 Yard and property
maintenance
Repealed by L.L. No.
1-2014
1-2010 2-15-2010 Water: rules,
regulations and rates
amendment
Ch. 189, Art. I
2-2010 2-15-2010 Sewer rents and
charges amendment
Ch. 144
§ DL-1 PROCUREMENT POLICY § DL-1
A206:321
L.L. No. Adoption
Date
Subject Disposition
3-2010 8-2-2010 Sidewalk
construction and
maintenance
amendment
Ch. 163, Art. I
4-2010 5-3-2010 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 183
1-2011 8-1-2011 Zoning amendment Ch. 200
2-2011 8-1-2011 Zoning Map
amendment
NCM
3-2011 9-19-2011 Protests and
demonstrations:
funeral-related
events
Ch. 141, Art. I
4-2011 11-7-2011 2012 tax levy limit
override
NCM
1-2013 1-21-2013 2013 tax levy limit
override
NCM
2-2013 2-18-2013 Building construction
and fire prevention
Ch. 76
3-2013 3-18-2013 Historic preservation Ch. 116
4-2013 12-2-2013 Water: rules,
regulations and rates
amendment
Ch. 189, Art. I
5-2013 12-2-2013 Peddling and
soliciting amendment
Ch. 139
6-2013 12-16-2013 2014 tax levy limit
override
NCM
1-2014 9-22-2014 Yard and property
maintenance
Ch. 194
1-2016 8-1-2016 Subdivision of Land
Amendment
Ch. 167
2-2016 8-1-2016 Zoning Amendment Ch. 200
1-2017 3-20-2017 Streets and
Sidewalks: Sidewalk
Construction and
Maintenance
Amendment
Ch. 163, Art. I
2-2017 3-20-2017 Building
Construction and
Fire Prevention
Amendment
Ch. 76
§ DL-1 PALMYRA CODE § DL-1
A206:322
L.L. No. Adoption
Date
Subject Disposition
3-2017 9-1-2017 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 183
4-2017 10-16-2017 Peddling and
Soliciting
Amendment
Ch. 139
5-2017 10-16-2017 Building
Construction and
Fire Prevention
Amendment
Ch. 76
§ DL-1 PROCUREMENT POLICY § DL-1
A206:323