7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 1/441
Village of Rockville Centre, NY
Wednesday, July 15, 2020
Part I, Administrative Legislation
Chapter 1. General Provisions
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Trustees of the Village of Rockville Centre as indicated in article
histories. Amendments noted where applicable.]
Article I. Definitions and Penalties
[Adopted 2-22-1971 by L.L. No. 1-1971 as Ch. 1, Art. I, of the 1971 Code]
§ 1-1. Definitions, interpretation and word usage.
In the definition of terms and construction of all ordinances hereby enacted or hereafter to be enacted
the following rules shall be observed unless excluded by express provision, or when to do so would be
inconsistent with manifest intent of the ordinance:
GENDER
The words of the masculine gender include the feminine and the neuter gender and may refer to a
corporation, or to a board or other body or assembly of persons, and when the sense so indicates,
the words of the neuter gender may refer to any gender.
HERETOFORE and HEREAFTER
Each of the terms "heretofore" and "hereafter" in any provision of the ordinance relates to the time
such provision takes effect.
PERSON
Includes a corporation, an association, partnership and firm, as well as an individual, unless such
extension is clearly inapplicable.
SINGULAR and PLURAL WORDS
Words in the singular number include the plural, and in the plural number include the singular.
TENSES
The words of the present tense shall include the future.
VILLAGE and VILLAGE OFFICIALS
Whenever used without modifying words or qualifications "Village" shall mean the Incorporated
Village of Rockville Centre, New York, and the designation of any board, commission, committee,
official or agency shall mean that of the Incorporated Village of Rockville Centre, New York. The
words "Village Board" or "Board of Trustees" shall mean the Board of Trustees of the Incorporated
Village of Rockville Centre.
§ 1-2. Penalties for offenses.
[Amended 5-18-2009 by L.L. No. 1-2009]
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 2/441
A.
B.
Unless otherwise provided by law or by specific enactment, the penalty for each violation of any
provision of this Code shall be a sum of money not exceeding $250, imprisonment for a period not
to exceed 15 days, or both such fine and imprisonment. In addition, unless otherwise provided by
law or by specific enactment, a violation of any provision of this Code shall constitute an offense.
Notwithstanding the provisions of Subsection A of this section, the monetary penalty for each
violation of the following provisions of this Code shall be as provided hereinafter, in the place and
stead of any lesser monetary penalty provided for any such violation and in addition to any other
penalty which may be provided by law:
[Amended 5-3-2010 by L.L. No. 6-2010]
Code Section Violation
Maximum Fine
(for each day on which a
violation occurs)
§ 115-1 and 115-14 Violation of Code or New York
State Uniform Fire Prevention
and Building Code or
International Building Code
$1,500
§ 115-8 Alteration without permit $750
§ 115-12 Stop-work order $1,000
§ 115-15 Unlicensed plumber $750
§ 115-23(b) Failure to obey $1,500
§ 132-2 Dangerous buildings $1,500
§ 160-1 Unlicensed electrician $750
Chapter 212 Illicit discharge into storm
sewer; other violations of
chapter
Not less than $500, nor more
than $1,000, for the first
violation in a six-month period;
not less than $1,000, nor more
than $2,500, for each
subsequent violation within six
months
Chapter 219 Landscape/gardeners $350, except $500 for violations
of 219-8(C)
§ 247-8 Indecent acts, displays or
signs
$750
Chapter 261 Property maintenance $350
§ 283-5 Depositing material on
property without permit – for
all dumpsters, scaffolding,
piles of bricks or dirt
$900
§ 283-11 Litter – all garbage and debris $350
§ 283-21 Garbage out at improper hours
or uncovered
$350 for two-family residential
properties; $750 for all other
properties other than one-family
residential properties
§ 283-37 Unlicensed private waste
hauler
$900
§ 287-1 Sidewalk work without permit $400
§ 287-25 and 26 Road opening without permit $1,500
§ 291-1 Improper swimming pool –
permit or fencing
$1,000
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 3/441
[1]
Code Section Violation
Maximum Fine
(for each day on which a
violation occurs)
§ 335-9 Commercial signs without
permit
$400
§ 335-11 No posting bills $350
§ 335-15 Improper real estate sign –
permit, location
$250
Article II. Adoption of Code
[Adopted 3-10-2003 by L.L. No. 5-2003[1]]
Editor's Note: This local law was originally adopted as Art. I, §§ 1-1 through 1-13, but was redesignated
as Art. II, §§ 1-3 through 1-15, to maintain the style of the Code.
§ 1-3. Legislative intent.
In accordance with Subdivision 3 of § 20 of the Municipal Home Rule Law, the local laws and
ordinances of the Village of Rockville Centre, as codified by General Code Publishers Corp., and
consisting of Chapters 1 through 340, together with an Appendix, shall be known collectively as the
"Code of the Village of Rockville Centre," hereafter termed the "Code." Wherever reference is made in
any of the local laws and ordinances contained in the "Code of the Village of Rockville Centre" to any
other local law or ordinance appearing in said Code, such reference shall be changed to the
appropriate chapter title, chapter number, article number or section number appearing in the Code as if
such local law or ordinance had been formally amended to so read.
§ 1-4. Continuation of existing provisions.
The provisions of the Code, insofar as they are substantively the same as those of local laws and
ordinances in force immediately prior to the enactment of the Code by this local law are intended as a
continuation of such local laws and ordinances and not as new enactments, and the effectiveness of
such provisions shall date from the date of adoption of the prior local law or ordinance. All such
provisions are hereby continued in full force and effect and are hereby reaffirmed as to their adoption
by the Board of Trustees of the Village of Rockville Centre, and it is the intention of said Board that
each such provision contained within the Code is hereby reaffirmed as it appears in said Code. Only
such provisions of former local laws and ordinances as are omitted from this Code shall be deemed
repealed or abrogated by the provisions of § 1-5 below.
§ 1-5. Repeal of enactments not included in Code.
All local laws and ordinances of a general and permanent nature of the Village of Rockville Centre in
force on the date of the adoption of this local law and not contained in such Code or recognized and
continued in force by reference therein are hereby repealed from and after the effective date of this
local law.
§ 1-6. Enactments saved from repeal; matters not affected.
The repeal of local laws and ordinances provided for in § 1-5 of this local law shall not affect the
following classes of local laws, ordinances, rights and obligations, which are hereby expressly saved
from repeal:
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 4/441
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
I.
J.
K.
L.
M.
N.
Any right or liability established, accrued or incurred under any legislative provision of the Village
of Rockville Centre prior to the effective date of this local law or any action or proceeding brought
for the enforcement of such right or liability.
Any offense or act committed or done before the effective date of this local law in violation of any
legislative provision of the Village of Rockville Centre or any penalty, punishment or forfeiture
which may result therefrom.
Any prosecution, indictment, action, suit or other proceeding pending or any judgment rendered
prior to the effective date of this local law, brought pursuant to any legislative provision of the
Village of Rockville Centre.
Any agreement entered into or any franchise, license, right, easement or privilege heretofore
granted or conferred by the Village of Rockville Centre.
Any local law or ordinance of the Village of Rockville Centre providing for the laying out, opening,
altering, widening, relocating, straightening, establishing grade, changing name, improvement,
acceptance or vacation of any right-of-way, easement, street, road, highway, park or other public
place within the Village of Rockville Centre or any portion thereof.
Any local law or ordinance of the Village of Rockville Centre appropriating money or transferring
funds, promising or guaranteeing the payment of money or authorizing the issuance and delivery
of any bond of the Village of Rockville Centre or other instruments or evidence of the Village's
indebtedness.
Local laws or ordinances authorizing the purchase, sale, lease or transfer of property, or any
lawful contract, agreement or obligation.
The levy or imposition of special assessments or charges.
The annexation or dedication of property.
Any local law or ordinance relating to salaries and compensation.
Any local law or ordinance amending the Zoning Map.
Any local law or ordinance relating to or establishing a pension plan or pension fund for municipal
employees.
Any local law or ordinance or portion of a local law or ordinance establishing a specific fee amount
for any license, permit or service obtained from the Village.
Any local law adopted subsequent to 10-21-2002.
§ 1-7. Severability.
If any clause, sentence, paragraph, section, article, chapter or part of this local law or of any local law
or ordinance included in this Code now or through supplementation shall be adjudged by any court of
competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such judgment shall not affect, impair or invalidate the remainder
thereof but shall be confined in its operation to the clause, sentence, paragraph, section, article,
chapter or part thereof directly involved in the controversy in which such judgment shall have been
rendered.
§ 1-8. Copy of Code on file.
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 5/441
A copy of the Code, in loose-leaf form, has been filed in the office of the Village Clerk of the Village of
Rockville Centre and shall remain there for use and examination by the public until final action is taken
on this local law; and, if this local law shall be adopted, such copy shall be certified by the Village Clerk
of the Village of Rockville Centre by impressing thereon the Seal of the Village of Rockville Centre, and
such certified copy shall remain on file in the office of said Village Clerk to be made available to
persons desiring to examine the same during all times while said Code is in effect. The enactment and
publication of this local law, coupled with the availability of a copy of the Code for inspection by the
public, shall be deemed, held and considered to be due and legal publication of all provisions of the
Code for all purposes.
§ 1-9. Amendments to Code.
Any and all additions, deletions, amendments or supplements to any of the local laws and ordinances
known collectively as the "Code of the Village of Rockville Centre" or any new local laws or resolutions,
when enacted or adopted in such form as to indicate the intention of the Board of Trustees to be a part
thereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated into such Code so that reference to the Code shall be
understood and intended to include such additions, deletions, amendments or supplements. Whenever
such additions, deletions, amendments or supplements to the Code shall be enacted or adopted, they
shall thereafter be printed and, as provided hereunder, inserted in the loose-leaf book containing said
Code as amendments and supplements thereto. Nothing contained in this local law shall affect the
status of any local law or ordinance contained herein, and such local laws or ordinances may be
amended, deleted or changed from time to time as the Board of Trustees deems desirable.
§ 1-10. Code book to be kept up-to-date.
It shall be the duty of the Village Clerk to keep up-to-date the certified copy of the book containing the
Code of the Village of Rockville Centre required to be filed in the office of the Village Clerk for use by
the public. All changes in said Code and all local laws adopted by the Board of Trustees subsequent to
the enactment of this local law in such form as to indicate the intention of said Board to be a part of
said Code shall, when finally enacted or adopted, be included therein by temporary attachment of
copies of such changes, local laws or resolutions until such changes, local laws or resolutions are
printed as supplements to said Code book, at which time such supplements shall be inserted therein.
§ 1-11. Sale of Code book; supplementation.
Copies of the Code, or any chapter or portion of it, may be purchased from the Village Clerk, or an
authorized agent of the Clerk, upon the payment of a fee to be set by resolution of the Board of
Trustees. The Clerk may also arrange for procedures for the periodic supplementation of the Code.
§ 1-12. Penalties for tampering with Code.
Any person who, without authorization from the Village Clerk, changes or amends, by additions or
deletions, any part or portion of the Code of the Village of Rockville Centre or who alters or tampers
with such Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the legislation of the Village of Rockville
Centre to be misrepresented thereby or who violates any other provision of this local law shall be guilty
of an offense and shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a fine of not more than $250 or
imprisonment for a term of not more than 15 days, or both.
§ 1-13. Changes in previously adopted legislation; new
provisions.
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 6/441
[1]
In compiling and preparing the local laws and ordinances for publication as the Code of the Village of
Rockville Centre, no changes in the meaning or intent of such local laws and ordinances have been
made, except as provided for in Subsection B hereof.[1] In addition, certain grammatical changes and
other minor nonsubstantive changes were made in one or more of said pieces of legislation. It is the
intention of the Board of Trustees that all such changes be adopted as part of the Code as if the local
laws and ordinances had been previously formally amended to read as such.
Editor's Note: No substantive changes were made in the compilation and preparation of the Code,
hence there is no Subsection B.
§ 1-14. Incorporation of provisions into Code.
The provisions of this local law are hereby made Article II of Chapter 1 of the Code of the Village of
Rockville Centre, such local law to be entitled "General Provisions, Article I, Adoption of Code," and
the sections of this local law shall be numbered §§ 1-3 to 1-15, inclusive.
§ 1-15. When effective.
This local law shall take effect immediately upon filing with the Secretary of State of the State of New
York.
Chapter 4. Appearance Tickets
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Trustees of the Village of Rockville Centre 10-23-1978 by L.L. No.
9-1978; amended in its entirety 1-7-1980 by L.L. No. 1-1980. Subsequent amendments noted where
applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Police Commissioner — See Ch. 45.
§ 4-1. Issuance by public servants.
The Police Commissioner of the Village of Rockville Centre, the Superintendent of Public Works, the
Superintendent of Buildings or the Superintendent of Utilities of the Village of Rockville Centre is
hereby empowered to promulgate rules and regulations for carrying into effect or fully administering the
provisions of any local law and to authorize the issuance of appearance tickets by a public servant,
who, by virtue of office, title or position, is authorized or required to enforce any statute, local law,
ordinance, rule or regulation relating to parking, licensing of occupations or businesses, fire prevention
and safety, health and sanitation and building, zoning and planning; provided, however, that a peace
officer may be authorized to issue an appearance ticket relating to enforcement of any statute, local
law, ordinance, rule or regulation affecting the public health, safety and welfare.
Chapter 10. Comptroller
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Trustees of the Village of Rockville Centre 2-22-1971 by L.L. No.
1-1971 as Ch. 37 of the 1971 Code. Amended in its entirety 6-8-2010 by L.L. No. 12-2010; subsequent
amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Taxation — See Ch. 294.
§ 10-1. Office established.
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 7/441
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
The Board of Trustees hereby finds that for the purpose of establishing a greater degree of efficiency,
management and control of Village fiscal affairs, in accordance with sound accounting practices, the
office of Comptroller shall be established and the duties of such office shall be specified.
§ 10-2. Comptroller to be an additional Village officer.
In addition to the Village officers specified in § 3-301 of the Village Law, Rockville Centre shall have a
Comptroller, and the Comptroller shall be a public officer.
§ 10-3. Residence of Comptroller.
Pursuant to Village Law § 3-300, Subdivision 2(a), the Comptroller need not be a resident of the
Village of Rockville Centre, but must be a resident of the County of Nassau, State of New York.
§ 10-4. Terms of office.
The term of office of the Comptroller shall be one official year.
§ 10-5. Duties.
The duties of the Comptroller shall be as follows:
The powers of the Board of Trustees with respect to auditing and allowing or refusing claims
against the Village shall devolve upon and be exercised by the Comptroller; provided, however,
that without the prior consent of the Board of Trustees the Comptroller shall not be authorized to
compromise or pay any property tax claim in which the reduction in assessed value would be 25%
or more for a single-family or two-family residential property or 10% or more for any other property,
and/or pay any refund of property taxes in the amount of $10,000 or more.
The Comptroller, when required by resolution of the Board of Trustees, shall countersign all
checks to be signed by the Treasurer.
The Comptroller shall be the accounting officer of the Village and shall maintain the accounts in
conformance with all applicable laws of the State of New York.
In addition to keeping detailed accounting records, the Comptroller shall prepare and file in the
office of the Village Clerk the annual report required by Village Law § 4-408(e) and shall prepare
and submit the report required by § 30 of the General Municipal Law.
The Comptroller shall prepare and submit from time to time such additional fiscal reports as the
Board of Trustees may require.
The Comptroller shall examine and audit all books, accounts and records pertaining to fiscal
affairs of all Village officers, departments and administrative units; he shall also prescribe the
forms of books, accounts and records to be maintained.
§ 10-6. Performance by Comptroller to relieve audit by Board of
Trustees.
The performance by the Comptroller of the powers specified in § 10-5 hereto shall relieve the Board of
Trustees from performing the audit required by § 4-408 of the Village Law.
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 8/441
[1]
§ 10-7. Comptroller to audit and order paid all claims.
Subject to the provisions of § 10-5A hereof, the Comptroller of the Village of Rockville Centre shall
audit and order paid all claims against the Village, and the Comptroller shall transmit such order
directly to the Village Treasurer and shall retain a duplicate thereof in his office.
§ 10-8. Construal.
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to relieve the Treasurer of the duties imposed by § 4-408 of
the Village Law in relation to the receipt, deposit and disbursement of moneys.
Chapter 13. Continuity of Government
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Trustees of the Village of Rockville Centre 2-22-1971 by L.L. No.
1-1971 as Ch. 38 of the 1971 Code.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Comptroller — See Ch. 10.
Salaries and compensation — See Ch. 58.
Fire prevention and control — See Ch. 185.
§ 13-1. Intent.
The New York State Defense Emergency Act, in Section 29-a thereof, authorizes political subdivisions
of the state to provide for the continuity of their governments in the event of an actual or imminent
attack upon the United States by an enemy or foreign nation. The General Municipal Law, in Section
60 thereof,[1] authorizes political subdivisions to provide for the continuity of their governments in the
event of other public disasters, catastrophes or emergencies. Based on the authority contained in such
laws, this chapter is adopted so that on such occasions the government of the Village of Rockville
Centre, New York, may continue to function properly and efficiently under emergency circumstances.
Editor's Note: Section 60 was repealed by L. 1978, c. 640, effective 4-1-1979. See now Executive Law
§ 27.
§ 13-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall mean and include:
ATTACK
Any attack, actual or imminent, or series of attacks, by an enemy or foreign nation upon the United
States, causing, or which may cause, substantial damage or injury to civilian property or persons
in the United States in any manner by sabotage or by the use of bombs, shellfire, or nuclear,
radiological, chemical, bacteriological or biological means, or other weapons or processes.
DULY AUTHORIZED DEPUTY
A person authorized to perform all the powers and duties of a public office in the event the office is
vacant or at such times as it lacks administration due to the death, absence or disability of the
incumbent officer, where such authorization is provided pursuant to the provisions of any general,
special or local law other than this chapter.
EMERGENCY INTERIM SUCCESSOR
A person designated pursuant to this chapter for possible temporary succession to the powers and
duties, but not the office, of a village officer in the event that neither such officer nor any duly
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 9/441
A.
B.
A.
B.
C.
D.
authorized deputy is able, due to death, absence from the Village or other physical, mental or legal
reasons, to perform the powers and duties of the office.
PUBLIC DISASTER
A disaster, catastrophe or emergency, actual or imminent, of such unusual proportions or extent
that:
A substantial number of the residents of the Village of Rockville Centre either sustain injury,
become ill, are infected with disease, have their lives imperiled, are killed or die as the result
of injury, disease or exposure, or the property of a substantial number of such residents is
imperiled, damaged or destroyed, and
It is necessary and essential in the interest of public safety, health and welfare that the
continuity of the government of the Village of Rockville Centre be assured in order that it be
enabled to function properly and efficiently and to exercise its essential powers in meeting
emergency conditions.
Such disasters, catastrophes and emergencies may include, but shall not be limited to,
conflagrations, explosions, earthquakes or other convulsions of nature, floods, tidal
waves, pestilence, riots, insurrections, storms, prolonged failure of electric power or
essential transportation services, or any incident or occurrence which causes or
threatens to cause danger to life, health or property from exposure to noxious materials
or radiation.
§ 13-3. Designation, status, qualifications, terms of office of
emergency interim successors.
Elective officers. Within 30 days following the effective date of this chapter, and thereafter within
30 days after first entering upon the duties of his office, each elective officer shall, in addition to
any duly authorized deputy, designate such number of emergency interim successors to the
powers and duties of his office and specify their rank in order of succession after any duly
authorized deputy so that there will be not less than three duly authorized deputies or emergency
interim successors, or combination thereof, to perform the powers and duties of the office.
Appointive officers. Each officer or body of officers empowered by law to appoint officers shall,
within the time specified in Subdivision A of this section, in addition to any duly authorized deputy,
designate for each such appointive officer such number of emergency interim successors to such
officers and specify their rank in order of succession after any duly authorized deputy so that there
will be not less than three duly authorized deputies or emergency interim successors, or
combination thereof, for each such officer. Where such a body of officers consists of members
having overlapping terms, such body of officers shall review and, as necessary, revise the
previous designations of emergency interim successors by such board within 30 days after a new
member elected or appointed to such body of officers first enters upon the duties of his office as a
member of such body of officers.
Review of designations. The incumbent in the case of those elective officers specified in
Subdivision A of this section, and the appointing officer or body of officers specified in Subdivision
B of this section, shall from time to time review and, as necessary, promptly revise the
designations of emergency interim successors to insure that at all times there are at least three
duly authorized deputies or emergency interim successors, or combination thereof, for each
elective and appointive officer of the Village.
Qualifications. No person shall be designated to, nor serve as, an emergency interim successor
unless he is legally qualified to hold the office of the person to whose powers and duties he is
designated to succeed.
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 10/441
E.
F.
Status of emergency interim successor. A person designated as an emergency interim successor
shall hold that designation at the pleasure of the designator, and such a designation shall remain
effective until replaced by another by the authorized designator.
Compensation. An emergency interim successor shall serve without salary, unless otherwise
provided by local law. He shall, however, be entitled to reimbursement for actual expenses
necessarily incurred in the performance of his powers and duties.
§ 13-4. Assumption of powers and duties.
Assumption of powers and duties of officer by emergency interim successor. If, in the event of attack or
a public disaster, an officer described in § 13-3A or B of this chapter or his duly authorized deputy, if
any, is unable, due to death, absence from the Village or other physical, mental or legal reasons, to
perform the powers and duties of the office, the emergency interim successor of such officer highest in
rank in order of succession who is able to perform the powers and duties of the office shall, except for
the power and duty to discharge or replace duly authorized deputies and emergency interim
successors of such officer, perform the powers and duties of such officer. An emergency interim
successor shall perform such powers and duties only until such time as the lawful incumbent officer or
his duly authorized deputy, if any (or an emergency interim successor higher in rank in order of
succession), resumes the office or undertakes the performance of the powers and duties of the office,
as the case may be, or until, where an actual vacancy exists, a successor is duly elected or appointed
to fill such vacancy and qualifies as provided by law.
§ 13-5. Recording and publication of designations.
The name, address and rank in order of succession of each duly authorized deputy and emergency
interim successor shall be filed with the Village Clerk, and each designation, replacement or change in
order of succession of any emergency interim successor shall become effective when the designator
files with such Clerk the successor's name, address and rank in order of succession. Such Clerk shall
keep an up-to-date file of all such data regarding duly authorized deputies and emergency interim
successors and the same shall be open to public inspection. The Clerk shall notify, in writing, each
designated person of the filing of his name as an emergency interim successor and his rank in order of
succession, and also shall notify, in writing, any person previously designated who is replaced or
whose place in order of succession is changed.
§ 13-6. Qualification for taking office.
At the time of their designation or as soon thereafter as possible, emergency interim successors shall
take such oath and do such other things, if any, as may be required to qualify them to perform the
powers and duties of the office to which they may succeed.
§ 13-7. Quorum and vote requirements.
In the event of an attack or a public disaster the Mayor, or his duly authorized deputy or emergency
interim successor performing his powers and duties, may suspend quorum requirements for the Board
of Trustees. If quorum requirements are suspended, any local law, ordinance, resolution or other action
requiring enactment, adoption or approval by an affirmative vote of a specified proportion of members
may be enacted, adopted or approved by the affirmative vote of the specified proportion of those voting
thereon.
Chapter 16. Defense and Indemnification
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 11/441
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Trustees of the Village of Rockville Centre 6-16-1980 by L.L. No.
3-1980; amended in its entirety 4-2-2001 by L.L. No. 6-2001. Subsequent amendments noted where
applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Comptroller — See Ch. 10.
Dog enumerators — See Ch. 19.
Officers and employees — See Ch. 35.
Police Commissioner — See Ch. 45.
Police Department — See Ch. 48.
§ 16-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to confer the benefits of § 18 of Article 2 of the Public Officers Law of
New York State upon covered persons, as defined in § 16-2 of Chapter 16 of the Code of the Village of
Rockville Centre. The intent of this legislation is to defend and indemnify covered persons, who have
been named in administrative or judicial proceedings. The further intent is to provide supplemental
defense and indemnification for punitive and exemplary damages. as well as compensatory damages.
The duty shall not arise where the injury or damage resulted from the intentional wrongdoing or
maliciousness on the part of a covered person.
§ 16-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEEDING
A proceeding before a governmental agency charged with administering and implementing
legislation.
CIVIL ACTION
An action brought to enforce, redress or protect private rights, including suits at equity and at law.
COVERED PERSON
Any person holding a position by election, appointment or employment in the service of the
Incorporated Village of Rockville Centre, whether or not compensated, but shall not include any
independent contractor. The term "covered person" shall include a former employee, his estate or
judicially appointed personal representative. The benefits of this chapter shall inure only to
"covered persons" as defined herein and shall not enlarge or diminish the rights of any other party.
DEPARTMENT HEAD
The head of a department of the Incorporated Village of Rockville Centre.
JUDICIAL PROCEEDING
Any proceeding in which judicial action is invoked and taken in a legally constituted court.
TRUSTEE-LIAISON
A member of the Village Board of Trustees appointed by the Mayor to act as liaison to a particular
village department.
VILLAGE
The Incorporated Village of Rockville Centre.
VILLAGE ATTORNEY
The Village Attorney for the Incorporated Village of Rockville Centre.
VILLAGE COMPTROLLER
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 12/441
(1)
(2)
A.
B.
A person or persons performing the functions of comptroller or auditor for the Incorporated Village
of Rockville Centre.
§ 16-3. Village to provide for defense of covered person.
The Village shall provide for the defense of the covered person in any common law or statutory
civil action, administrative proceeding or judicial proceeding in any state or federal court arising
out of any alleged act or omission which occurred or is alleged in the complaint to have occurred
while the covered person was acting within the scope of his or her employment with the Village or
duties; provided, however, that the duty of the Village to defend or save harmless shall be
conditioned upon:
Delivery to the Village Attorney at his or her offices by the covered person of the original or a
copy of any summons, complaint, process, notice, demand or pleading within five days after
he or she is served with such document. Such delivery shall be deemed a request by the
covered person that the Village provide for his or her defense pursuant to this chapter.
The full cooperation of the covered person in the defense of such action or proceeding and in
defense of any action or proceeding against the Village based upon the same act or omission
and in the prosecution of any appeal.
This duty to provide for a defense shall not arise where such civil action or administrative or
judicial proceeding is brought by or on behalf of the Village, but shall arise where such civil action
or administrative or judicial proceeding arises as a cross-claim or counterclaim in response to a
civil action or administrative or judicial proceeding brought by or on behalf of the Village.
§ 16-4. Representation by Village Attorney or private counsel.
Subject to the conditions set forth in § 16-3 of this chapter, the covered person shall be entitled to
representation by private counsel of his or her choice in any civil action or administrative or judicial
proceeding whenever the Village Attorney determines, based upon his or her investigation and review
of the facts and circumstances of the case, that representation by the Village Attorney would be
inappropriate or whenever a court of competent jurisdiction, upon appropriate motion or by a special
proceeding, determines that a conflict of interest exists and that the covered person is entitled to be
represented by private counsel of his or her choice. The Village Attorney shall notify the covered
person in writing of such determination that the covered person is entitled to be represented by private
counsel.
§ 16-5. Fees and expenses.
The Village Attorney may require, as a condition to payment of the fees and expenses of such
representation by private counsel, that appropriate groups of such covered persons be represented by
the same counsel. If the covered person or group of covered persons is entitled to representation by
private counsel under the provisions of § 16-4 of this chapter, the Village Attorney shall so certify to the
Village Comptroller. Reasonable attorneys' fees and litigation expenses shall be paid by the Village to
such private counsel from time to time during the pendency of the civil action or proceeding, subject to
certification that the covered person is entitled to representation under the terms and conditions of
§ 16-4 of this chapter by the head of the department or office in which such covered person is
employed and upon the audit and warrant of the Village Comptroller. Any dispute with respect to
representation of multiple covered persons by a single counsel or the amount of litigation expenses or
the reasonableness of attorneys' fees shall be resolved by the court upon motion or by way of a
special proceeding.
§ 16-6. Authority of Village Attorney.
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 13/441
A.
B.
C.
D.
Where the covered person delivers process and a request for a defense to the Village Attorney, as
required by § 16-3 of this chapter, the Village Attorney shall take the necessary steps, including the
retention of private counsel, under the terms and conditions therein provided, on behalf of the covered
person to avoid entry of a default judgment pending resolution of any question pertaining to the
obligation to provide for a defense.
§ 16-7. Judgments and settlements.
The Village shall indemnify and save harmless its covered persons in the amount of any judgment
rendered against such covered person by any state or federal court or by any administrative
agency or in the amount of any settlement of a claim, including punitive or exemplary damages,
that arise out of a negligent or other act committed while in the proper discharge of his or her
duties and within the scope of his or her employment. The duty to indemnify and save harmless
prescribed by this section shall not arise where the injury or damage resulted from intentional
wrongdoing on the part of the covered person.
Such proper discharge of duty and scope of employment shall be determined by a majority vote of
a panel consisting of the Village Administrator, the Trustee-liaison to the department in which the
covered person is employed and the department head. In the absence of or unavailability of a
Trustee-liaison, the Mayor shall sit on the panel. In the event that the covered person that is the
subject of the proper discharge and scope of employment determination is the department head,
or in the event that the covered person does not belong to a department, the Village Attorney shall
sit as the third member of the panel. In the event that the Village Administrator and the Village
Attorney are the covered persons that are the subject of the proper discharge and scope of
employment determination, the panel shall consist of the Board of Trustees.
Any proposed settlement, which may be subject to indemnification, must be presented to the
Board of Trustees by the Village Attorney, or by the covered person or his private counsel, within
three business days of the covered person's receipt of the settlement offer. The Board of Trustees,
by a majority of no less than three votes, may approve any proposed settlement. In addition, the
Board of Trustees, in its discretion, may initiate settlement discussions as to any pending civil
action, administrative proceeding or judicial proceeding, or direct the Village Attorney or the
Village Administrator to initiate such settlement discussions. Further, after consultation with the
Village Attorney, the Board of Trustees may propose a settlement to the adversarial party. The
Village Attorney shall review such proposed settlement as to form and amount, and shall give his
or her approval if, in his or her judgment, the settlement is in the best interest of the Village.
Nothing in this section shall be construed to authorize the Village to indemnify or save harmless a
covered person with respect to a settlement not so reviewed and approved by the Village Attorney.
Upon entry of a final judgment against the covered person or upon the execution of a settlement of
the claim, the covered person shall cause to be served a copy of such judgment or settlement,
personally or by certified or registered mail within 30 days of the date of entry or settlement, upon
the head of the department or office in which he or she is employed or under whom he or she
served, and, if not inconsistent with the provisions of this section, such judgment or settlement
shall be certified for payment by such head of the department or office. If the Board of Trustees of
the Incorporated Village of Rockville Centre concurs in such certification, the judgment or
settlement shall be paid upon the audit and warrant of the Village Comptroller. The Board of
Trustees shall not concur in the certification of a judgment that it has determined to appeal.
§ 16-8. Damages, fines and penalties.
Nothing in this chapter shall authorize the Village to indemnify or save harmless a covered person with
respect to money recovered from a covered person pursuant to Article 7-A of the State Finance Law.
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 14/441
A.
B.
C.
D.
§ 16-9. Construal of provisions.
The provisions of this chapter shall not be construed to affect, alter or repeal any provision of the
Workers' Compensation Law.
This chapter shall not in any way affect the obligation of any claimant to give notice to the Village
under any provision of law.
The provisions of this chapter shall not be construed to impair, alter, limit or modify the rights and
obligations of any insurer under any policy of insurance.
Except as otherwise specifically provided in this chapter, the provisions of this chapter shall not be
construed in any way to impair, alter, limit, modify, abrogate or restrict any immunity available to or
conferred upon any unit, entity, officer or covered person of the Village or any right to defense
and/or indemnification provided for any governmental officer or covered person by, in accordance
with or by reason of any other provisions of state or federal statutory or common law.
§ 16-10. Applicability.
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all actions and proceedings pending upon the effective
date hereof or hereafter instituted.
§ 16-11. Liability for costs.
The Board of Trustees of the Incorporated Village of Rockville Centre hereby accepts the applicability
of § 18 of the Public Officers Law for the Incorporated Village of Rockville Centre and agrees that the
Village shall be liable for costs incurred under the provisions of § 18 of the Public Officers Law and
confers upon the officers and employees of the Village the benefits of § 18 of such law. Such benefits
shall supplement and be available in addition to defense and indemnification protection conferred by
the other provisions of this chapter.
§ 16-12. Police officers.
Notwithstanding the provisions of any other law, code or charter, the Village shall provide for the
defense of any civil action, administrative proceeding or judicial proceeding brought in any state or
federal court against a duly appointed police officer of the Rockville Centre Police Department and
shall indemnify and save harmless such police officer from any judgment of a court of competent
jurisdiction whenever such action, proceeding or judgment is for damages, including punitive or
exemplary damages, arising out of a negligent act or other tort of such police officer committed while in
the proper discharge of his or her duties and within the scope of his or her employment. Such proper
discharge and scope shall be determined by a majority vote of a panel consisting of the Commissioner
of Police, the Village Administrator and the Trustee-liaison to the Police Department.
Chapter 19. Dog Enumerators
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Trustees of the Village of Rockville Centre 2-22-1971 by L.L. No.
1-1971 as Ch. 41 of the 1971 Code. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Animals — See Ch. 87.
Noise— See Ch. 232.
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 15/441
[1]
§ 19-1. Appointment of dog enumerators.
[Amended 10-7-1974 by L.L. No. 3-1974; 10-26-2010 by L.L. No. 14-2010[1]]
The Village Board of Trustees may, from time to time, appoint one or more dog control officers to assist
within the Village with the control of dogs and enforcement of the Village’s dog licensing laws. The
persons so appointed may ascertain by due inquiry the names of owners of dogs kept or harbored in
such Village.
Editor’s Note: This local law also provided for an effective date of 1-1-2011.
§ 19-2. Remaining provisions to remain in full force and effect.
Except as herein modified, the provisions of said Section 108 of the Agriculture and Markets Law shall
remain in full force and effect with respect to the preparation of a list of the persons in the Village of
Rockville Centre owning and harboring dogs.
Chapter 24. Fire Department
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Trustees of the Village of Rockville Centre as indicated in article
histories. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Police Department — See Ch. 48.
Fire prevention and control — See Ch. 185.
Article I. Election of Members
[Adopted 12-17-2007 by L.L. No. 9-2007]
§ 24-1. Election of members of fire companies.
New York Village Law § 10-1006, Subdivision 2, is hereby amended and superseded in the Village of
Rockville Centre to read as follows:
"2. The Board of Fire Commissioners shall appoint residents of the Village as the volunteer members
of any newly organized fire company. Thereafter, the fire company may elect other eligible persons,
including Village officers, as volunteer members. The election shall be pursuant to the bylaws, if any,
of the fire company; otherwise, by a three-fourths vote of the members of the fire company present
and voting at a regular or special meeting thereof. The membership of any person so elected shall
become effective when approved by the Mayor, unless such approval by the Mayor is disapproved by
resolution of the board of fire commissioners within 30 days thereafter; or approved by resolution of
the Board of Fire Commissioners, whichever shall first occur. Membership shall be deemed to have
been approved pursuant to this subdivision in the event that no action is taken by the Mayor or Board
of Fire Commissioners within 40 days after service of written notice of election to membership shall
have been made by the secretary of the fire company upon the Village clerk, either personally or by
mail."
Chapter 30. Local Laws, Adoption of
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Trustees of the Village of Rockville Centre 5-1-2014 by L.L. No. 5-
2014.[1] Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 16/441
[1]
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
Ordinances, When to take effect — See Ch. 38.
Editor’s Note: This local law also superseded former Ch. 30, Adoption of Local Laws, adopted 2-22-
1971 by L.L. No. 1-1971 as Ch. 79 of the 1971 Code and passed at referendum.
§ 30-1. Notice and conduct of public hearings.
Pursuant to authority granted in the New York Municipal Home Rule Law, the provisions of New
York Village Law § 7-706(1) are hereby superseded and amended in their application to the
Village of Rockville Centre.
Except as otherwise provided in this section, notice of public hearings for the adoption of local
laws (other than zoning laws) shall be given by publication and posting at least three days prior to
the date of commencement of such public hearing. Notice of public hearings for the adoption of
zoning laws shall be given by publication and posting at least five days prior to the date of
commencement of such public hearing.
Such notice by publication shall be given by the Village Clerk by causing the same to be published
once in the official newspaper designated for such purpose, and in any other manner required by
law. The Board of Trustees may designate one or more newspapers in place of or in addition to
the official newspaper for publication of any such notice or notices. Notice by posting shall be
given by posting at the Village Hall and in such other locations as may be customary, and at such
locations otherwise required by law, and in any other manner designated by the Board of
Trustees. The Board of Trustees also may require other notice as it may deem appropriate in any
particular case.
Notice of each such hearing, other than by publication or posting, also shall be given as required
by any other applicable law.
Each such notice shall contain the title of the proposed local law. Such notice may also include
any explanatory statement which the Village Clerk determines to be appropriate and which is in a
form approved by the Village Attorney.
Proof of publication and posting of such notice of public hearing shall be filed in the office of the
Village Clerk.
Village Law § 7-706(5) is hereby amended and superseded in its application to the Village of
Rockville Centre, and the following is enacted in its place and stead: "5. Filing. Every zoning law
and every amendment thereto (excluding any map incorporated therein) shall be entered or
incorporated by reference in the minutes of the Village Board of Trustees. The Village shall not be
required to publish a copy, summary or abstract thereof, or any map incorporated therein, in the
official newspaper, nor shall the Village be required to post a copy of such local law or amendment
together with a summary or abstract of any map incorporated therein. Such minutes shall identify
the adopted local law and any map adopted in connection with such local law or amendment."
Chapter 35. Officers and Employees
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Trustees of the Village of Rockville Centre as indicated in article
histories. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Comptroller — See Ch. 10.
Defense and indemnification — See Ch. 16.
Dog enumerators — See Ch. 19.
Police Commissioner — See Ch. 45.
Police Department — See Ch. 48.
Retirement incentive — See Ch. 55.
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 17/441
A.
B.
C.
D.
Salaries and compensation — See Ch. 58.
Article I. Residency Requirements
[Adopted 4-7-1986 by L.L. No. 1-1986]
§ 35-1. Residency requirement.
Notwithstanding the provisions of the Public Officers Law, the Board of Trustees of the Incorporated
Village of Rockville Centre may appoint or reappoint a person to the office of Treasurer, Clerk, Deputy
Treasurer, Deputy Clerk, Assessor, Administrator, Superintendent of Public Works, Utilities and
Buildings, Director of Recreation, Director of Human Services, Purchasing Agent, and Director of
Senior Center if said person resides within the Village of Rockville Centre or within the County of
Nassau, New York.
§ 35-2. (Reserved)
§ 35-3. (Reserved)
§ 35-4. (Reserved)
Article II. Criminal History Checks
[Adopted 4-28-2008 by L.L. No. 1-2008]
§ 35-5. Criminal history checks required for certain employees.
No person shall be hired by the Village of Rockville Centre as a full-time or part-time employee in
the Parks and Recreation Department, Martin Luther King Center and/or the Sandel Senior
Center, or in any other position where the Village Administrator determines that a substantial part
of the duties of such position involves contact with minor children, unless such person first has
undergone a satisfactory criminal history check performed by the New York State Division of
Criminal Justice Services.
Prior to hiring any person described in Subsection A hereof, the Village shall obtain from such
person a fingerprint card and submit the same to the New York State Division of Criminal Justice
Services, together with any applicable fee, and receive a favorable criminal history record
information report from such Division with respect to the criminal history of the person to be hired.
The Village Administrator, or the designee of the Village Administrator, shall be responsible for
reviewing the criminal history record information report.
If a prospective or probationary employee has been convicted of a felony and/or a misdemeanor,
any decision regarding such prospective or probationary employee’s fitness for a position shall be
made upon a review including, without limitation, the factors contained in New York Correction
Law §§ 751 through 753, inclusive.
Chapter 38. (Reserved)
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 18/441
A.
B.
A.
B.
[Former Ch. 38, Ordinances, When to Take Effect, adopted 2-2-1971 by L.L. No. 1-1971 as Ch. 88
of the 1971 Code, was repealed 9-8-2015 by L.L. No. 6-2015.]
Chapter 45. Police Commissioner
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Trustees of the Village of Rockville Centre 5-1-1978 by L.L. No. 6-
1978. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Police Department — See Ch. 48.
§ 45-1. Findings and declaration.
[Amended 6-20-1983 by L.L. No. 8-1983]
It is essential to good government in the Village of Rockville Centre, to the protection of its
inhabitants and of property within the Village, to the preservation of peace and good order, the
suppression of vice, the protection and preservation of public works and of the general safety,
health, comfort and welfare of the inhabitants of the Village that adequate police protection be
maintained throughout the Village. The Village has long maintained its own police force, deeming
that such ends are thereby better served. To do so in an efficient manner with a due and balanced
regard for public welfare and the cost of operation, it is essential that the Village Police
Department utilize the services of the Police Department of the County of Nassau to support and
supplement the services and protection provided by the Village-operated Police Department;
without such support and supplementation, the Village Police Department would not be able to
provide totality of the service required for Village purposes. The proper functioning of government
requires that the Police Department of the Village be operated in an efficient manner. Efficiency of
operation includes the cost of operations as well as the need to update operations to keep pace
with modern methods, to incorporate modern concepts and procedures and to coordinate them in
close cooperation with the Police Department of the county. Because of the relatively small size of
the Village Police Department, it is not possible to achieve the economies of scale enjoyed by a
large department, and, additionally, there is a loss of flexibility of assignment and utilization of
personnel. These and further factors, such as the significant and rapid increase in operating costs
stemming in large part from increases in the wage levels of police personnel, have emphasized
the urgency of the need for the adoption of modern methods. The close balancing of needs with
costs has become increasingly apparent to the Board of Trustees.
To ensure the provision of police protection needed, to promote the general welfare of the Village,
to achieve the economies needed to justify the continuation of a Police Department operated by
the Village, to further the modernization of police methods and concepts and to improve and
continue the harmony of procedures and methods of the Police Departments of the Village and the
county, it is necessary to establish the Office of Police Commissioner, having direct access to the
Mayor and Board of Trustees, to assist in the formulation of policy and to make recommendations
as to the means by which economies can be achieved and methods can be improved and to
ensure that any new policies formulated and new methods are immediately carried out and
employed.
§ 45-2. Establishment of Office.
The Office of Police Commissioner is hereby established.
The head of the Office shall be the Police Commissioner, appointed in the manner set forth in
§ 45-4 hereof.
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 19/441
C.
A.
B.
A.
B.
(1)
(2)
A.
The Police Commissioner shall have the right to designate a deputy, subject to the approval of the
Board of Trustees; provided, however, that such deputy must be a member of the Police
Department of the Village.
[Amended 3-29-2018 by L.L. No. 2-2018]
§ 45-3. Commissioner to be in addition to other officers.
In addition to the other village officers specified in the Village Law, the Village shall have a Police
Commissioner.
§ 45-4. Appointment; residence.
[Amended 2-5-1979 by L.L. No. 1-1979]
The Police Commissioner shall be appointed by the Mayor of the Village, subject to the approval
of the Board of Trustees. Once appointed, the Police Commissioner shall serve as an active
member of the Police Department. If such appointee is a member of the Police Department at the
time of appointment as Police Commissioner, he or she shall be considered as being on leave of
absence without pay from the competitive class police rank which he or she held at the time of
such appointment. In the event that his or her term of office as Police Commissioner is terminated
for any reason, he or she shall automatically revert to the rank he or she held at the time of
appointment as Police Commissioner, and he or she shall receive the pay and allowances of such
rank computed as if he or she had been continuously employed in such rank.
[Amended 11-27-2000 by L.L. No. 3-2000]
Notwithstanding the provisions of the Public Officers Law or of the Village Law, the Police
Commissioner may reside within the limits applicable to all other members of the Police
Department, even though such residence is outside the corporate limits of the Village.
[Amended 7-15-1991 by L.L. No. 6-1991]
§ 45-5. Term of office; compensation.
[Amended 3-29-2018 by L.L. No. 2-2018]
The term of office of the Police Commissioner shall be at the pleasure of the Mayor.
The annual compensation of the Police Commissioner and of the Deputy Commissioner, if any,
shall be fixed by the Mayor and Board of Trustees in the same manner as the annual
compensation of all other officers, appointed officials and department heads is fixed.
§ 45-6. Duties of Commissioner; delegated powers.
[Amended 2-5-1979 by L.L. No. 1-1979; 6-20-1983 by L.L. No. 8-1983; 3-29-2018 by L.L. No. 2-2018]
The Police Commissioner is hereby authorized and empowered:
Subject to the provisions of Village Law §§ 8-800 and 8-804, to promulgate rules and
regulations governing the operation of the Police Department and to recommend such other
rules and regulations applicable to other departments as shall be necessary or desirable for
the public safety and welfare, subject, however, to the prior approval of the Mayor and Board
of Trustees of any such rules and regulations.
To exercise supervision, control and direction over the conduct of the members of the Police
Department of the Village and of all matters relative to the operation of such Department,
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 20/441
(3)
(4)
(5)
B.
including the appointment, promotion, change in status and removal of said members;
provided, however, that the actions of the Commissioner in making any such appointment,
promotion, change in status or removal shall be reported promptly, in writing, to the Board of
Trustees, which may amend, change or modify such action within 30 days after receipt of
such report.
To prepare and submit from time to time fiscal reports relative to the operation of the Police
Department and to recommend to the Mayor and the Board such changes in the methods,
practices and procedures involved in the operation of the Department and in the procurement
of equipment necessary or desirable to promote modernization of the Department, all
consistent with its efficient operation.
To promote cooperation between the Police Department of the Village and that of the County
of Nassau, looking to better and greater utilization of county-provided services and methods
so as to eliminate unnecessary and duplicative services provided by the Village and to bring
into conformity, to the extent reasonably possible, the practices of the police departments of
the county and of the Village; to remain abreast of modern-day developments in the area of
law enforcement in the United States; to recommend the introduction of changes of methods,
procedures and equipment; and to seek out federal and state funds which may be used by
the Village to improve police procedures and operations within the Village.
To do all things necessary or desirable to promote the achievement of the ends and policies
set forth in § 45-1 hereof.
The Mayor may delegate to the Commissioner such other powers of the Mayor as set forth in the
Village Law § 4-400(1)(b) and (e) and such other powers as may be deemed by the Mayor
necessary or desirable to enable the Commissioner to effectively discharge the duties above set
forth; provided, however, that any such delegation of powers shall not in any way relieve or
absolve the Mayor from the responsibility to supervise the proper discharge by the Commissioner
of the obligations placed upon the Mayor by the Village law.
Chapter 48. Police Department
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Trustees of the Village of Rockville Centre as indicated in article
histories. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Police Commissioner — See Ch. 45.
Article I. Chief of Police
[Adopted 5-1-1978 by L.L. No. 5-1978]
§ 48-1. Abolishment of position of Chief.
The position of Chief of Police of the Police Department of the Incorporated Village of Rockville Centre
be and the same is hereby abolished.
Article II. Police Captain
[Adopted 5-1-1978 by L.L. No. 7-1978]
§ 48-2. Abolishment of position of Captain.
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 21/441
The position of Police Captain of the Police Department of the Incorporated Village of Rockville Centre
be and the same is hereby abolished.
Chapter 55. Retirement Incentive
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Trustees of the Village of Rockville Centre 7-15-1991 by L.L. No.
5-1991; amended in its entirety 7-15-1996 by L.L. No. 2-1996. Subsequent amendments noted where
applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Officers and employees — See Ch. 35.
Salaries and compensation — See Ch. 58.
§ 55-1. Program established.
The Village of Rockville Centre/Rockville Centre Community Development Agency hereby elects to
provide all its eligible employees with a retirement incentive program authorized by Chapter 30, Laws
of 1996.
§ 55-2. Commencement date.
The commencement date of the retirement incentive program shall be October 1, 1996.
§ 55-3. Open period.
The open period during which eligible employees may retire and receive the additional retirement
benefit shall be 31 days in length.
§ 55-4. Funding period.
The actuarial present value of the additional retirement benefits payable pursuant to the provisions of
this chapter shall be funded over a five-year period. The amount of the annual payment in each of the
five years shall be determined by the Actuary of the New York State and Local Employees' Retirement
System, and it shall be paid by the Village of Rockville Centre/Rockville Centre Community
Development Agency for each employee who receives the retirement benefits payable under this
chapter.
Chapter 58. Salaries and Compensation
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Trustees of the Village of Rockville Centre 4-5-2000 by L.L. No. 1-
2000. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Retirement incentive — See Ch. 55.
§ 58-1. Compensation of officers.
In the Village of Rockville Centre, Nassau County, New York, the annual compensation of the Mayor,
Trustees and Village Justices shall be established in the annual budget, in accordance with New York
State Village Law § 5-508.
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 22/441
A.
B.
C.
§ 58-2. Effective date of rate of compensation.
The rate of annual compensation of the Mayor, Trustees and Village Justices of the Village of Rockville
Centre as provided in § 58-1 shall take effect immediately upon the effective date of this chapter.
§ 58-3. Effective date.
This chapter shall take effect April 7, 2000.
Chapter 62. Traffic Violation Bureau
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Trustees of the Village of Rockville Centre 2-22-1971 by L.L. No.
1-1971 as Ch. 120 of the 1971 Code. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Bicycles — See Ch. 99.
Fire prevention and control — See Ch. 185.
Parades and processions — See Ch. 239.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 247.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 287.
Taxicabs — See Ch. 297.
Towing — See Ch. 300.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 309.
Zoning — See Ch. 340.
§ 62-1. Bureau authorized.
For the purpose of assisting the Village Justice of the Village of Rockville Centre in the disposition of
offenses in relation to traffic violations, the Village Justice thereof is hereby authorized to establish a
Traffic Violation Bureau.
§ 62-2. Designation by Village Justice.
The Traffic Violation Bureau shall be in charge of such person or persons and shall be open at such
hours as the Village Justice may designate.
§ 62-3. Rights, duties and limitations.
The Traffic Violation Bureau shall dispose of violations of traffic laws, ordinances, rules and
regulations when such offenses shall not constitute the crime of speeding, reckless driving or the
commission of a misdemeanor or felony, by permitting a person charged with an offense within the
limitations herein stated, to answer, within a specific time, at the Traffic Violation Bureau, either in
person or by written power of attorney, by paying a prescribed fine and, in writing, waiving a
hearing in court, pleading guilty to the charge and authorizing the person in charge of the Bureau
to make such plea and pay such fine in court.
Acceptance of the prescribed fine and power of attorney by the Bureau shall be deemed complete
satisfaction for the violation, and the violator shall be given a receipt which so states.
If a person charged with a traffic violation does not answer as hereinbefore prescribed within five
days after the service of the summons upon him, the Bureau shall cause a complaint to be
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 23/441
D.
E.
F.
entered against him forthwith and a warrant to be issued for his arrest and appearance before the
court.
Any person who has been guilty of three or more violations within the preceding 12 months shall
not be permitted to appear and answer to a subsequent violation at the Traffic Violation Bureau,
but must appear in court at a time specified by the Bureau.
The Traffic Violation Bureau shall not be authorized to deprive a person of his right to counsel or to
prevent him from exercising his right to appear in court to answer to, explain or defend any charge
of a violation of any traffic law, ordinance, rule or regulation.
The Village Justice shall designate the fines to be paid for first, second and third offenses which
may be satisfied at the Bureau as hereinbefore stated, provided such fines are within the limits
established for penalties for such offenses.
§ 62-4. Records to be kept.
The Traffic Violation Bureau shall keep a record of all violations of which each person has been guilty,
whether such guilt was established in court or in the Bureau, and also a record of all fines collected
and the disposition thereof. It shall also perform such other or additional duties and keep such other or
additional records as shall be prescribed by the court and/or the Board of Trustees.
Chapter 66. Village Liability
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Trustees of the Village of Rockville Centre 2-22-1971 by L.L. No.
1-1971 as Ch. 127 of the 1971 Code.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building Code — See Ch. 112.
Building drains — See Ch. 118.
Dangerous and unsafe buildings — See Ch. 122.
Moving of buildings — See Ch. 126.
Rehabilitation of buildings — See Ch. 132.
Soil and earth removal — See Ch. 280.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 287.
Excavations — See Ch. 287, Art. X.
Trees, shrubs and hedges — See Ch. 303.
Electric and water utilities — See Ch. 306.
§ 66-1. Liability of Village in certain actions.
Section 341-a of the Village Law as added thereto by Chapter 650 of the Laws of 1927, as it applies to
the Village of Rockville Centre, is hereby amended to read as follows:
Section 341-a. Liability of Village in certain actions.
No civil action shall be brought or maintained against the Village of Rockville Centre for damages or
injuries to person or property sustained in consequence of any street, highway, bridge, culvert,
sidewalk or crosswalk being defective, out of repair, unsafe, dangerous or obstructed, or in
consequence of the existence or accumulation of snow or ice upon any street, highway, bridge,
culvert, sidewalk or crosswalk, unless written notice of the existence of such condition, relating to the
particular place, had theretofore actually been given to the Board of Trustees of the Village of
Rockville Centre and there had been a failure or neglect on the part of said Village to cause such
condition to be corrected or such snow or ice to be removed or the place otherwise made reasonably
safe within a reasonable time after the receipt of such notice.
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 24/441
(1)
A.
§ 66-2. Nonapplicability.
Nothing herein contained, however, shall be held to revive any claim or cause of action now barred by
any existing requirement or statute of limitations nor to waive any existing limitation now applicable to
any claim or cause of action against the Village of Rockville Centre.
Part II, General Legislation
Chapter 74. Agent for Service of Process
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Trustees of the Village of Rockville Centre 3-6-1972 by L.L. No. 1-
1972. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alarm systems — See Ch. 81.
Building code — See Ch. 112.
Building code administration — See Ch. 115.
Dangerous and unsafe buildings — See Ch. 122.
Numbering of buildings — See Ch. 132.
Fire prevention and control — See Ch. 185.
Lodging and boarding houses — See Ch. 225.
§ 74-1. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the terms used herein are defined as follows:
ACTION or PROCEEDING
Any action or proceeding which may be instituted in the Village Court of the Village of Rockville
Centre in connection with an alleged violation of any of the ordinances of the Village of Rockville
Centre.
BUILDING
Any improved real property located within the Village of Rockville Centre which, in whole or in part,
is leased.
OWNER
Any individual or individuals, partnership or corporation, whether for profit or otherwise, in whose
name title to a building stands.
PROCESS
A summons, or any notice, mandate or other paper or process issued under any provision of the
Code of the Village of Rockville Centre.
VILLAGE CLERK
Either the Village Clerk or the Village Clerk-Treasurer or any Deputy Village Clerk or Deputy
Village Clerk-Treasurer of the Village of Rockville Centre.
§ 74-2. Designation of agent.
Every owner of a building located within the Village of Rockville Centre shall file:
A statement of designation, signed and verified, in the office of the Village Clerk setting forth
the name and address, by street and number within the Village of Rockville Centre, of an
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 25/441
(2)
B.
(1)
(2)
(3)
A.
(1)
(2)
B.
agent upon whom process may be served in any action or proceeding which may be
commenced or instituted against said owner.
A designation, signed and verified, of the Village Clerk as the agent upon whom process
against the owner may be served, and the post office address, within or without the Village of
Rockville Centre, to which the Village Clerk may mail a copy of any process against such
owner served upon the Village Clerk.
Whenever process is served upon the Village Clerk, he shall promptly mail, by certified mail,
addressed to the agent named in said designation at the address therein set forth, a true copy of
said process.
§ 74-3. Certificate of ownership.
Attached to such statement and designation shall be a certificate properly certified by the owner that
he is the owner of the apartment house with respect to which such statement or designation is filed.
§ 74-4. Posting of notice.
Every owner of a building located within the Village of Rockville Centre shall post, and keep
posted, in a conspicuous place in a main public area in said building, a notice, at least six inches
by eight inches in size, setting forth:
The name, address and telephone number of the person, firm or corporation responsible for
the management of the building.
The name, address, apartment number and telephone number of the resident superintendent
of the building.
Whether the building is heated by gas, oil or electricity and if heated by oil, the name, address
and telephone number of the supplier thereof.
Exception. In the event that a building is:
A one-family house, such notice need not be posted.
A two- or three-family house and the owner of the building resides in the building, such notice
need not be posted but the owner shall furnish each tenant with the information required in
Subsection A(3) above.
§ 74-5. Effective date.
The effective date of this chapter shall be September 1, 1972.
Chapter 78. Aircraft
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Trustees of the Village of Rockville Centre 2-22-1971 by L.L. No.
1-1971 as Ch. 4 of the 1971 Code.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Noise — See Ch. 232.
Zoning — See Ch. 340.
§ 78-1. Landing and starting without permit.
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 26/441
A.
B.
C.
No person, firm, association or corporation shall land or start any aircraft or operate any landing field
within the Village without first having obtained a permit therefor from the Board of Trustees, which shall
be issued only after adequate provisions have been made for the preserving and caring for the safety,
health, comfort and general welfare of the inhabitants of the Village.
§ 78-2. Penalties for offenses.
Any person, firm, association or corporation violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be
liable to a fine not exceeding $100, and any violation shall constitute and is hereby declared to be
disorderly conduct, and any person or persons violating this chapter shall be and is hereby declared a
disorderly person.
Chapter 81. Alarm Systems
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Trustees of the Village of Rockville Centre 9-24-1979 by L.L. No.
9-1979. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire prevention and control — See Ch. 185.
Noise — See Ch. 232.
Security gates within business districts — See Ch. 268.
§ 81-1. Legislative findings; purpose and intent.
The unregulated transmission of automatic tape alarm systems to police headquarters in the
Village has, from time to time, resulted in the overtaxing of facilities and in the impairment of the
ability of the Police and Fire Departments of the Village to respond to true emergencies.
Additionally, the continued and unnecessarily prolonged emission of sound from audible alarm
systems to the surrounding community and the difficulties and delays encountered in silencing
such systems have disturbed the rest and repose of residents of the Village and have caused
police, fire and other village personnel to spend excessive amounts of time both in the
investigation of those alarms and in the attempted silencing of them, thereby preventing the
devotion of such time to the protection and general welfare of the inhabitants of the Village.
It is necessary to the general welfare, peace and repose of the Village to protect its residents
through the establishment of controls of various types of fire, intrusion, holdup and other
emergency signals from fire and police alarm devices which require Fire Department or Police
Department response, investigation or safeguarding of property at the location of an event
reported by a signal transmitted by telephone or radio or otherwise relayed to the Police
Department or the Fire Department by an alarm device requiring investigation or other action by
any person acting in response to a signal activated by any alarm device.
The purpose and intent of this chapter is to decrease the congestion of police switchboards and to
improve the availability of police and fire equipment and personnel for the handling of emergency
situations and to reduce the number of false alarms. It is hereby declared that the noise emanating
from audible alarms which continue to sound either without the existence of an emergency
situation or after the emergency situation has ended constitutes a public nuisance.
§ 81-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
ALARM SYSTEM
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 27/441
Any alarm device which automatically dials the emergency telephone number of the police and
uses a pretaped or prerecorded message to alert the police that an emergency exists or that the
services of that department or of the Fire Department are needed. "Alarm system" shall also mean
any alarm device which automatically emits an audible, visual or other response upon the
occurrence of any hazard or emergency and is intended to alert persons outside the building to
the existence of said hazard or emergency. The term shall also include fire alarms for the
purposes of this chapter, but does not include alarm signals transmitted to privately operated
central stations.
DIAL ALARM or DIALING DEVICE
Any fire or police alarm device which is a telephone device or telephone attachment which
automatically or electronically selects a telephone line connected to police headquarters and
reproduces a prerecorded message to report a criminal act or other emergency requiring Police or
Fire Department response.
FALSE EMERGENCY ALARM
Any signal actuated by an emergency alarm to which the Police or Fire Department responds
which is not the result of a fire, holdup, robbery or other crime or emergency.
POLICE EMERGENCY NUMBER
Any telephone number designated by the Commissioner of Police as a telephone number through
which members of the public may report an emergency or request public assistance.
VILLAGE
The Incorporated Village of Rockville Centre.
§ 81-3. Dialing devices.
All dialing devices operated by automatic means shall transmit messages only to such numbers as
may be designated for that purpose by the Police Department of the Village. After six months following
the effective date of this chapter, no person shall use, operate or install any device which will, upon
activation by automatic means, initiate the dialing, calling or other connection with the Police
Department of the Village either at its regularly constituted telephone number or any other number
which may be designated by said Police Department as a police emergency number.
§ 81-4. Limitations on dialing devices.
No person shall use, operate or install any dialing device that will, upon activation, automatically dial,
call or connect with the telephone number designated by the Commissioner of Police, for the purpose
of receiving such alarm messages, more than twice for any one incident. Any system installed on or
after the effective date of this chapter must comply with this section. Preexisting installations must
comply within six months of the effective date of this chapter.
§ 81-5. Delay.
Upon the activation of a burglary (break-in) alarm, there shall be a mandatory delay of at least 15
seconds before the transmission of a signal to the Police Department to enable the user to abort the
signal in the event that it was triggered inadvertently. This delay shall not be applicable to a robbery
(holdup), fire or medical emergency alarm. Any system installed on or after the effective date of this
chapter must comply with this section. Preexisting installations must comply within six months of the
effective date of this chapter.
§ 81-6. Timing device.
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 28/441
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
A.
B.
A.
B.
C.
A.
The user of every alarm system emitting an audible, visual or other response shall, at the time such
system is installed, or within six months of the effective date of this chapter in the case of existing
systems, install or cause to be installed an automatic timing device which shall deactivate such alarm
so that it will be activated for no more than 30 minutes.
§ 81-7. Filing requirements.
The user of every alarm system maintained in the Village, except those installed in motor vehicles,
shall, within 10 days of the installation thereof or within 60 days of the enactment of this chapter,
file the following information with the Police Department of the Village:
Type of alarm system.
Street address and the nearest cross street of the building which houses the alarm.
In the case of a commercial premises, the name, address and telephone number of an
authorized representative and/or an alternative who will be able to respond when called by
police to deactivate the alarm system, if necessary.
In the case of a private residence, the name, address and telephone number of a person who
is not a resident of the private residence in question and who will be able to deactivate the
alarm system.
Such filing requirements are applicable to all alarm systems, whether the same are or are not
directly connected to the police headquarters or are merely audible alarms. Such filing must be
made within the time period specified above even though there shall have been previous
notification of the existence of such alarm systems to the Police Department or any other
department of the Village.
§ 81-8. Permit; fee; revocation.
The Village Clerk is hereby authorized to grant a revocable permit to any owner, lessee or
occupant of property located in the Village to operate, maintain, install or modify a police or fire
alarm device, and no such device shall be operated unless such permit shall have first been
issued.
The Village Clerk shall charge a fee of $10 for the issuance of any such permit.
A permit issued pursuant to this chapter may be revoked at any time or from time to time by the
Village Clerk upon the giving of 10 days' notice in writing, by registered or certified mail, to the
permittee, sent to the address shown on the permit. The violation of this chapter, following
conviction therefor, shall constitute grounds for the revocation of the permit; the failure of the
Village Clerk to revoke the permit following finding by the Village Court that there has been a
violation of this chapter shall not be deemed a waiver of the right to revoke the permit.
§ 81-9. False alarms.
[Amended 1-7-1985 by L.L. No. 2-1985; 7-11-1988 by L.L. No. 9-1988]
No person shall intentionally, negligently, carelessly or erroneously cause a false alarm. The user
of the alarm system shall be solely and wholly responsible for any false alarms. Negligent or
careless acts shall include improper maintenance and insufficient or inadequate instructions to
tenants, employees, agents, children or others concerned with or having access to the operation
of the alarm system.
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 29/441
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(1)
(2)
B. Charges.
Any owner or lessee of property having a fire or police alarm device or system of fire or police
alarm devices on his or its premises on the effective date of this chapter and any user of
services or equipment furnished by a licensee under this chapter shall pay to the town a
charge for each and every false emergency alarm to which the Police or Fire Department
responds, in each calendar year, as follows:
First two false emergencies each calendar year: no charge.
Third false emergency alarm each calendar year: $20.
Fourth and fifth false emergency alarms each calendar year: $40.
All false emergency alarms over five in each calendar year: $75.
The above charges shall be paid to the Village Clerk. Failure to pay any such charges shall
subject such owner, lessee or user to the penalty provisions of this chapter.
§ 81-10. Disconnection.
In the event that an alarm system emitting an audible, visual or other similar response shall fail to be
deactivated within the time limitation specified in § 81-6 above, the Village shall have the right to take
such action as may be necessary in order to disconnect any such alarm.
§ 81-11. Penalties for offenses.
Any person who violates the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a violation and, upon
conviction, shall be subject to such fine as may be imposed by the Village Justice in accordance with
the provisions of the Code of the Village of Rockville Centre.
Chapter 84. Amusement and Gaming Devices
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Trustees of the Village of Rockville Centre as indicated in article
histories. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Bowling alleys and pool halls — See Ch. 105.
Entertainment — See Ch. 163.
Licenses — See Ch. 222.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 247.
Article I. Gaming Devices; Gambling
[Adopted 1-20-1975 by L.L. No. 2-1975]
§ 84-1. Definitions.
The following definitions are applicable to this article:
ADVANCE GAMBLING ACTIVITY
A person "advances gambling activity" when, acting other than as a player, he engages in conduct
which materially aids any form of gambling activity. Such conduct includes but is not limited to
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 30/441
conduct directed toward the creation or establishment of the particular game, contest, scheme,
device or activity involved, toward the acquisition or maintenance of premises, paraphernalia,
equipment or apparatus therefor, toward the solicitation or inducement of persons to participate
therein, toward the actual conduct of the playing phases thereof, toward the arrangement of any of
its financial or recording phases, or toward any other phase of its operation. One "advances
gambling activity" when, having substantial proprietary or other authoritative control over premises
being used with his knowledge for purposes of gambling activity, he permits such to occur or
continue or makes no effort to prevent its occurrence or continuation.
CONTEST OF CHANCE
Any contest, game, gaming scheme or gaming device in which the outcome depends in a material
degree upon an element of chance, notwithstanding that the skill of the contestants may also be a
factor therein.
GAMBLING
A person engages in gambling when he stakes or risks something of value upon the outcome of a
contest of chance or a future contingent event not under his control or influence, upon an
agreement or understanding that he will receive something of value in the event of a certain
outcome.
GAMBLING DEVICE
Any device, machine, paraphernalia or equipment which is used or usable in the playing phases of
any gambling activity, whether such activity consists of gambling between persons or gambling by
a person involving the playing of a machine. Notwithstanding the foregoing, lottery tickets, policy
slips and other items used in the playing phases of lottery and policy schemes are not gambling
devices.
PLAYER
A person who engages in any form of gambling solely as a contestant or bettor, without receiving
or becoming entitled to receive any profit therefrom other than personal gambling winnings and
without otherwise rendering any material assistance to the establishment, conduct or operation of
the particular gambling activity. A person who gambles at a social game of chance on equal terms
with the other participants therein does not otherwise render material assistance to the
establishment, conduct or operation thereof by performing, without fee or remuneration, acts
directed toward the arrangement or facilitation of the game, such as inviting person to play,
permitting the use of premises therefor and supplying cards or other equipment used therein. A
person who engages in bookmaking, as defined in this section, is not a player.
PROFIT FROM GAMBLING ACTIVITY
A person "profits from gambling activity" when, other than as a player, he accepts or receives
money or other property pursuant to an agreement or understanding with any person whereby he
participates or is to participate in the proceeds of gambling activity.
SLOT MACHINE
A gambling device which, as a result of the insertion of a coin or other object, operates, either
completely automatically or with the aid of some physical act by the player, in such manner that,
depending upon elements of chance, it may eject something of value. A device so constructed, or
readily adaptable or convertible to such use, is no less a slot machine because it is not in working
order or because some mechanical act of manipulation or repair is required to accomplish its
adaptation, conversion or workability; nor is it any less a slot machine because, apart from its use
or adaptability as such, it may also sell or deliver something of value on a basis other than chance.
A machine which sells items of merchandise which are of equivalent value, is not a slot machine
merely because such items differ from each other in composition, size, shape or color.
SOMETHING OF VALUE
Any money or property, any token, object or article exchangeable for money or property, or any
form of credit or promise directly or indirectly contemplating transfer of money or property or of any
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 31/441
A.
B.
(1)
(2)
A.
B.
A.
B.
C.
interest therein, or involving extension of a service, entertainment or a privilege of playing at a
game or scheme without charge.
UNLAWFUL
Not specifically authorized by law.
§ 84-2. Promotion of gambling.
A person is guilty of promoting gambling when he knowingly advances or profits from unlawful
gambling activity.
Promoting gambling is an offense under this article.
§ 84-3. Possession of gambling devices.
A person is guilty of possession of a gambling device when, with knowledge of the character
thereof, he manufactures, sells, transports, places or possesses, or conducts or negotiates any
transaction affecting or designed to affect ownership, custody or use of:
A slot machine; or
Any other gambling device, believing that the same is to be used in the advancement of
unlawful gambling activity.
Possession of a gambling device is an offense under this article.
Article II. Coin-Operated Devices Near School
[Adopted 2-22-1971 by L.L. No. 1-1971 as Ch. 7, Art. II, of the 1971 Code]
§ 84-4. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
COIN-OPERATED DEVICE
Any game involving an element of skill or chance which is caused to operate or may be
operated as a result of the insertion of any piece of money or coin or the insertion of any
object for which a fee, charge or other consideration is imposed directly or indirectly.
Any machine or apparatus, whether manually, mechanically, electrically or otherwise
operated, and whether or not affixed or attached to or installed in any premises or place, in or
upon which machine or apparatus a game involving any element of chance, skill or
knowledge may be played by one or more persons, singly or collectively, upon the payment of
a fee, charge or other consideration directly or indirectly.
Any machine or apparatus of the type, design, class or construction commonly known as cue
ball, ski ball, game of knowledge or other similar games which are played upon payment of a
fee, charge or other consideration directly or indirectly.
PINBALL MACHINE
Any electrically operated machine upon which any game or contest of skill, chance or amusement
may be played upon payment of a fee, charge or other consideration directly or indirectly,
including but not limited to any shooting device in which no firearm ammunition is used and any
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 32/441
[1]
game, machine, apparatus, paraphernalia or device of the type, design, class or construction
commonly known as "pinball" or "bagatelle."
[Added 8-11-1980 by L.L. No. 6-1980]
§ 84-5. Devices prohibited near schools.
[Amended 8-11-1980 by L.L. No. 6-1980]
It shall be unlawful for any person, by himself or by an agent or employee, to possess or maintain a
pinball machine or a coin-operated device, as hereinbefore defined, involving an element of chance,
skill or knowledge, or to permit the maintenance or operation of any such pinball machine or coinoperated
device in any premises or place within 500 feet from any school property in the Incorporated
Village of Rockville Centre, Nassau County, New York.
§ 84-6. Penalties for offenses.
A person or persons violating any of the provisions of this ordinance shall be liable to a fine of not
exceeding $100, and any violation thereof shall constitute and is hereby declared to be disorderly
conduct, and any person or persons violating this ordinance or any provision thereof shall be and is
hereby declared a disorderly person.
Chapter 87. Animals
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Trustees of the Village of Rockville Centre 9-22-2003 by L.L. No.
6-2003.[1] Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Dog enumerators — See Ch. 19.
Noise — See Ch. 232.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 247.
Zoning — See Ch. 340.
Editor’s Note: This local law also superseded former Ch. 87, Animals, which consisted of Art. I, Animals
Running at Large, adopted 2-22-1971 by L.L. No. 1-1971 as Ch. 9, Art. I, of the 1971 Code; Art. II,
Restraint of Dogs, adopted 2-22-1971 by L.L. No. 1-1971 as Ch. 9, Art. II, of the 1971 Code, as
amended; Art. III, Horses and Other Animals, adopted 2-22-1971 by L.L. No. 1-1971 as Ch. 9, Art. III, of
the 1971 Code; Art. IV, Disturbances by Animals, adopted 2-22-1971 by L.L. No. 1-1971 as Ch. 9, Art.
IV, of the 1971 Code; Article V, Unlicensed Dogs, adopted 9-24-1979 by L.L. No. 7-1979.
Article I. Animals Running at Large
§ 87-1. Running at large prohibited for animals and fowl.
No person shall allow any animals or fowl to run at large or be at large within the Village. An animal is
“at large” when it is not on the premises of its owner or custodian and is not on a leash and under the
immediate control of its owner or custodian.
§ 87-1.1. Penalties for offenses.
Except as otherwise provided in § 119 of the Agriculture and Markets Law, any person who violates
any provision of this article shall, upon conviction, be subject to a maximum fine of $250 or a maximum
term of imprisonment of 15 days, or both, for each offense.[1]
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 33/441
[1]
A.
(1)
(2)
B.
A.
B.
A.
Editor’s Note: Former Art. 1A, Certain Dogs Prohibited, added 6-8-2010 by L.L. No. 9-2010, which
immediately followed this section, was repealed 7-20-2010 by L.L. No. 13-2010.
Article II. Restraint of Dogs
§ 87-2. Running at large; sanitation requirements.
No person owning or harboring a dog shall allow it to run at large in any of the streets or public
places of the Village or upon the premises of anyone other than the owner or occupant unless the
owner or occupant of such premises grants permission. No dog shall be permitted in any public
place or street within the Village unless it is effectively restrained by a chain or leash not
exceeding six feet in length, and unless it is attended by a person of adequate age and discretion
to properly control its actions.
No person owning, harboring, keeping or in charge of any dog shall allow such dog to soil, defile,
or defecate on any common thoroughfare, sidewalk, passageway, bypath, play area, park or any
place where people congregate or walk, or on any public property whatsoever, or on any private
property without the permission of the owner of that private property. The restriction in this section
shall not apply to that portion of the street lying between the curblines which shall be used to curb
such dog under the following conditions:
The person who so curbs such dog shall immediately remove, in a sanitary method, all feces
deposited by such dog; provided, however, that the disposal of said feces by the depositing
thereof in storm sewers within the Village shall not be deemed to be a sanitary method of
disposal of such feces and is prohibited.
The feces removed from the aforementioned designated area shall be disposed of in a
sanitary manner by the person owning, harboring, keeping or in charge of any dog curbed in
accordance with the provisions of this article.
§ 87-3. Entering private property and curbing.
Any person owning or in charge of a dog, in addition to restraining such dog as required in § 87-2
of this article, shall keep such dog from entering upon private and/or municipally owned property
and shall keep such dog at the curb on all streets in the Village.
Subsection A shall not be construed to prohibit dog shows, obedience classes or other organized
events conducted under the auspices of the Recreation Department of the Village of Rockville
Centre, nor shall it be construed to apply to the walking of a dog on a publicly owned street or to
prevent any guide dog, hearing dog, service dog, war dog, working search dog, detection dog,
police work dog or therapy dog from entering upon privately or municipally owned property.
§ 87-4. Vicious dogs and dangerous animals; penalties for
offenses.
Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
AT LARGE
When an animal is not on the premises of its owner or custodian and is not on a leash and
under the immediate control of its owner or custodian.
DANGEROUS ANIMAL
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 34/441
B.
A.
B.
C.
Any animal which is capable of inflicting bodily harm upon a person, excluding nonvicious
dogs and other domestic animals.
VICIOUS DOG
A dog which has once bitten any person or twice makes an unprovoked attack upon and bites
another dog or other domestic animal while at large. The term shall also mean a dog which is
at large and which without being provoked harasses or threatens a person in such a manner
as to create the appearance of fear or bodily injury by such person or damages the real
property or damages or destroys the personal property of a person other than the dog's
owner or custodian.
Upon a finding after trial by the Village Justice that a dog is vicious or that an animal is dangerous,
the owner or custodian of such animal shall be responsible in damages for any injury or damage
caused by such animal and shall also be liable for a fine as provided for in this article. The Village
Justice may order that any dangerous animal or vicious dog be destroyed and in addition may
impose a fine. Pending trial, the Village Justice may, on proper cause shown, order such dog or
other animal confined under such conditions as may be imposed.
§ 87-5. Enticement prohibited.
No person shall entice any dog or other animal out of the enclosure or house of its owner or harborer,
or seize or molest any dog or other animal while held or led by any person on a leash, or bring any dog
into said Village for the purpose of taking up, distraining or selling same.
§ 87-6. Disturbance of the peace.
A person who owns or possesses a dog is prohibited from allowing it to disturb the comfort or peace of
any persons in the vicinity by long, continued or frequent noise, including howling, whining or barking.
If a complaint is made to the Police Department that such noise has occurred, the owner or possessor
of the offending animal shall receive a warning from the Police Department that he or she has violated
the provisions of this article. No penalty, however, shall be imposed unless such notification has been
made and a violation thereafter has recurred.
§ 87-7. Dog license required; fees; impoundment.
[Amended 10-26-2010 by L.L. No. 14-2010[1]]
Purpose. The purpose of this section is to provide for the licensing and identification of dogs, the
control and protection of the dog population, and the protection of persons, property, and domestic
animals from dog attack and damage.
Definitions. Except as otherwise provided in this section, the definitions in Agricultural and Markets
Law § 108 shall apply to this section. The term "owner" means any person who harbors or keeps
any dog.
Except as is provided in §§ 107 and 109 of the Agriculture and Markets Law, all dogs within the
Village four months of age or older shall be licensed. The owner of each dog required to be
licensed shall obtain, complete, and return to the Village Clerk a dog license application together
with the license application fee, any applicable license surcharges and such additional fees as
shall be established by the Village. Each license application shall be accompanied by proof that
the dog has been vaccinated against rabies, or a statement from a licensed veterinarian that such
vaccination would endanger the dog’s life in which case vaccination shall not be required. Each
license issued shall be valid for a period of one year and shall not be transferable.
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 35/441
D.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
E.
F.
G.
(1)
(2)
H.
In the event that a dog owned by a resident of New York City or a nonresident of New York State
is licensed pursuant to the law of the area of such residence, such dog shall be exempt from
licensing pursuant to this section for a period of 30 days after being brought into the Village.
The owner shall obtain a license from the Village Clerk, or the designee of such Village Clerk, on
forms provided by the Village, which will include the following information:
The owner's name, residence address and telephone number.
The breed, color, markings and month and year of birth, or approximate age, of the dog, and
the municipal license number of the dog.
The type of license, including the sex of the dog, whether it is spayed or neutered and if the
dog is a guide, war or police work dog.
The amount of the fee submitted to the Village Clerk.
Such other information as may be reasonably required by the Village Clerk and is reasonably
related to the foregoing or required by the provisions of the Agriculture and Markets Law.
Each dog license shall be renewed after a period of one year beginning with the first day of the
month following the date of issuance and shall be renewable annually thereafter, prior to the
expiration date.
Purebred license. The owner of one or more purebred dogs registered by a recognized registry
association may annually make an application to the Village Clerk or the designee of the Village
Clerk for a purebred license, in addition to the individual licenses required by this section. A
purebred license shall be valid for a period of one year beginning with the first day of the month
following the date of issuance and shall be renewable annually thereafter prior to the expiration
date. Such application shall be made to the Village Clerk or the designee of such Village Clerk.
The application shall state the name, address and telephone number of the owner; the county and
city, town or village where such dogs are harbored; the sex, breed, registry name and number of
each purebred registered dog over the age of four months which is harbored on the premises; and
the sex and breed of each purebred dog over the age of four months which is harbored on the
premises and which is eligible for registration. The application shall also include a statement by
the owner that all purebred dogs over the age of four months which are harbored on the premises
have been listed. The application shall be accompanied by the license fee prescribed by this
section and a certificate of rabies vaccination or statement in lieu thereof, as required by this
section. Upon receipt of the foregoing items, the Village Clerk shall assign a license number,
which shall be reserved for the sole use of the named owner, and shall issue a purebred license.
Once a purebred license has been issued, no refund therefor shall be made. No purebred license
shall be transferable. Upon change of ownership of any dog licensed under a purebred license,
such dog shall become subject to the licensing provisions of this section, except when the new
owner holds a valid purebred license.
Fees. All fees paid pursuant to this section are nonrefundable.
The fee for the licensing of dogs, and the additional fee, if any, for a purebred license, shall be
established from time to time by resolution of the Board of Trustees, provided that the fee for
unspayed or unneutered dogs shall be at least $5 more than the fee for spayed or neutered
dogs.
In addition to such license fee, there shall be an additional fee surcharge pursuant to
Agriculture and Markets Law § 110, Subdivision 3, established from time to time by resolution
of the Board of Trustees, in the amount of at least $1 for altered dogs and at least $3 for
unaltered dogs, to be used for the purposes of animal population control efforts.
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 36/441
(3)
(4)
(5)
I.
(1)
(2)
(3)
J.
[1]
[1]
The Board of Trustees may impose an additional surcharge which shall be retained by the
Village and used to defray the cost of an enumeration of dogs living within the Village.
The Board of Trustees also may establish from time to time a fee for replacement
identification tags.
Exemptions from fees. No fee shall be required for a license for a guide dog, hearing dog,
service dog, war dog, working search dog, detection dog, police work dog or therapy dog
exempted pursuant to § 110 of the Agriculture and Markets Law shall not be subject to
licensing fees. The license for each such dog shall be conspicuously marked “Guide Dog,”
“Hearing Dog,” “Service Dog,” “Working Search Dog,” “War Dog,” “Detection Dog,” Police
Work Dog” or “Therapy Dog” as may be appropriate.
Display of license. Dogs shall display their license as required by Agriculture and Markets Law
§ 111. However, a dog participating in a dog show shall be exempt from the identification
requirement of such section during such participation.
Notification of change of ownership; lost dog; death of dog.
In the event of a change in the ownership of any dog licensed pursuant to this section or the
address of the owner of record of any such dog, the owner of record shall, within 10 days of
such change, file with the Village Clerk a written report of such change. Such owner shall
remain liable for any violation of this section until such filing is made or until the dog is
licensed in the name of the new owner.
If any dog which has been licensed pursuant to this section is lost or stolen, the owner of
record shall, within 10 days after the discovery of such event, file with the Village Clerk a
written report of such loss or theft. The owner shall not be responsible for any violation of this
section with respect to such dog committed after such report is filed.
In the case of a dog’s death, the owner of record shall notify the Village Clerk prior to renewal
of the license.
Editor’s Note: This local law also provided for an effective date of 1-1-2011.
§ 87-7.1. Impoundment fees.
[Added 10-26-2010 by L.L. No. 14-2010[1]]
The owner of any dog impounded by the Village shall be entitled to redeem that dog within five
business days, excluding the day the dog is impounded, from the day the dog is impounded, provided
that the owner produces proof that the dog is licensed and identified and pays a fee in an amount to be
determined by resolution of the Board of Trustees. Such fees may be established in an amount not
less than $10 for the first such impoundment, not less than $20 for the second such impoundment, and
not less than $30 for the third and each subsequent impoundment, and also shall provide for a fee of
$3 for each twenty-four-hour period for the second and each subsequent impoundment.
Editor's Note: This local law also provided for an effective date of 1-1-2011.
§ 87-8. Penalties for offenses.
Except as otherwise provided in § 119 of the Agriculture and Markets Law, any person who violates
any provision of this article shall, upon conviction, be subject to a maximum fine of $250 or a maximum
term of imprisonment of 15 days, or both, for each offense.
Article III. Horses and Other Animals
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 37/441
§ 87-9. Pace limited to a walk.
No person shall ride any horse or other animal on any street or in any public place at a pace other than
a walk. The provisions of this section do not apply, however, to any show, parade, exhibition or other
display of such animals as part of a performance or function duly authorized in a public place or park.
§ 87-10. Sidewalks not to be used.
No person shall ride or lead a horse, pony, donkey, mule or other animal along any sidewalk or
footpath or upon private property without the consent of the owner or occupant thereof.
§ 87-11. Penalties for offenses.
Except as otherwise provided in § 119 of the Agriculture and Markets Law, any person who violates
any provision of this article shall, upon conviction, be subject to a maximum fine of $250 or a maximum
term of imprisonment of 15 days, or both, for each offense.
Article IV. Disturbances by Animals
§ 87-12. Disturbances.
A person who owns or possesses any animal is prohibited from allowing it to disturb the comfort or
peace of any persons in the vicinity by long, continued or frequent noise, including howling, whining or
barking. If a complaint is made to the Police Department that such noise has occurred, the owner or
possessor of the offending animal shall be notified as a warning that he or she has violated the
provisions of this article. No penalty, however, shall be imposed unless such notification has been
made and a violation thereafter has recurred.
§ 87-13. Penalties for offenses.
Except as otherwise provided in § 119 of the Agriculture and Markets Law, any person who violates
any provision of this article shall, upon conviction, be subject to a maximum fine of $250 or a maximum
term of imprisonment of 15 days, or both, for each offense.
Chapter 90. Auctioneers
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Trustees of the Village of Rockville Centre 2-22-1971 by L.L. No.
1-1971 as Ch. 12 of the 1971 Code. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Secondhand automobile dealers — See Ch. 93.
Businesses — See Ch. 138.
Junk and secondhand dealers — See Ch. 215.
Licenses — See Ch. 222.
Pawnbrokers — See Ch. 244.
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 250.
Special sales — See Ch. 265.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 287.
§ 90-1. License required.
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 38/441
[1]
No person shall engage in business as an auctioneer or conduct an auction in the Village without first
obtaining a license therefor.
§ 90-2. Fees.
[Amended 12-4-1972]
The fee for any license required by the provisions of this chapter shall be at the levels fixed from time
to time by resolution of the Board of Trustees of the Village of Rockville Centre.
§ 90-3. Exceptions.
Sections 90-1 and 90-2 of this chapter notwithstanding, no fee shall be required to be paid for a permit
to conduct an auction directed to be held within the Village by the order of any court of competent
jurisdiction, or for a permit to a church or charitable, veterans', fraternal or religious organization to
conduct an auction, the proceeds of which are to be devoted solely to the purposes of such
organization.
Chapter 93. Automobile Sales, Secondhand
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Trustees of the Village of Rockville Centre 2-22-1971 by L.L. No.
1-1971 as Ch. 13 of the 1971 Code. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Gasoline sale and service stations — See Ch. 204.
Licenses — See Ch. 222.
Special sales — See Ch. 265.
Towing — See Ch. 300.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 309.
Zoning — See Ch. 340.
§ 93-1. License required.
No person or persons, firm, association or corporation shall engage in the business of a dealer in
secondhand, used and/or repossessed motor vehicles, automobiles, parts or accessories within the
limits of the Village without a license. Said license shall be required both in the event such person,
persons, firm, association or corporation is engaged solely and exclusively in said business, or said
person, persons, firm, association or corporation is engaged in said business as a part of or along with
some other business. No license shall be granted, however, unless the applicant or his tenant shall
conduct and maintain within the confines of the Village a showroom or a building to store at least five
cars. Said license shall not be transferable.
Editor's Note: See Ch. 222, Licenses.
§ 93-2. Fees.
[Amended 10-18-1971; 12-4-1972]
All licenses issued hereunder shall expire on the first day of October next succeeding the issuance
thereof, and a license may be issued by the Mayor, who is hereby empowered to issue such license to
the person applying therefor. Every such license shall be countersigned by the Village Clerk and shall
have endorsed thereon the receipt of the Treasurer showing payment to him of the license fee.
§ 93-3. Right to revoke.
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 39/441
[1]
The license mentioned in the preceding section of this chapter may be suspended or revoked at any
time by the Mayor of the Village or by the Board of Trustees thereof if such licensee shall violate any of
the provisions of any other ordinance of the Village or do anything to the detriment of the safety, health,
comfort and general welfare of the inhabitants of the Village or visitors thereto.
§ 93-4. Availability of license.
Every person holding a license under any provision of this chapter shall exhibit the same upon the
demand of any person and shall report to the Chief of Police and the Village Clerk any change of
residence or place of business within three days of such change. All licensed vehicles or place of
business shall be regularly inspected.
§ 93-5. Existing ordinances not affected.
Nothing herein contained shall be construed as in anywise amending or limiting the provisions of the
ordinance of the Village of Rockville Centre commonly known as the Zoning Ordinance and the
Building Code,[1] or either of them.
Editor's Note: See Ch. 340, Zoning, and Ch. 112, Building Code, respectively.
§ 93-6. Penalties for offenses.
Any person or persons violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be liable for and forfeit and
pay a penalty of not less than $25 for each violation thereof, for the use of said Village. Any violation of
this chapter or any part thereof shall constitute disorderly conduct, and any person violating this
chapter or any part thereof shall be and is hereby declared a disorderly person.
Chapter 96. Awnings
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Trustees of the Village of Rockville Centre 5-20-1991 by L.L. No.
3-1991. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building Code — See Ch. 112.
Signs and posting bills — See Ch. 335.
Zoning — See Ch. 340.
§ 96-1. Legislative intent.
The Board of Trustees of the Village of Rockville Centre declares and finds it to be in the public interest
and for the public good to protect property values, create a more attractive economic and business
climate, enhance and protect the physical appearance of the community, preserve the scenic and
natural beauty and for other aesthetic considerations to provide for the regulation of awnings and
awning signs within the business districts of the Incorporated Village of Rockville Centre. The Board of
Trustees further intends to reduce visual clutter, advertising distractions and obstructions that may
contribute to traffic accidents and injuries, as well as help provide for the safety of pedestrians.
§ 96-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the following meanings:
AWNING
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 40/441
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
A.
B.
C.
A.
B.
An unenclosed roof-like structure, supported entirely by the building to which it is attached and
which may be of a stationery or retractable type.
AWNING SIGN
Any lettering and/or numbers sewn, attached, painted, inscribed or otherwise directly applied on
an awning.
BUSINESS DISTRICTS
Areas wholly or partly within the following use districts as defined in Chapter 340 of the Village
Code:
Business AAA.
Business AA.
Business A.
Business B.
Urban Renewal Commercial or light Manufacturing A.
Urban Renewal Recreational and Limited Commercial.
DROP AWNING
A retractable awning.
FIXED AWNING
A fixed-frame awning that is not retractable.
FRONT PROPERTY LINE
Street line above.
STREET LINE
The dividing line between the street and a lot.
§ 96-3. Drop awnings.
Drop awnings may extend beyond the street line but may not extend over the sidewalk past a
point that is within two feet of the curbline.
A drop awning, including its valance, if any, when let down to its full extent, may not be less than
seven feet six inches above the sidewalk at any point.
Only lettering and numbering that is no more than six inches in height is permitted. Such letters
and numbers may set forth only the name and street number of the entity transacting business in
the building to which the awning is attached.
§ 96-4. Fixed awnings construction.
The framework for fixed awnings shall not be less than seven feet six inches above the sidewalk
at any point.
The awning shall be constructed so that the projection outwards to height against the building ratio
shall not exceed a ratio of 1:2.
§ 96-5. Fixed awning sign.
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 41/441
A.
(a)
(b)
(1)
(2)
(3)
B.
C.
D.
A.
B.
A.
B.
No more than one fixed awning sign shall be allowed on each premise.
Lettering.
Such sign shall:
Consist of one row of letters or numbers on the front side of the awning.
Be limited to the name of the premises and its street address.
The letters and numbers shall be painted, sewn, inscribed or attached directly to the front of
the awning.
Individual lettering and/or numbers shall not exceed 24 inches in overall height, with the
bottom of each letter and/or number situated within two inches of the lowest edge of the
awning or its valance, if any, and parallel to such edge or valance.
Lettering and/or numbering shall not be permitted on any other part of the awning.
A fixed awning sign is not permitted on the same facade of a building onto which a wall sign is
attached. A fixed awning sign is permitted, upon compliance with this chapter, after the removal of
any wall signs that are on the facade to which the awning sign is to be attached. A facade of a
building may not have both a wall sign and a fixed awning sign at the same time per § 335-5(B) of
this Code.
§ 96-6. Awnings to be detachable; permit.
Every awning must be constructed so that it may be detached from the supporting building, and
every awning is subject to removal by its owner upon notice by the Board of Trustees.
A permit issued by the Building Superintendent of the Village of Rockville Centre must be obtained
before beginning the installation of any type of awning.
§ 96-7. Colors.
No more than three colors or shades of color, including the lettering and/or numbering, may be used on
any awning or awning sign.
§ 96-8. Nonconforming uses.
Awnings existing at the time of the adoption of this chapter are hereby declared to be
nonconforming. These may remain until such time as the canvas or canopy covering is replaced,
and at such time the new canvas or canopy covering must be in conformity with this chapter as
well as Chapter 335 of this Code.
Whenever an awning frame is replaced, the entire new awning, both covering and frame, must be
in conformity with this chapter and Chapter 335 of this Code.
Chapter 99. Bicycles
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Trustees of the Village of Rockville Centre 2-22-1971 by L.L. No.
1-1971 as Ch. 17 of the 1971 Code]
GENERAL REFERENCES
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 42/441
A.
B.
A.
B.
A.
B.
C.
Traffic Violation Bureau — See Ch. 62.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 247.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 287.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 309.
§ 99-1. Subject to traffic regulations.
Every person riding a bicycle upon a roadway shall be granted all the rights and shall be subject to all
the duties applicable to the driver of a vehicle by the laws of this state declaring rules of the road
applicable to vehicles or by the traffic ordinances of this Village applicable to the driver of a vehicle,
except as to special regulations in this chapter and except as to those provisions of laws and
ordinances which by their nature can have no application.
§ 99-2. Obedience to traffic control devices.
Any person operating a bicycle shall obey the instructions of official traffic control signals, signs
and other control devices applicable to vehicles, unless otherwise directed by a police officer.
Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating that no right or left or U-turn is permitted, no
person operating a bicycle shall disobey the direction of any such sign, except where such person
dismounts from the bicycle to make any such turn, in which event such person shall then obey the
regulations applicable to pedestrians.
§ 99-3. Riding on bicycles.
A person propelling a bicycle shall not ride other than astride a permanent and regular seat
attached thereto.
No bicycle shall be used to carry more persons at one time than the number for which it is
designed and equipped.
§ 99-4. Riding on roadways and bicycle paths.
Every person operating a bicycle upon a roadway shall ride as near to the right-hand side of the
roadway as practicable, exercising due care when passing a standing vehicle or one proceeding in
the same direction.
Persons riding bicycles upon a roadway shall not ride more than two abreast except on paths or
parts of roadways set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles.
Whenever a usable path for bicycles has been provided adjacent to a roadway, bicycle riders shall
use such paths and shall not use the roadway.
§ 99-5. Speed.
No person shall operate a bicycle at a speed greater than is reasonable and prudent under the
conditions then existing.
§ 99-6. Emerging from alley or driveway.
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 43/441
A.
B.
A.
B.
C.
A.
B.
The operator of a bicycle emerging from an alley, driveway or building shall, upon approaching a
sidewalk or the sidewalk area extending across any alleyway, yield the right of way to all pedestrians
approaching on said sidewalk or sidewalk area, and upon entering the roadway shall yield the right of
way to all vehicles approaching on said roadway.
§ 99-7. Clinging to vehicles.
No person riding upon a bicycle shall attach the same or himself to any vehicle upon a roadway.
§ 99-8. Carrying articles.
No person operating a bicycle shall carry any package or bundle or article which prevents the rider
from keeping at least one hand on the handlebars.
§ 99-9. Parking.
No person shall park a bicycle upon a street other than upon the roadway against the curb or upon the
sidewalk in a rack to support the bicycle or against a building or at the curb, in such a manner as to
afford the least obstruction to pedestrian traffic.
§ 99-10. Riding on sidewalks.
No person over the age of 10 years shall ride a bicycle upon any sidewalk in this Village.
Whenever any person is riding a bicycle upon a sidewalk, such person shall yield the right of way
to any pedestrian and shall give audible signal before overtaking and passing such pedestrian.
§ 99-11. Lamps and other equipment.
Every bicycle when in use at nighttime shall be equipped with a lamp on the front which shall emit
a white light visible from a distance of at least 500 feet to the front and with a red reflector on the
rear of a type which shall be visible from all distances from 50 feet to 300 feet to the rear when
directly in front of lawful upper beams of headlamps on a motor vehicle. A lamp emitting a red light
visible from a distance of 500 feet to the rear may be used in addition to the red reflector.
No person shall operate a bicycle unless it is equipped with a bell or other device capable of giving
a signal audible for a distance of at least 100 feet, except that a bicycle shall not be equipped with
nor shall any persons use upon a bicycle any siren or whistle.
Every bicycle shall be equipped with a brake which will enable the operator to make the braked
wheel skid on dry, level, clean pavement.
§ 99-12. Effect of regulations.
The parent of any child and the guardian of any ward shall not authorize or knowingly permit any
such child or ward to violate any of the provisions of this chapter.
These regulations applicable to bicycles shall apply whenever a bicycle is operated upon any
street or upon any public path set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles, subject to those
exceptions stated herein.
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 44/441
C.
[1]
Any person violating any provisions of this chapter shall be liable for and pay a penalty or fine not
exceeding $10 for the first offense and not more than $25 for the second offense and not more
than $100 for the third offense, and in addition thereto each of said violations shall constitute and
is hereby declared to be disorderly conduct, and any person violating the same shall be and is
hereby declared a disorderly person.
Chapter 105. Bowling Alleys and Pool Halls
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Trustees of the Village of Rockville Centre 2-22-1971 by L.L. No.
1-1971 as Ch. 19 of the 1971 Code. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Amusement and gaming devices — See Ch. 84.
Building code — See Ch. 112.
Entertainment — See Ch. 163.
Fire escapes — See Ch. 181.
Fire prevention and control — See Ch. 185.
Licenses — See Ch. 222.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 247.
Zoning — See Ch. 340.
§ 105-1. License required.
No person shall conduct any bowling alley, shooting gallery or skating rink without first procuring an
annual license therefor.
§ 105-2. Fees.
[Amended 12-4-1972]
The fee for any license required by the provisions of this chapter shall be at the levels fixed from time
to time by resolution of the Board of Trustees of the Village of Rockville Centre.
§ 105-3. Hours to be observed.
It shall be unlawful to keep any premises licensed hereunder open for business at any time on Sunday
or between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 8:00 a.m. on any other day, with the exception that
bowling alleys and skating rinks may be kept open for business from 8:00 a.m. until 3:00 a.m. on
weekdays and Sundays.
§ 105-4. Right to revoke.
Any license granted under this chapter may be suspended or revoked at any time by the Mayor of the
Village or by the Board of Trustees thereof if such license shall violate any of the provisions of any
other ordinance of the Village or of the terms and conditions which may be imposed by the Board of
Appeals[1] in connection with the granting by said Board of Appeals of a permit for the use of premises
for a bowling alley.
Editor's Note: See Ch. 340, Zoning.
Chapter 109. Broadcasting Reception
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 45/441
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Trustees of the Village of Rockville Centre 2-22-1971 by L.L. No.
1-1971 as Ch. 22 of the 1971 Code.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Entertainment — See Ch. 163.
Noise — See Ch. 232.
Electric and water utilities — See Ch. 306.
§ 109-1. Operation of apparatus.
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate within the Village limits any electrical apparatus, device,
machine or equipment, other than that of a duly licensed broadcasting station, which needlessly
causes interference with radio and television reception, when such interference can reasonably be
eliminated by shielding, altering, adjusting or otherwise taking corrective measures to eliminate the
fault.
§ 109-2. Enforcement.
The enforcement of this chapter shall be entrusted to the Chief Engineer of the Village, whose duty it
shall be to investigate all complaints of radio and television interference, to locate the source of such
interference and to determine the best and most practical ways of securing its elimination.
§ 109-3. Orders issued.
Upon findings made of the source of such interference, the Chief Engineer of the Village is authorized
to issue directions to the owner or operator of the offending apparatus, device, machine or equipment,
requiring him to make the necessary adjustments or corrections within a specified length of time.
§ 109-4. Failure to comply.
Failure to comply with the directions of the Chief Engineer of the Village within the time specified by
him shall constitute a violation of this chapter.
§ 109-5. Entry upon premises.
Upon properly identifying himself, the Chief Engineer of the Village or his duly designated deputy on
that behalf shall have the right of access to any premises at a reasonable time for the purpose of
inspecting the installation and operation of any device, machine or equipment coming within the
purview of this chapter; and it shall be a violation hereof for any reason to interfere with such official or
to hinder him in the discharge of his duties.
Chapter 112. Building Code
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Trustees of the Village of Rockville Centre 2-22-1971 by L.L. No.
1-1971 as Ch. 23 of the 1971 Code. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Awnings — See Ch. 96.
Bowling alleys and pool halls — See Ch. 105.
Building code administration — See Ch. 115.
Building drains — See Ch. 118.
Dangerous and unsafe buildings — See Ch. 122.
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 46/441
[1]
[1]
Moving of buildings — See Ch. 126.
Numbering of buildings — See Ch. 129.
Rehabilitation of buildings — See Ch. 132.
Master electricians — See Ch. 160.
Entertainment — See Ch. 163.
Escalators — See Ch. 169.
Fire escapes — See Ch. 181.
Fire prevention and control — See Ch. 185.
Licenses — See Ch. 222.
Lodging and boarding houses — See Ch. 225.
Plumbing — See Ch. 256.
Smoke emission — See Ch. 276.
Solid waste — See Ch. 283.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 287.
Swimming pools — See Ch. 291.
Electric and water utilities — See Ch. 306.
Planning Board; site plan review; subdivision of land — See Ch. 330.
Signs and posting bills — See Ch. 335.
Zoning — See Ch. 340.
§ 112-1. Adoption by references.
The Board of Trustees of the Incorporated Village of Rockville Centre hereby accepts the applicability
of the State Building Construction Code for the Incorporated Village of Rockville Centre on the 12th
day of September 1962, in accordance with the provisions of Section 374-a of the Executive Law.[1]
Editor's Note: Former Art. 18 of the Executive Law, which contained § 374-a, was replaced by the New
York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code Act, which may be found in Art. 18 of the
Executive Law.
§ 112-2. Filing of certified copy.
The Village Clerk be and hereby is instructed to file a certified copy of this chapter in the principal office
of the State Building Code Council, Division of Housing and Community Renewal, 270 Broadway, New
York 7, New York, and in the office of the Secretary of State at Albany, New York.[1]
Editor's Note: Original § 23-3, as amended 2-24-1965, which established fire limits and which
immediately followed this section, was repealed 9-13-1971. See now Ch. 115, Building Code
Administration.
Chapter 115. Building Code Administration
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Trustees of the Village of Rockville Centre as indicated in article
histories. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Awnings — See Ch. 96.
Bowling alleys and pool halls — See Ch. 105.
Building code — See Ch. 112.
Building drains — See Ch. 118.
Dangerous and unsafe buildings — See Ch. 122.
Moving of buildings — See Ch. 126.
Numbering of buildings — See Ch. 129.
Rehabilitation of buildings — See Ch. 132.
Master electricians — See Ch. 160.
Entertainment — See Ch. 163.
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 47/441
Escalators — See Ch. 169.
Fire escapes — See Ch. 181.
Fire prevention and control — See Ch. 185.
Licenses — See Ch. 222.
Lodging and boarding houses — See Ch. 225.
Plumbing — See Ch. 256.
Smoke emission — See Ch. 276.
Solid waste — See Ch. 283.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 287.
Swimming pools — See Ch. 291.
Electric and water utilities — See Ch. 306.
Planning Board; site plan review; subdivision of land — See Ch. 330.
Signs and posting bills — See Ch. 335.
Zoning — See Ch. 340.
Article I. General Provisions
[Adopted 9-13-1971]
§ 115-1. Legislative intent and history.
[Amended 5-3-2005 by L.L. No. 3-2005]
The public health, safety and welfare requires the promulgation of a building code and of regulations
consistent therewith. This chapter shall continue to provide for the administration and enforcement of
Article 18 of the Executive Law, now known as the “New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and
Building Code” (Uniform Code) as well as the International Building Code (IBC) in the Village of
Rockville Centre. This article is adopted pursuant to § 10 of Article 2 of the Municipal Home Rule Law.
Except as otherwise provided within this article, state law, the Uniform Code, and the IBC, all premises,
regardless of use, are subject to the provisions that follow. The Board of Trustees of the Village of
Rockville Centre (Board) had, by resolution passed on September 4, 1962, accepted the applicability
of State Building Construction Code pursuant to the provisions of Article 18 of the Executive Law and
is by law responsible for the administration and enforcement of the provisions of that code. To that end,
the Village had rules and regulations relating to the administration and enforcement of such Building
Construction Code. The adoption of this article in 1971 replaced those rules and regulations and
defined the fire limits.
§ 115-2. Superintendent of Buildings.
[Amended 5-3-2005 by L.L. No. 3-2005]
There is hereby designated in the Village of Rockville Centre a Superintendent of Buildings and a
Deputy Superintendent of Buildings, who shall be appointed by the Village Board at a compensation to
be fixed by it. The Board of Trustees shall have the power to delegate to the Mayor the authority to
designate the Deputy Superintendent to act in the absence, or inability to act, of the Superintendent of
Buildings. The term “Superintendent of Buildings,” as used in this article, shall be the individual
charged with the enforcement of this article.
§ 115-3. Building Inspectors.
[Amended 5-3-2005 by L.L. No. 3-2005]
The Board of Trustees (Board) may appoint one Building Inspector or more, as the need may appear,
to act under the supervision of the Superintendent of Buildings and to exercise any portion of his or her
powers and duties. The compensation of such Building Inspectors shall be fixed by the Board.
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 48/441
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
§ 115-4. Restrictions on employees of Building Department.
[Amended 5-3-2005 by L.L. No. 3-2005]
No officer or employee of the Building Department shall engage in any activity inconsistent with his or
her duties or with the interests of the Building Department, nor shall he or she, during the term of his
employment, engage directly or indirectly in any building construction or alteration or building repair
business, in the furnishing of labor, materials or appliances for the construction, alteration or
maintenance of a building or the preparation of plans or specifications thereof within the Village of
Rockville Centre, except that this provision shall not prohibit any employee from such activities in
connection with the construction, alteration or repair of a building or structure owned by him and not
constructed for sale.
§ 115-5. Duties and powers of Superintendent of Buildings.
[Amended 5-3-2005 by L.L. No. 3-2005]
Except as otherwise specifically provided by law, ordinance or regulation, or except as herein
otherwise provided, the Superintendent of Buildings shall:
Administer and enforce all of the provisions of laws, ordinances and regulations applicable to the
construction, alteration, repair, removal and demolition of buildings and structures, and the
installation and use of materials and equipment therein, and the location, use, occupancy and
maintenance thereof.
Have the power to adopt rules and, from time to time, to alter, amend, change or revoke such
rules, to secure the intent and purpose of this article and a proper enforcement of the laws,
ordinances and regulations governing building construction.
Receive and review applications and issue permits for the erection, alteration, removal and
demolition of buildings or structures, or parts thereof, including plumbing, drainage, air
conditioning, ventilation, heating, and examine the premises for which such applications have
been received or such permits have been issued for the purpose of insuring compliance with laws,
ordinances and regulations governing building construction.
Issue all appropriate notices or orders to remove illegal or unsafe conditions, to require the
necessary safeguards during construction and, to insure compliance during the entire course of
construction with the requirements of such laws, ordinances and regulations, make all inspections
which, in his or her judgment, are necessary or proper for the carrying out of his or her duties,
except that written reports of inspection from Building Inspectors or other employees of the
Building Department, or from generally recognized and authoritative service and inspection
bureaus, provided the same are certified by the responsible official thereof, may be accepted in
lieu of any such inspections.
Have the right to require an applicant for a building permit to secure the performance of tests in
the field by experienced, professional persons, or by accredited and authoritative testing
laboratories or service bureaus or agencies, whenever the same may be necessary or appropriate
to assure compliance with the provisions of applicable laws, ordinances and regulations covering
building construction, to ensure the adequacy of infrastructure, utilities, water, sewers, sanitation
and other resources and to evaluate the impact of the application on the environment. The
performance of any tests described in this subsection shall be at the expense of the applicant for
the building permit.
Receive and examine and approve or disapprove, within a reasonable time after receipt thereof,
applications to install any new plumbing or drainage work in a building or structure, or to extend or
alter any existing plumbing or drainage work, whether such work is to be connected with a sewer
or not.
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 49/441
G.
H.
A.
B.
A.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
B.
Have the right to enter any building or premises in said Village at any reasonable hour upon
showing his or her badge of office, which right shall also extend to any officer or employee of the
Building Department, so far as may be necessary for the performance of his duties.
Have all the powers of a peace officer of the Village, including the power of arrest.
§ 115-6. Records and reports.
[Amended 5-3-2005 by L.L. No. 3-2005]
The Superintendent of Buildings shall keep official records of all transactions and activities
conducted by the Building Department, including all applications received, permits and certificates
issued, fees charged and collected, inspection reports and notices of orders issued in accordance
with New York State Education Department laws.
The Superintendent of Buildings shall, yearly, submit to the Village Board a written report and
summary of all business conducted by the Building Department, including permits and certificates
issued, fees collected.
§ 115-7. Cooperation of other departments.
The Superintendent of Buildings may request and shall receive, so far as may be necessary in the
discharge of his duties, the assistance and cooperation of the appropriate Police, Fire and Health
Departments, and of all municipal or other officials exercising any jurisdiction over the construction,
use or occupancy of buildings or the installation of equipment therein.
§ 115-8. Application for building permit.
[Amended 5-3-2005 by L.L. No. 3-2005]
No person, firm, partnership, corporation or entity shall commence the erection, construction,
enlargement, alteration, removal, improvement, demolition, conversion or change in the nature of
the occupancy of any building or structure, or cause the same to be done, without first obtaining a
separate building permit from the Superintendent of Buildings for each such building or structure;
except that no building permit shall be required for the performance of ordinary repairs which are
not structural in nature.
Application for a building permit shall be made to the Superintendent of Buildings on forms
provided by the Building Department and shall contain the following information:
A description of the land on which the proposed work is to be done.
A statement of the use or occupancy of all parts of the land and the proposed building or
structure.
The valuation of the proposed work.
The name and address of the owner and the applicant and licensed professionals engaged to
work on the project shall be shown. Where the applicant or owner is a corporation, the
Superintendent of Buildings may require the names and addresses of all officers, directors
and principal stockholders of said corporation, and shall require the applicant or owner to
notify the Building Department of any changes to those names and addresses.
A brief description of the nature of the proposed work.
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 50/441
(6)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(7)
[1]
(8)
(9)
C.
D.
E.
A schematic utility/service site plan, including but not limited to sewer, electric and water
connections.
At least two sets of construction documents (drawings and/or specifications) as set forth in
Subsection D of this section, which:
[Amended 6-17-2008 by L.L. No. 6-2008]
Define the scope of the proposed work;
Are prepared by a New York State registered architect or licensed professional engineer
or other authorized professional where so required by the Education Law;
Indicate with sufficient clarity and detail the nature and extent of the work proposed;
Substantiate that the proposed work will comply with the Uniform Code and the Energy
Code; and
Where applicable, include a site plan that shows any existing and proposed buildings and
structures on the site, the location of any existing or proposed well or septic system, the
location of the intended work, and the distances between the buildings and structures
and the lot lines.
A statement of special inspections prepared in accordance with the provisions of the Uniform
Code.
[Added 6-17-2008 by L.L. No. 6-2008[1]]
Editor's Note: this local law also redesignated former Subsection B(8) as B(9).
Such other information as may reasonably be required by the Superintendent of Buildings to
establish compliance of the proposed work with the requirements of the applicable building
laws, ordinances and regulations.
Applications shall be made by the owner or lessee, or agent of either, or by the architect, engineer
or builder employed in connection with the proposed work. The Superintendent of Buildings shall
require a separate application to be filed for an elevator installation, but in case such separate
application is filed by the same applicant in connection with and relating to an application to
construct or alter a building or structure, it shall not be necessary to duplicate information
contained in the application to construct or alter. Nothing in this section shall prevent the
Superintendent of Buildings from requiring such additional information as may be necessary to an
intelligent understanding of any proposed work.
Each application for a building permit shall be accompanied by duplicate copies of plans and
specifications, including a plot plan and property survey, drawn to scale, showing the location and
size of all proposed new construction and all existing structures on the site, the nature and
character of the work to be performed and the materials to be incorporated, distance from lot lines,
the relationship of structure on adjoining property, including the grades thereof, widths and grades
of adjoining streets, walks and alleys, and, where required by the Superintendent of Buildings,
details of structural, mechanical and electrical work, including computations, stress programs and
other essential technical data. Each application shall also be accompanied by a recent tax bill.
Plans and specifications shall bear the signature of the person responsible for the design and
drawings and, where required by §§ 7209 and 7307 of Article 147 of the Education Law of the
State of New York, the seal of a licensed architect or a licensed professional engineer. The
Superintendent of Buildings may waive the requirement for filing plans and specifications for minor
alterations.
Amendments, if any, to the application or to the plans and specifications accompanying the same
shall be filed with the Building Department and approval received from the Superintendent of
Buildings prior to the commencement of such change of work.
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 51/441
F.
A.
B.
C.
A.
B.
C.
No permit shall be issued until proof in form satisfactory to the New York State Superintendent of
Insurance and the Superintendent of Buildings that Workers’ Compensation Insurance covering all
operations on the building for which a permit is requested has been submitted to the
Superintendent of Buildings and recorded by him for inspection by representatives of the New
York State Department of Labor.
§ 115-9. Issuance or disapproval of building permit.
[Amended 5-3-2005 by L.L. No. 3-2005]
The Superintendent of Buildings shall examine or cause to be examined all applications for
permits and the plans, specifications and documents filed therewith, and shall approve or
disapprove the application within a reasonable time.
Upon approval of the application and upon receipt of all legal fees therefor, he or she shall issue a
building permit to the applicant upon the form prescribed by him and shall affix his or her signature
or cause his or her signature to be affixed thereto. Upon approval of the application, both sets of
plans and specifications shall be endorsed with the word "approved." One set of such approved
plans and specifications shall be retained in the files of the Superintendent of Buildings and the
other set shall be returned to the applicant, together with the building permit, and shall be kept at
the building site open to inspection by the Superintendent of Buildings or his or her authorized
representative at all reasonable times.
If the application, together with plans, specifications and other documents filed therewith describe
proposed work which does not conform to all of the requirements of the applicable building
regulations, the Superintendent of Buildings shall disapprove the same and shall return the plans
and specifications to the applicant. Upon the request of the applicant, the Superintendent of
Buildings shall cause such disapproval, together with the reasons therefor, to be transmitted to the
applicant in writing.
§ 115-10. Conditions of building permit.
A building permit shall be effective for a period of three months after issuance to authorize the
commencement and continuation of work in accordance with the application, plans and
specifications on which it is based. If substantial work pursuant to the permit is commenced within
three months after the date of its issuance, and such work actively continues until completion, the
permit shall remain in effect during such period of time. In the event no substantial construction is
performed in any period of 60 days or more during the term of a permit, the permit shall be
deemed abandoned unless extended by the Superintendent of Buildings pursuant to this
subsection. Notwithstanding any of the foregoing, a building permit shall not remain effective for a
period in excess of one year from the date of issuance unless extended pursuant to this
subsection. For good cause shown and at the discretion of the Superintendent, and upon payment
of a fee as established by resolution of the Board of Trustees, the Superintendent may grant a
maximum of two extensions of a permit for periods not exceeding three months each. Any further
extensions shall require the approval of the Board of Trustees, which may be issued only upon
written application and payment of any required extension fee.
[Amended 5-3-2005 by L.L. No. 3-2005; 5-3-2010 by L.L. No. 4-2010]
The issuance of a building permit shall constitute authority to the applicant to proceed with the
work in accordance with the approved plans and specifications and in accordance with the
applicable building laws, ordinances or regulations. All work shall conform to the approved
application, plans and specifications.
The building permit card shall be displayed prominently on the job site at all times during the
progress of construction so as to be readily seen from adjacent thoroughfares.
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 52/441
A.
B.
C.
D.
A.
B.
§ 115-11. Revocation of permit.
[Amended 5-3-2005 by L.L. No. 3-2005]
The Superintendent of Buildings may revoke a building permit previously issued in the following
instances:
Where he or she finds that there has been any false statement or misrepresentation as to a
material fact in the application, plans or specifications on which the building permit was based.
Where he or she finds that the building permit was issued in error, and should not have been
issued, in accordance with applicable laws.
Where he or she finds that the work performed under the permit is not being prosecuted in
accordance with the provisions of the application, plans or specifications.
Where the person to whom a building permit has been issued fails or refuses to comply with a
stop order issued by the Superintendent of Buildings.
§ 115-12. Stop orders.
[Amended 5-3-2005 by L.L. No. 3-2005; 6-17-2008 by L.L. No. 6-2008]
Whenever the Superintendent of Buildings has reasonable grounds to believe that work on any
building or structure is being prosecuted in violation of the provisions of the applicable building
laws, ordinances or regulations, or not in conformity with the provisions of an application, plans or
specifications on the basis of which a building permit was issued, or in an unsafe and dangerous
manner, he or she shall notify the owner of the property, or the owner's agent, or the person
performing the work, to suspend all work, and any such persons shall forthwith stop such work
and suspend all building activities until the stop order has been rescinded. Such order and notice
shall be in writing, shall state the reason for the stop order and the conditions under which the
work may be resumed, and may be served upon the person to whom it is directed either by
delivering it personally to him, or by posting the same upon a conspicuous portion of the building
under construction or being worked upon and sending a copy of the same by certified mail to said
person.
Remedy not exclusive. The issuance of a stop-work order shall not be the exclusive remedy
available to address any event described in this section, and the authority to issue a stop-work
order shall be in addition to, and not in substitution for or limitation of, the right and authority to
pursue any other remedy or impose any other penalty as authorized by law. Any such other
remedy or penalty may be pursued at any time, whether prior to, at the time of, or after the
issuance of a stop-work order.
§ 115-13. Abandonment of project.
[Amended 5-3-2005 by L.L. No. 3-2005]
In the event of the abandonment of any building project, it shall be the duty of the holder of the permit
or the owner of the premises, his agent or duly authorized representative, to backfill any open
excavation up the street or ground level. In case the construction of the building or structure has
proceeded beyond the cellar excavation, all incompleted structures or openings shall be completely
boarded up in a manner satisfactory to the Superintendent of Buildings so as to prevent access to the
building or structure, in order to limit and prevent danger to persons or property and possible fire
hazards and to present a neat appearance.
§ 115-14. Supervision of construction; inspections.
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 53/441
A.
B.
C.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
D.
E.
[Amended 5-3-2005 by L.L. No. 3-2005]
No building which is to have a total floor area in excess of 10,000 square feet shall be constructed
except under the supervision of a professional engineer or architect licensed or registered in the
State of New York. The affidavit shall be signed and sworn to by the engineer or architect who will
supervise the construction of such building and shall have his or her professional seal affixed. In
the event that such engineer or architect shall, for any reason, discontinue his or her supervision
of the construction of the building at any time prior to the completion, he or she shall notify the
Superintendent of Buildings of such fact immediately, and thereupon the building permit issued for
such construction shall be suspended and no further work shall be done thereunder until another
such affidavit shall be filed with the Superintendent of Buildings certifying that supervision of the
construction has been resumed by another or the same engineer or architect.
No certificate of occupancy will be issued for a building having a total floor area in excess of
10,000 square feet until a final certificate is filed with the Superintendent of Buildings by the
engineer or architect who supervised the construction that the building was in fact erected in
conformity with the plans therefor filed with the Building Department.
Work to remain accessible and exposed. Work shall remain accessible and exposed until
inspected and accepted by the Superintendent of Buildings or by an inspector authorized by the
Superintendent of Buildings. The permit holder shall notify the Superintendent of Buildings when
any element of work described in Subsection D of this section is ready for inspection.
[Added 6-17-2008 by L.L. No. 6-2008]
Elements of work to be inspected. The following elements of the construction process shall be
inspected, where applicable:
[Added 6-17-2008 by L.L. No. 6-2008]
Work site prior to the issuance of a building permit;
Footing and foundation;
Preparation for concrete slab;
Framing;
Building systems, including underground and rough-in;
Fire-resistant construction;
Fire-resistant penetrations;
Solid-fuel-burning heating appliances, chimneys, flues or gas vents;
Energy Code compliance; and
A final inspection after all work authorized by the building permit has been completed.
Inspection results. After inspection, the work or a portion thereof shall be noted as satisfactory as
completed, or the permit holder shall be notified as to where the work fails to comply with the
Uniform Code or Energy Code. Work not in compliance with any applicable provision of the
Uniform Code or Energy Code shall remain exposed until such work shall have been brought into
compliance with all applicable provisions of the Uniform Code and the Energy Code, reinspected,
and found satisfactory as completed.
[Added 6-17-2008 by L.L. No. 6-2008]
§ 115-15. Qualifications for plumbers; Plumbers' Examining
Board.
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 54/441
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
Qualifications of plumbers. No person shall engage in the business of plumbing or do any
plumbing work within the Village of Rockville Centre unless he or she shall be duly licensed by the
Village of Rockville Centre and maintain insurance coverage as provided in this article, proof of
which shall be filed with the Superintendent of Buildings.
[Amended 5-16-1983 by L.L. No. 6-1983; 8-8-2005 by L.L. No. 5-2005]
Application for license. Any person desiring a master plumber's license shall make application in
writing to the Plumbers' Examining Board, which Board shall arrange for an examination of such
applicant. Where, however, the applicant is, at the time of making the application, a duly licensed
master or employing plumber, maintaining his or her principal place of business in any other
municipality in the State of New York, which maintains standards equal to those of the Village of
Rockville Centre, he or she may submit a certified or photostatic copy of a certificate of
competency issued by such municipality. In such case, examination may be waived and the
application approved, provided that such municipality has signified in writing its willingness to
reciprocate in like manner with the Village of Rockville Centre. No certificate of competency shall
be issued to any applicant unless he or she has been examined by the Plumbers' Examining
Board of the Village of Rockville Centre. The fee in such cases shall be the same as for those
requiring examination by the Plumber's Examining Board.
[Amended 5-3-2005 by L.L. No. 3-2005; 8-8-2005 by L.L. No. 5-2005]
After such examination, said Plumbers' Examining Board shall endorse on said application its
approval or disapproval thereof and, if approved, shall issue a certificate of competency. If the
application shall be passed on without examination as hereinbefore provided, said Board shall
endorse on said application its approval or disapproval thereof and, if approved, shall issue a
certificate of approval. Upon issuance of such certificate of competency or approval and
compliance with the other provisions of this article, the Board of Trustees through the Village Clerk
may issue to such applicant a license to do business as a master plumber in the Village of
Rockville Centre.
Notice of change. Whenever a licensed master plumber shall retire from business or remove his or
her place of business from the place named in his or her application for license, the Building
Department shall be notified of such retirement or removal and shall be given the address of the
new place of business in case of such removal.
[Amended 5-3-2005 by L.L. No. 3-2005; 8-8-2005 by L.L. No. 5-2005]
Revocation of license. A license granted under the provisions of this section may be revoked by
the Board of Trustees after notice to the licensee that it is proposed to revoke the license and a
hearing in the matter at which the licensee shall have an opportunity to appear and be heard in
relation to such revocation, in accordance with Chapter 222 of the Rockville Centre Code.
[Amended 5-3-2005 by L.L. No. 3-2005]
License restricted to individual. No master plumber shall directly or indirectly allow his or her
license to be used in connection with work not actually done by him or her or under his or her
supervision. A partnership or corporation may establish, engage in, or carry on the business of
plumbing under a master plumber's license granted in accordance with the provisions hereof to a
master plumber who is a partner or an officer of such corporation, and who is engaged in such
business as supervising or directing master plumber, and who will be responsible for the carrying
on of said business in accordance with the provisions of the laws, ordinances and regulations of
the state, county and Village applicable to said business.
[Amended 5-3-2005 by L.L. No. 3-2005]
Insurance. Every master plumber shall file with the Village Clerk before issuance of a license, and
upon each renewal of said license, as hereinafter provided, proof of maintenance of an insurance
policy with minimum limits of one million dollars ($1,000,000) primary insurance and two million
dollars ($2,000,000) excess insurance, indemnifying and saving harmless the Village of Rockville
Centre of and from all damages or claims of damages to a public sewer, water service mains or
pipes, to a highway or the surface thereof, to public or private property or to any person, arising
from unlawful or negligent acts or omissions of said master plumber, his or her agents or
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 55/441
[1]
H.
A.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(a)
(4)
B.
employees, or anyone operating under the authority of his or her license, in making connection
with a public sewer, in opening a public sewer, or in making an opening or excavation in a public
highway, public square or public park, or in maintaining, guarding, refilling or working in or about
such opening or excavation, or in maintaining or guarding objects or materials taken from such
opening or excavation or used in connection therewith. Said insurance coverage shall remain in
full force and effect until the 31st day of December of the year of its issuance, unless sooner
canceled by the Board of Trustees, and shall be and remain security for indemnity for damages,
as aforesaid, during the time it is in force. Renewal insurance policies shall in all cases be filed
with the Superintendent of Buildings on or before December 31 of each year.
[Amended 5-16-1983 by L.L. No. 6-1983; 5-3-2005 by L.L. No. 3-2005; 8-8-2005 by L.L. No. 5-
2005]
Plumbers' Examining Board. The Board of Trustees shall appoint a Plumbers' Examining Board
which shall consist of three members, one of whom shall be designated as Chairman. The Board
of Trustees may also appoint not more than three alternate members of said Examining Board,
who shall sit in the place of absent or recused regular members of the Board in the order of
seniority of their appointment. The members and alternate members of said Examining Board
shall hold office at the pleasure of the Board of Trustees and shall receive such compensation as
the Board of Trustees may fix. Members of said Examining Board shall be master plumbers who
shall have had not less than 10 years' practical experience in the plumbing trade. The Plumbers'
Examining Board shall meet at the call of the Superintendent of Buildings. Notice of meetings of
the Board shall be given to members and alternate members by mailing notice of the time and
place of meeting, addressed to each member and alternate member at his or her last known post
office address, at least 24 hours before the time of such meeting. Notice of such meetings shall
also be given in accordance with the New York State Open Meetings Law.[1] The Plumbers'
Examining Board shall make rules and regulations for the conduct of its business as an Examining
Board. Said Examining Board shall have the power to examine all applicants for a license, shall
determine their fitness for a license under this article and shall recommend to the Superintendent
of Buildings that a license be issued to each qualified applicant who passes such examination.
[Amended 5-3-2005 by L.L. No. 3-2005; 8-8-2005 by L.L. No. 5-2005; 9-10-2007 by L.L. No. 5-
2007]
Editor's Note: See Art. 7 of the New York State Public Officers Law.
§ 115-16. Miscellaneous requirements.
Leaders. All buildings hereafter constructed shall be provided with proper leaders for conducting
water from the roofs. In no case shall the water from leaders be allowed to flow upon the sidewalk.
The water from the leaders shall be conducted by proper pipe or pipes below the surface to a dry
well. In new buildings leaders may be placed inside of wall.
Street encroachments.
General. Except as otherwise provided in this section, no part of a building hereafter erected
or altered shall project beyond the property line.
Projection permits revocable. Any permission, expressed or implied, to construct part of a
structure so as to project beyond the building line, is revocable at will by the Board of
Trustees.
Structural support. The footings of street walls may project not more than 12 inches, when
such projecting parts of footings are not less than seven feet below the curb level.
Permissible projections.
No door shall be hung so as to project more than 12 inches, when fully open, beyond the
street property line.
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 56/441
(b)
(5)
[1]
(6)
A.
B.
A.
B.
Marquees at entrances to hotels, theaters and moving-picture houses may extend only
beyond the property line and across the sidewalk to within four feet of the curbline,
provided they are not less than 10 feet above the curb level at all points, except that if
such marquee does not project more than five feet from the building, same may be not
less than eight feet above the curb level at all points. Marquees shall be constructed of
iron and wire glass or other incombustible materials, securely supported from the building
and properly drained, and provided further that the plans and specifications thereof are
approved by the Superintendent of Buildings.
[Amended 5-3-2005 by L.L. No. 3-2005]
Areas. Every area existing when this article becomes effective that is open at the top and that
projects into any street or public walk shall be covered at the top with an iron or steel grating
set flush with the sidewalk.
[1]Project prohibited by other law not legalized. Nothing in this article shall be deemed to
authorize any projection beyond the property line that is prohibited by any other law or
ordinance.
Editor's Note: Former Subsection B(6), Cellar stairs, cellar doors, was repealed 5-3-2005 by
L.L. No. 3-2005. This local law also redesignated former Subsection B(7) as B(6).
§ 115-17. Excavations.
When excavation exceeds four feet. If such excavation is not intended to be, or shall not be
carried to a depth of more than four feet below the curb, the owner of any wall, building or
structure, the safety of which may be affected by said excavations, shall preserve and protect the
same from injury and support the same by proper foundations; and, when necessary for that
purpose, shall be permitted to enter upon the premises where such excavation is to be made. In
case such wall, building or structure, however, is so located that the curb to which it is properly
referred is at a higher level than the curb to which the excavation is referred, such part of any
necessary underpinning or foundation as may be due to the difference in curb levels shall be
made and maintained at the joint expense of the person causing the excavation to be made and
the owner of such wall, building or structure.
Superintendent of Buildings may act. If the persons whose duty it shall be under the provisions of
this code to properly guard and protect an excavation, or to prevent adjoining earth from caving in
or to preserve or protect any wall, building or structure from injury, shall neglect or fail to do so
after having had a notice from the Superintendent of Buildings, such official may enter upon the
premises and employ such labor, and furnish such materials and take such steps as, in his or her
judgment, may be necessary to prevent adjoining earth from caving in, or to make such wall,
building or structure safe and secure, or to prevent the same from becoming unsafe and
dangerous, at the expense of the person whose duty it is to keep the same safe and secure.
[Amended 5-3-2005 by L.L. No. 3-2005]
§ 115-18. Certificate of occupancy.
No building hereafter erected shall be used or occupied, in whole or in part, until a certificate of
occupancy shall have been issued by the Superintendent of Buildings.
[Amended 5-3-2005 by L.L. No. 3-2005]
No building hereafter enlarged, extended or altered, or upon which work has been performed
which required the issuance of a building permit, shall continue to be occupied or used for more
than 30 days after the completion of the alteration or work unless a certificate of occupancy shall
have been issued by the Superintendent of Buildings.
[Amended 5-3-2005 by L.L. No. 3-2005]
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 57/441
C.
D.
E.
A.
(1)
(2)
B.
No change shall be made in the use or type of occupancy of an existing building unless a
certificate of occupancy authorizing such change shall have been issued by the Superintendent of
Buildings.
[Amended 5-3-2005 by L.L. No. 3-2005]
The owner or his or her agent shall make application for a certificate of occupancy. Accompanying
this application and before the issuance of a certificate of occupancy, for new construction and/or
major alterations involving structural changes, there shall be filed with the Superintendent of
Buildings an affidavit of the registered architect or licensed professional engineer who filed the
original plans, or of the registered architect or licensed professional engineer who supervised the
construction of the work, or of the superintendent of construction who supervised the work and
who, by reason of his or her experience, is qualified to superintend the work for which the
certificate of occupancy is sought. This affidavit shall state that the deponent has examined the
approved plans of the structure for which a certificate of occupancy is sought, that the structure
has been erected in accordance with approved plans and, as erected, complies with the law
governing building construction except insofar as variations therefrom have been legally
authorized. Such variations shall be specified in the affidavit. There shall also be filed an affidavit
of final cost, a final survey and a certificate issued by an electrical inspection agency, as defined
by § 115-26 of the Rockville Centre Village Code.
[Amended 3-6-1995 by L.L. No. 1-1995; 5-3-2005 by L.L. No. 3-2005]
In addition to the certification when required by this section as to compliance with approved plans
and specifications, and provisions of the law, all certificates of occupancy shall state the purpose
for which the building(s) shall be used in the several parts, the maximum permissible live loads on
the several floors, the number of persons that may be accommodated in the several stories, in
case such number is limited by any provision of all applicable ordinances or the approved
specifications, and all stipulations of the permit, if any.
§ 115-19. Inspection prior to issuance of certificate of occupancy;
required documents.
[Amended 5-3-2005 by L.L. No. 3-2005; 6-17-2008 by L.L. No. 6-2008]
Before issuing a certificate of occupancy, the Superintendent of Buildings shall examine, or cause
to be examined, all buildings, structures and sites for which an application has been filed for a
building permit to construct, enlarge, alter, repair, remove, demolish or change the use or
occupancy; and he or she may conduct such inspections as he or she deems appropriate from
time to time during and upon completion of the work for which a building permit has been issued.
There shall be maintained in the Building Department a record of all such examinations and
inspections, together with a record of findings of violation of the law.
In addition, where applicable, the following documents, prepared in accordance with the provisions
of the Uniform Code by such person or persons as may be designated by or otherwise acceptable
to the Superintendent of Buildings, at the expense of the applicant for the certificate of occupancy,
shall be provided to the Superintendent of Buildings prior to the issuance of the certificate of
occupancy:
A written statement of structural observations and/or a final report of special inspections; and
Flood hazard certifications.
§ 115-20. Issuance of certificate of occupancy; contents of
certificate.
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 58/441
A.
B.
C.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
D.
When, after final inspection, it is found that the proposed work has been completed in accordance
with the applicable building laws, ordinances and regulation, and also in accordance with the
application, plans and specifications filed in connection with the issuance of the building permit,
the Superintendent of Buildings shall issue a certificate of occupancy upon the form provided by
the Building Department. If it is found that the proposed work has not been properly completed,
the Superintendent of Buildings shall refuse to issue a certificate of occupancy and shall order the
work completed in conformity with the building permit and in conformity with the applicable
building regulations.
[Amended 5-3-2005 by L.L. No. 3-2005]
A certificate of occupancy shall be issued, after compliance and within 30 days after application
therefor is made.
The certificate of occupancy shall certify that the work has been completed, and that the proposed
use and occupancy is in conformity with the provisions of the applicable building and zoning laws,
ordinances and regulations, and shall specify the use or uses and the extent thereof to which the
building or structure or its several parts may be put.
Contents of certificates of occupancy. A certificate of occupancy shall contain the following
information:
[Added 6-17-2008 by L.L. No. 6-2008]
The building permit number, if any;
The date of issuance of the building permit, if any;
The name, address and Tax Map number of the property;
If the certificate of occupancy is not applicable to an entire structure, a description of that
portion of the structure for which the certificate of occupancy is issued;
The use and occupancy classification of the structure;
The type of construction of the structure;
The assembly occupant load of the structure, if any;
If an automatic sprinkler system is provided, a notation as to whether the sprinkler system is
required;
Any special conditions imposed in connection with the issuance of the building permit; and
The signature of the official issuing the certificate of occupancy and the date of issuance.
§ 115-21. Temporary certificate of occupancy.
[Amended 5-3-2005 by L.L. No. 3-2005]
Upon request, the Superintendent of Buildings may issue a temporary certificate of occupancy for a
building or structure, or part thereof, before the entire work covered by the building permit shall have
been completed provided such portion or portions as have been completed may be occupied safely
without endangering life or the public welfare. A temporary certificate of occupancy shall remain
effective for a period not exceeding three months from its date of issuance. For good cause and at the
discretion of the Superintendent of Buildings, he or she may allow a maximum of two extensions for
periods not exceeding three months each.
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 59/441
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(1)
(2)
A.
B.
§ 115-21.1. Revocation or suspension of certificates of
occupancy.
[Added 6-17-2008 by L.L. No. 6-2008]
If the Superintendent of Buildings determines that a certificate of occupancy or a temporary certificate
was issued in error because of incorrect, inaccurate or incomplete information, and if the relevant
deficiencies are not corrected to the satisfaction of the Superintendent of Buildings within such period
of time as shall be specified by the Superintendent of Buildings, the Superintendent of Buildings shall
revoke or suspend such certificate.
§ 115-21.2. Notification regarding fire or explosion.
[Added 6-17-2008 by L.L. No. 6-2008]
The Chief of any fire department providing fire-fighting services for a property within the Village shall
promptly notify the Superintendent of Buildings of any fire or explosion involving any structural
damage, fuel-burning appliance, chimney or gas vent.
§ 115-21.3. Operating permits.
[Added 6-17-2008 by L.L. No. 6-2008]
Operating permits required.
Operating permits shall be required for conducting the activities or using the categories of
buildings listed below:
Manufacturing, storing or handling hazardous materials in quantities exceeding those
listed in Table 2703.1.1(1), 2703.1.1(2), 2703.1.1(3) or 2703.1.1(4) in the publication
entitled "Fire Code of New York State" and incorporated by reference in 19 NYCRR
1225.1;
Hazardous processes and activities, including, but not limited to, commercial and
industrial operations which produce combustible dust as a byproduct, fruit and crop
ripening, and waste handling;
Use of pyrotechnic devices in assembly occupancies;
Buildings containing one or more areas of public assembly with an occupant load of 50
persons or more; and
Buildings whose use or occupancy classification may pose a substantial potential hazard
to public safety, as determined by resolution adopted by the Board of Trustees of the
Village.
Any person who proposes to undertake any activity or to operate any type of building listed in
this Subsection A(1) shall be required to obtain an operating permit prior to commencing such
activity or operation.
Applications for operating permits. An application for an operating permit shall be in writing on a
form provided by or otherwise acceptable to the Superintendent of Buildings. Such application
shall include such information as the Superintendent of Buildings deems sufficient to permit a
determination by the Superintendent of Buildings that quantities, materials, and activities conform
to the requirements of the Uniform Code. If the Superintendent of Buildings determines that tests
or reports are necessary to verify conformance, such tests or reports shall be performed or
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 60/441
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
(1)
(2)
(3)
A.
B.
provided by such person or persons as may be designated by or otherwise acceptable to the
Superintendent of Buildings, at the expense of the applicant.
Inspections. The Superintendent of Buildings or an inspector authorized by the Superintendent of
Buildings shall inspect the subject premises prior to the issuance of an operating permit.
Multiple activities. In any circumstance in which more than one activity listed in Subsection A(1) of
this section is to be conducted at a location, the Superintendent of Buildings may require a
separate operating permit for each such activity, or the Superintendent of Buildings may, in his or
her discretion, issue a single operating permit to apply to all such activities.
Duration of operating permits. Operating permits shall be issued for such period of time, not to
exceed one year in the case of any operating permit issued for an area of public assembly and not
to exceed three years in any other case, as shall be determined by the Superintendent of
Buildings to be consistent with local conditions. The effective period of each operating permit shall
be specified in the operating permit. An operating permit may be reissued or renewed upon
application to the Superintendent of Buildings, payment of the applicable fee, and approval of such
application by the Superintendent of Buildings.
Revocation or suspension of operating permits. If the Superintendent of Buildings determines that
any activity or building for which an operating permit was issued does not comply with any
applicable provision of the Uniform Code, such operating permit shall be revoked or suspended.
Fee. The fee specified in or determined in accordance with the provisions of this Code must be
paid at the time of submission of an application for an operating permit, for an amended operating
permit, or for reissue or renewal of an operating permit.
§ 115-21.4. Firesafety and property maintenance inspections.
[Added 6-17-2008 by L.L. No. 6-2008]
Inspections required. Firesafety and property maintenance inspections of buildings and structures
shall be performed by the Superintendent of Buildings or an inspector designated by the
Superintendent of Buildings at the following intervals:
Firesafety and property maintenance inspections of buildings or structures which contain an
area of public assembly shall be performed at least once every 12 months.
Firesafety and property maintenance inspections of buildings or structures being occupied as
dormitories shall be performed at least once every 12 months.
Firesafety and property maintenance inspections of all multiple dwellings not included in
Subsection A(1) or (2), and all nonresidential buildings, structures, uses and occupancies not
included in Subsection A(1) or (2), shall be performed at least once every 12 months.
Inspections permitted. In addition to the inspections required by Subsection A firesafety and
property maintenance inspection of any building, structure, use, or occupancy, or of any dwelling
unit, may also be performed by the Superintendent of Buildings or an inspector designated by the
Superintendent of Buildings at any time upon the request of the owner of the property to be
inspected or an authorized agent of such owner; receipt by the Superintendent of Buildings of a
written statement alleging that conditions or activities failing to comply with the Uniform Code or
Energy Code exist; or receipt by the Superintendent of Buildings of any other information,
reasonably believed by the Superintendent of Buildings to be reliable, giving rise to reasonable
cause to believe that conditions or activities failing to comply with the Uniform Code or Energy
Code exist; provided, however, that nothing in this Subsection B shall be construed as permitting
an inspection under any circumstances under which a court order or warrant permitting such
inspection is required, unless such court order or warrant shall have been obtained.
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 61/441
C.
D.
A.
B.
C.
D.
A.
B.
OFPC inspections. Nothing in this section or in any other provision of this Code shall supersede,
limit or impair the powers, duties and responsibilities of the New York State Office of Fire
Prevention and Control (OFPC) and the New York State Fire Administrator under Executive Law
§ 156-e and Education Law § 807-b.
The fee specified in or determined in accordance with this Code must be paid prior to or at the
time each inspection is performed pursuant to this section. This Subsection D shall not apply to
inspections performed by OFPC.
§ 115-22. Tests.
[Amended 5-3-2005 by L.L. No. 3-2005]
Whenever there are reasonable grounds to believe that any material, construction, equipment or
assembly does not comply with the requirements of the applicable building laws, ordinances or
regulations, the Superintendent of Buildings may require the same to be subjected to tests, at the
applicant's expense, in order to furnish proof of such compliance.
§ 115-22.1. Complaints.
[Added 6-17-2008 by L.L. No. 6-2008]
The Superintendent of Buildings shall review and investigate complaints which allege or assert the
existence of conditions or activities that fail to comply with the Uniform Code, the Energy Code, the
Village Code, or any other local law, ordinance, rule or regulation adopted for administration and
enforcement of the Uniform Code or the Energy Code. The process for responding to a complaint shall
include such of the following steps as the Superintendent of Buildings may deem to be appropriate:
Performing an inspection of the conditions and/or activities alleged to be in violation, and
documenting the results of such inspection;
If a violation is found to exist, providing the owner of the affected property and any other person
who may be responsible for the violation with notice of the violation and opportunity to abate,
correct or cure the violation, or otherwise proceeding in the manner described in this Code.
If appropriate, issuing a stop-work order;
If a violation which was found to exist is abated or corrected, performing an inspection to ensure
that the violation has been abated or corrected, preparing a final written report reflecting such
abatement or correction, and filing such report with the complaint.
§ 115-23. Penalties for offenses.
[Amended 1-22-1990 by L.L. No. 1-1990; 5-3-2005 by L.L. No. 3-2005]
In accordance with § 382 of Article 18 of the Executive Law of the State of New York:
In addition to and not in limitation of any power otherwise granted by law, every local government
and its authorized agents shall have the power to order in writing the remedying of any condition
found to exist in, on or about any building in violation of the Uniform Fire Prevention and Building
Code and to issue appearance tickets for violations of the Uniform Code.
Any person, having been served, either personally or by registered or certified mail, with an order
to remedy any condition found to exist in, on, or about any building in violation of the Uniform Fire
Prevention and Building Code, who shall fail to comply with such order within the time fixed by the
regulations promulgated by the Secretary[1] pursuant to Subdivision 1 of § 381 of this article,[2]
such time period to be stated in the order, and any owner, builder, architect, tenant, contractor,
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 62/441
[1]
[2]
[3]
C.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
A.
subcontractor, construction superintendent or their agents or any other person taking part or
assisting in the construction of any building who shall knowingly violate any of the applicable
provisions of the Uniform Code or any lawful order of a local government, a county or the
Secretary made thereunder regarding standards for construction, maintenance, or fire protection
equipment and systems, shall be punishable by a fine of not more than $1,000 per day of
violation, or imprisonment not exceeding one year, or both.
Editor's Note: Section 372(15) of the Executive Law defines the “Secretary” as New York State's
Secretary of State.
Editor's Note: The phrase “this article” refers to Article 18 of the Executive Law.
Where the construction or use of a building is in violation of any provision of the Uniform Code or
any lawful order obtained thereunder, a Justice of the Supreme Court at a special term in the
judicial district in which the building is located may order the removal of the building or an
abatement of the condition in violation of such provisions. An application for such relief may be
made by the Secretary,[3]an appropriate municipal officer, or any other person aggrieved by the
violation.
Editor's Note: Section 372(15) of the Executive Law defines the “Secretary” as New York State's
Secretary of State.
§ 115-24. Abatement of violations.
Appropriate actions and proceedings may be taken at law or in equity to prevent unlawful construction
or to restrain, correct or abate a violation or to prevent illegal occupancy of a building, structure or
premises or to prevent illegal acts or conduct a business in or about any premises, and these remedies
shall be in addition to penalties otherwise prescribed by law.
§ 115-25. Failure of enforcement officer does not legalize
nonconforming practice.
[Amended 5-3-2005 by L.L. No. 3-2005]
No oversight or dereliction of duty on the part of the Superintendent of Buildings or on the part of any
employee of the Building Department shall legalize the erection, construction, alteration, removal of,
use or occupancy of a building or structure that does not conform to the applicable building or
plumbing laws, ordinances or regulations or that does not conform with the provisions of an
application, plans or specifications on the basis of which a building permit or plumbing permit was
issued or that does not conform to the applicable provisions of the Rockville Centre Code.
§ 115-25.1. Recordkeeping.
[Added 6-17-2008 by L.L. No. 6-2008]
The Superintendent of Buildings shall keep permanent official records of all transactions and
activities conducted by all code enforcement personnel, including records of:
All applications received, reviewed and approved or denied;
All plans, specifications and construction documents approved;
All building permits, certificates of occupancy, temporary certificates, stop-work orders, and
operating permits issued;
All inspections and tests performed;
All statements and reports issued;
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 63/441
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
[1]
B.
A.
B.
C.
A.
(1)
[1]
[2]
(a)
(2)
B.
All complaints received;
All investigations conducted;
All other features and activities specified in or contemplated by this chapter; and
All fees charged and collected.
All such records shall be subject to the Freedom of Information Law,[1] and to the extent required
by such law shall be open for public inspection during normal business hours. All plans and
records pertaining to buildings or structures, or appurtenances thereto, shall be retained for at
least the minimum time period required by state law and regulation.
Editor's Note: See Public Officers Law § 84 et seq.
§ 115-25.2. Program review and reporting.
[Added 6-17-2008 by Ord. No. 6-2008]
The Superintendent of Buildings shall annually submit to the Board of Trustees of the Village a
written report and summary of all business conducted by the Superintendent of Buildings and the
inspectors, including a report and summary of all transactions and activities described in § 115-
25.1 and a report and summary of all appeals or litigation pending or concluded.
The Superintendent of Buildings shall annually submit to the Secretary of State, on behalf of the
Village, on a form prescribed by the Secretary of State, a report of the activities of the Village
relative to administration and enforcement of the Uniform Code.
The Superintendent of Buildings shall, upon request of the New York State Department of State,
provide to the New York State Department of State, from the records and related materials the
Village is required to maintain, excerpts, summaries, tabulations, statistics and other information
and accounts of the activities of the Village in connection with administration and enforcement of
the Uniform Code.
§ 115-26. Electrical installations and inspections.
[Amended 3-6-1995 by L.L. No. 2-1995; 5-3-2005 by L.L. No. 3-2005; 4-26-2011 by L.L. No. 8-2011[1]]
All electrical installations must comply in all respects with the applicable provisions of the New
York State Uniform Building and Fire Prevention Code and the rules and regulations of the Village
Municipal Electric Utility as amended at the date of installation. All work must be filed with and
approved by an electrical inspection agency approved by the Village of Rockville Centre.
Inspections.
Inspection of electrical work shall only be performed by an electrical inspector approved by
the Village Board of Trustees.
Insurance.
Inspection of electrical work shall only be performed by an approved electrical inspector
which carries public liability insurance. Such insurance shall:
Name the Village of Rockville Centre as an additional insured.
Be in an amount not less than $10,000,000 for all damages arising out of bodily
injury to one person.
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 64/441
[3]
[4]
(b)
(3)
C.
D.
[1]
A.
B.
Be in an amount not less than $10,000,000 for all damages arising out of bodily
injury in any one accident nor less than $10,000,000 for property damage.
Remain in full force and effect throughout the period such inspector is approved to
perform electrical inspections in the Village of Rockville Centre.
Said insurance shall provide that no cancellation or material modification of such policy
shall be effective unless at least 15 days' prior notice thereof is given by registered or
certified mail to the Superintendent of Buildings of the Village of Rockville Centre.
No electrical inspector shall perform any electrical inspections in the Village of Rockville
Centre unless a valid and current certificate of insurance is on file with the Superintendent of
Buildings of the Village of Rockville Centre.
No person, while acting as an electrical inspector, shall inspect any electrical work which he or she
has performed in his or her capacity as a licensed master electrician, or which was performed
under such person's supervision or behalf. No electrical inspector shall perform any electrical
inspection of any installation or premises or electrical work with which such electrical inspector or
any principal or employee of such inspector, has any direct or indirect affiliation.
The Village Board of Trustees may, by resolution, designate one or more qualified persons or
entities to act as an electrical inspector for the Village of Rockville Centre. Any person or entity so
designated shall be required, upon request of the Village Building Department or Electric
Department to perform in any one official year not more than two inspections without charge to the
Village.
Editor’s Note: This local law also provided that it take effect upon adoption and filing, except that
Subsection D not take effect until 7-1-2011.
§ 115-27. Repair of damaged buildings.
[Amended 5-3-2005 by L.L. No. 3-2005]
When prohibited. Within the fire limits, any existing frame, wood or other combustible structure
which, in the judgment of the Superintendent of Buildings, may be damaged from any cause
whatsoever to an amount greater than 1/2 of its value, exclusive of foundations, shall not be
repaired or rebuilt, but shall be taken down, except that if said frame building shall have been
occupied exclusively as a one-family residence when said building is damaged by fire, or
otherwise mentioned above, the amount of permissible damage shall be increased to 75%.
In case the owner or owners of the structure which may be damaged or in need of repairs shall be
dissatisfied with the decision of the Superintendent of Buildings as to the extent of such damage
or need of repairs, then the amount or extent of such damage or required repairs shall be
determined by competent engineers, architects or builders of at least 10 years' experience, one
appointed by the Superintendent of Buildings, one by the owner or owners of the structure and, in
case these two do not agree, one selected by them jointly. The report of these shall be reduced to
writing and, when signed by any two of them, shall be conclusive. No building the subject of
survey shall be in any manner repaired, altered or rebuilt until after the decision of the surveyors
shall have been rendered. The expense of the expert appointed by the owner shall be paid by him,
the expense of the expert appointed by the Building Official shall be paid by the Village, and the
expense of the third expert shall be paid in equal parts by the owner and the Village.
§ 115-28. Fire limits.
[Amended 11-21-1977 by L.L. No. 7-1977]
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 65/441
(1)
(2)
(3)
A.
B.
C.
D.
A.
B.
Fire Limit A is hereby established to include all districts other than Residential A District; provided,
however, that one- or two-family residences in Residential B or C Districts shall be considered to be
excluded from Fire Limit A.
§ 115-29. Elevators.
[Amended 12-4-1972; 11-21-1977 by L.L. No. 8-1977]
It shall be the duty of the owner of the building to place a mirror or mirrors in the rear of elevators
so as to make the interior thereof visible to a person prior to entering such elevator, such mirror to
be of a design and size prescribed by the Superintendent of Buildings so as to ensure proper
safety; and to supply the Building Department with a certificate of inspection from an acceptable
elevator company or insurance company. The required inspection and testing shall be made at
intervals as follows:
Six months for power passenger elevators.
Six months for escalators and power freight elevators.
Twelve months for hand elevators, self-powered and dumbwaiters.
The certificate shall indicate that the elevator, escalator and/or dumbwaiter is in proper working
order and complies with the regulations of the Uniform Code and generally accepted standards.
[Amended 5-3-2005 by L.L. No. 3-2005]
If the owner fails to supply the certificates, as required, the Building Department shall have said
elevator or escalator inspected. The fee for such inspection shall be at the levels fixed from time to
time by resolution of the Board of Trustees of the Village of Rockville Centre. Such fee shall be
paid by the owner of the building.
Any person who knowingly and willfully violates any of the provisions of this section or violates or
fails to comply with any order or requirements of an inspector, or other official charged with the
duty of inspecting elevators, shall be guilty of a violation punishable to the maximum extent
provided by law but not to exceed $500 or imprisonment for not more than 15 days.
§ 115-30. Fees.
[Amended 12-4-1972]
All fees prescribed in this section shall be collected by the Superintendent of Buildings, and no
permits shall be issued by the Superintendent of Buildings until such fees have been paid. The
Superintendent of Buildings is authorized to fix by regulation a schedule of square feet and/or
cubic feet for buildings or structures of varying types of construction and classes of occupancy to
serve as the basis for determining estimated costs. The estimated cost, which shall be the amount
of money that would ordinarily be expended for good safe construction in the erection of the
complete building or structure exclusive of interior decoration of the structure, shall be determined
by the Superintendent of Buildings.
[Amended 5-3-2005 by L.L. No. 3-2005]
The fee for any permit, license or certificate of occupancy or the installation or alteration of
furnaces or heat-producing appliances, elevators, standpipe systems, sprinkler systems,
refrigerator systems or central air-conditioning connections, oil burners or tanks, gasoline tanks or
the renewal of licenses as required by the provisions of this article shall be at the levels fixed from
time to time by resolution of the Board of Trustees of the Village of Rockville Centre.
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 66/441
C.
A.
(1)
(2)
B.
Every license shall expire on the 31st day of December of the year in which it is issued but may be
renewed without examination for each succeeding year upon payment, on or before January 31st
of such succeeding year, of such fee as may be fixed from time to time by resolution of the Board
of Trustees of the Incorporated Village of Rockville Centre.
§ 115-31. Interpretation.
The powers enumerated in this article shall be interpreted liberally to effectuate the purposes thereof
and shall not be construed as limitations of powers.
Article II. Emergency Lighting in Residential Structures
[Adopted 11-19-1979 by L.L. No. 10-1979]
§ 115-32. Definitions.
The following definitions shall apply throughout this article:
EMERGENCY LIGHTING
An independent lighting system other than that of the principal lighting system, powered by a
source of electricity independent of such principal lighting system, which is capable of providing an
amount of illumination for exits, aisles, halls, passageways, corridors, stairways or other areas so
as to provide a light intensity of at least 0.5 footcandle power at the floor or ground level for a
period of not less than 30 minutes, and which shall operate automatically and independently in the
event of failure of the electrical current in the principal lighting system.
EMERGENCY POWER
An independent power system other than that supplied by the principal electrical system, which
will generate a sufficient quantity of electricity to operate all electrically powered machines,
equipment, instruments, devices or contrivances as required in this article.
MULTIPLE DWELLING
Any building providing three or more apartment units to rent.
ROOMING HOUSE
Any building providing rooms for rent properly licensed pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 225
of the Code of the Village of Rockville Centre.
§ 115-33. Emergency lighting required; location.
No building herein defined shall be occupied unless and until an emergency lighting system shall
be installed and maintained in accordance with the provisions of this article.
Emergency lighting. Emergency lighting systems shall be provided as follows:
Rooming houses and boardinghouses: to illuminate all exit halls, corridors and stairways.
Multiple dwellings: In all buildings providing three apartment units or more, there shall be
provided an emergency lighting system for all exits, aisles leading directly to exits, stairways,
stair enclosures, elevators and all halls, passageways and corridors exceeding 100 feet in
length.
§ 115-34. Approved power sources.
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 67/441
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
Emergency lighting systems will be connected directly to rechargeable-type storage batteries that are
certified capable of achieving the desired result. All installations and sources of emergency power will
be subject to the direct approval of the Superintendent of the Department of Buildings.
§ 115-35. Conditions for approval; inspections.
It shall be the responsibility of each owner, agent or lessee of any building requiring emergency
lighting and/or power as required by this article to submit a plan of such system to the Building
Department for approval prior to installation, showing the number of units, size, location, life and
replacement span of the power source as recommended by the manufacturer and any other
pertinent or requested information applicable thereto.
Emergency lighting and power sources shall be capable of sustaining such lighting and/or power
for a minimum period of 30 minutes or for such longer periods of time as required by the
Superintendent of Buildings, due to the presence of special or unusual conditions.
Transfer to the required emergency lighting and/or power source shall be made within 15 seconds
upon failure of the principal system.
All exit lights and exit directional signs shall be connected to or supplied with emergency lighting.
All emergency lighting and power equipment systems shall be designed to incorporate testing
devices which are easily accessible to authorized representatives of the Village of Rockville
Centre.
All emergency lighting and/or power systems shall be maintained in an operative condition at all
times while the building, as defined in this article, is occupied.
It shall be the duty of the inspecting officer of the Building Department to inspect the installation
upon completion to ascertain whether the system has been installed in conformity with the
approved plans prior to approval and acceptance by the Building Department, and at such other
times to determine whether or not such system is being maintained in an operative condition.
§ 115-36. Higher standards to prevail; repealer.
In any case where a provision of this article is found to be in conflict with the provisions of any building,
fire, safety or health law, ordinance, law or code of this Village of Rockville Centre existing on the
effective date of this article, the provision which establishes the higher standard for the promotion and
protection of the health, safety and welfare of the people shall prevail. In any case where a provision of
this article is found to be in conflict with the provision of any other law, ordinance or code of this Village
of Rockville Centre existing on the effective date of this article which establishes a lower standard for
the promotion and protection of the health, safety and welfare of the people, the provision of this article
shall be deemed to prevail, and such other laws, ordinances or codes are hereby declared to be
repealed to the extent that they may be in conflict with this article.
§ 115-37. Date for compliance.
The owner or owners of any multiple dwelling or rooming house as defined in § 115-32 of this article
shall comply with the provisions of this article on or before April 1, 1980; provided, however, that the
time for compliance may be extended by the Village Clerk-Treasurer if there is an application made by
such owner or owners to the Village Clerk-Treasurer. Such application must be filed no later than
February 15, 1980, and must contain a sworn statement by the applicant that the applicant has
contracted for the installation of the emergency lighting required by this article but that the installation
has not been either begun or completed, and will show the date of the completion.
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 68/441
A.
B.
A.
B.
[1]
§ 115-38. Penalties for offenses.
For any and every offense against the provisions of this article, the owner, general agent or
contractor of a building or premises where such offense shall have been committed or shall exist,
and the general agent, architect, builder, contractor or any other person who knowingly commits,
takes part or assists in the commission of any such offense or who maintains a building or
premises in which any offense shall exist, is guilty of a violation punishable by a fine not exceeding
$250 or imprisonment for a period not exceeding 15 days for each such offense, or by both such
fine and imprisonment.
In the event that such offense shall continue for a period in excess of one week, each additional
week or part of a week shall constitute a separate violation.
Chapter 118. Building Drains
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Trustees of the Village of Rockville Centre 2-22-1971 by L.L. No.
1-1971 as Ch. 25 of the 1971 Code. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building code — See Ch. 112.
Plumbing — See Ch. 256.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 287.
§ 118-1. Permit required.
Issued by Clerk. No person shall construct or maintain any building drain which passes across or
beneath any part of any street, road or highway or sidewalk unless the owner of such building
shall first have obtained a permit from the Village Clerk.
Certificate by Engineer. A certificate by the Chief Engineer or his deputy that such drain is
necessary and that its construction will not injure the street or other public or private property shall
be issued as a condition precedent to granting the permit.
§ 118-2. Fees.
[Amended 12-4-1972]
The fee for any license required by the provisions of this chapter shall be at the levels fixed from time
to time by resolution of the Board of Trustees of the Village of Rockville Centre.
§ 118-3. Bonds.
No permit shall be issued unless the applicant posts bonds of the same nature and in the same
amounts as provided for permits to excavate in the streets in Section 4 of Ordinance No. 3.1,[1] to save
the Village harmless from the payment of damages for injury to persons or property because of fault or
default by him.
Editor's Note: Included as Ch. 287, Streets and Sidewalks, Art X, Excavations.
§ 118-4. Maintenance of drains.
All drains constructed shall at all times be maintained by the property owner, and the owner of the
premises for which such drain shall be constructed shall be responsible for and shall hold the Village
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 69/441
A.
harmless from all damages to person or property by reason of the existence of such drain.
§ 118-5. Revocation.
All permits issued hereunder shall be subject to revocation by the Board of Trustees at any time. Upon
such revocation the property owner shall immediately remove such drain and place the sidewalk and
curb in a proper condition.
Chapter 122. Buildings and Premises, Dangerous and
Unsafe
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Trustees of the Village of Rockville Centre 2-22-1971 by L.L. No.
1-1971 as Ch. 27 of the 1971 Code; amended in its entirety 12-15-2008 by L.L. No. 13-2008.
Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building code — See Ch. 112.
Building code administration — See Ch. 115.
Moving of buildings — See Ch. 126.
Rehabilitation of buildings — See Ch. 132.
Fire prevention and control — See Ch. 185.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 261.
Public nuisances — See Ch. 263.
§ 122-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to promote, protect and preserve the health, welfare and property of
residents of and owners of property within the Village of Rockville Centre, by providing for the removal
or repair of buildings, structures and premises that from any cause may be or become dangerous,
unsafe, a public nuisance or fire hazard.
§ 122-2. Inspector, inspections and reports.
The Superintendent of Building Department or the designee of the Superintendent is authorized and
designated to inspect any building, structure or premises within the Village of Rockville Centre which
the Superintendent of Building Department or the designee of the Superintendent has reason to
believe is or may be, from any cause, dangerous or unsafe to the public, or a public nuisance or
hazard, and promptly thereafter to report to the Board of Trustees, in writing, with respect to any such
inspection. Such report shall specify the date(s) of inspection, the condition(s) found which are deemed
to be dangerous or unsafe, or a public nuisance or hazard, an opinion as to the cause of such
condition, and recommendations for correction of such conditions.
§ 122-3. Notice.
Upon receipt of such report, and if the Board of Trustees shall so order, the Village Clerk shall cause a
notice to be served on the owner or one or more of the owner's legal representatives, or another
person having any interest in the property. Such notice shall be given by personal delivery, or by
certified mail, return receipt requested, addressed to such person(s) at their last known address, as
shown in the Village tax records and/or in the office of the Nassau County Clerk. Such notice shall
state:
A description of the premises.
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 70/441
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
The particulars in which the building, structure and/or premises is unsafe or dangerous.
A description of work or action required to be performed to make the building, structure and/or
premises safe and secure or remove any hazard.
The time within which such remedial action must be taken.
That the building, structure and/or premises will be inspected in the event of failure or refusal to
complete such remediation within such period of time, such inspection to be made by the
Superintendent of Building Department or the designee of the Superintendent, and by a builder,
engineer or architect designated by the Superintendent of Building Department or the designee of
the Superintendent, and a report of such inspection shall be filed with the Board of Trustees.
That in the event such report concludes that the building, structure and/or premises remain unsafe
or dangerous, the Board of Trustees may authorize an application to a court of appropriate
jurisdiction for an order determining the building, structure and/or premises to be a public nuisance
and directing such remedial action as may be required to remove any hazard to the public, and
that such remedial action shall be performed at the expense of the owner of the property, as the
court may determine.
§ 122-4. Posting of notice.
A copy of such notice shall be posted on the front door of the building or structure or in another
conspicuous location on the building, structure and/or premises within one day after personal delivery
or mailing of the notice.
§ 122-5. Service of inspection report.
A copy of the inspection report shall be served by personal delivery or by certified mail, return receipt
requested, upon the owner of the property, at the address listed for such owner in the Village tax rolls
or the records of the Nassau County Clerk, and a copy thereof shall be posted at the building or
structure, in the manner provided in § 122-4 hereof, within one day after such delivery or mailing.
§ 122-6. Compensation.
The builder, engineer or architect designated by the Superintendent of Building Department or the
designee of the Superintendent, pursuant to § 122-3 hereof, shall receive a fee to be fixed by the
Board of Trustees, which fee shall be a Village charge, but which the Village may charge to the
property owner. Any unpaid fee shall be and become a lien on said property as of the date of such
assessment in the same manner as provided for a lien for unpaid property taxes.
§ 122-7. Emergency action.
In the event the Superintendent of Building Department or the designee of the Superintendent
determines that a condition exists which constitutes an imminent danger to the public or public
property, the Superintendent of Building Department or the designee of the Superintendent may issue
such emergency order or determination as appropriate to protect the public from imminent injury or
hazard, including, without limitation, an order to vacate the building, structure and/or premises, or an
order directing the performance of immediate remedial work, at the expense of the property owner, as
may be necessary to prevent such imminent injury or hazard.
§ 122-8. Assessment of costs.
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 71/441
A.
B.
A.
(1)
(2)
B.
All costs and expenses incurred by the Village in connection with any emergency action taken by the
Superintendent of Building Department or the designee of the Superintendent, pursuant to § 122-7
hereof, or for any judicial proceedings instituted pursuant to this chapter or pursuant to any law
authorizing such proceedings with respect to any unsafe or dangerous building or premises shall be
assessed against the property and shall be and become a lien on said property as of the date of such
assessment in the same manner as provided for a lien for unpaid property taxes. The lien of the Village
for such costs and expenses shall have priority over all other liens and encumbrances, except the liens
of taxes and assessments which constitute prior liens.
§ 122-9. Remedies not to be exclusive.
The remedies of the Village as set forth in this chapter shall not be exclusive, and the Village shall
have any other and further remedy available at law or otherwise, by injunction or otherwise, pursuant
to the laws of the State of New York. Any and all such remedies shall be deemed cumulative and the
pursuit of any remedy shall not be construed as an election or the waiver of the right to pursue any and
all others.
§ 122-10. Penalties for offenses.
It shall be unlawful for any person or entity to knowingly maintain or cause to be maintained, or to
knowingly allow or permit any other person or entity as agent, lessee or otherwise to maintain, any
dangerous, unsafe or hazardous building, structure, or premises, and any owner, occupant, lessee
or other person or other entity who shall knowingly maintain or cause to be maintained, or
knowingly allows or permits to be maintained, any such dangerous, unsafe or hazardous building,
structure or premises, in violation of any order issued as provided in this chapter, shall be guilty of
an offense and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined in an amount as provided by law.
For the purpose of Subsection A of this section, each day during which there is a violation of this
chapter or any such order shall constitute a separate offense.
Chapter 126. Buildings, Moving of
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Trustees of the Village of Rockville Centre 2-22-1971 by L.L. No.
1-1971 as Ch. 29 of the 1971 Code. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building code — See Ch. 112.
Building code administration — See Ch. 115.
Licenses — See Ch. 222.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 287.
Zoning — See Ch. 340.
§ 126-1. Permit required.
Authorization by Board. No person shall move a building or other structure upon or across any
street of the Village unless a permit therefor has been issued by the Village Clerk upon
authorization by the Board of Trustees.
Application form. As a prerequisite to securing a permit, an application must be filed with the
Village Clerk, containing:
The name and address of the applicant.
The size and structural details of the object to be moved.
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 72/441
(3)
(4)
Its present location and the place within the Village to which it is to be moved.
Certificate by the telephone company and Electric Utility Department indicating that
satisfactory arrangements have been made covering the relocation of the utilities.
§ 126-2. Bonds.
Each application shall be accompanied by a certificate of insurance in form approved by the Village
Counsel and issued by an insurance company authorized to do business in this state, running to the
Village, guaranteeing that the applicant has provided public liability coverage of not less than
$100,000/$300,000, and property damage insurance in the amount of not less than $50,000/$100,000,
to save the Village harmless from all claims, actions and proceedings brought by any person for injury
to person or property resulting from or occasioned by any fault or default by the person to whom the
permit is issued or anyone acting thereunder on his behalf. The policy shall also protect the Village, in
the sum of $10,000, against any damages caused to any street trees or other public property by
reason of such house moving. In addition, every applicant shall post a ninety-day completion bond
assuring the reerection, modification, alteration or other work to be done upon the building in
conformity with the plans approved by the Chief Engineer or his deputy.
§ 126-3. Fees.
[Amended 12-4-1972]
The fee for any license required by the provisions of this chapter shall be at the levels fixed from time
to time by resolution of the Board of Trustees of the Village of Rockville Centre.
§ 126-4. Grounds for refusal.
If, to the Board, the moving of the structure seems likely to cause injury to property, trees, electric
wires, or otherwise cause hardship, inconvenience, or seems to be not conducive to public safety or
welfare, such permit may be refused, the deposit fees returned and the bonds canceled.
Chapter 129. Buildings, Numbering of
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Trustees of the Village of Rockville Centre as indicated in article
histories. Amendments noted where applicable]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building code — See Ch. 112.
Zoning — See Ch. 340.
Article I. Numbering of Houses
[Adopted 2-22-1971 by L.L. No. 1-1971 as Ch. 86 of the 1971 Code]
§ 129-1. Display of house number required.
It shall be the duty of the owner of every plot of land on which is erected any building other than a barn,
stable, private garage or other outbuilding within the Village, to cause to be conspicuously affixed on
the front part of each and every such building owned by him within said Village the proper number
thereof as appears by the house number map on file in the office of the Clerk of the Village aforesaid,
which number shall be plainly legible at a distance of 50 feet from the front of said building.
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 73/441
A.
§ 129-2. Village Clerk to furnish number.
It shall be the duty of the Clerk of the Village, upon application, to furnish to any person the proper
number of any building upon being furnished with a location of the said building.
§ 129-3. Penalties for offenses.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article or any part thereof shall be liable for and forfeit
and pay a penalty of not more $10 for each offense, for the use of said Village. Any violation of this
article or any part thereof shall constitute disorderly conduct, and any person violating this article or
any part thereof is hereby declared a disorderly person.
Chapter 132. Buildings, Rehabilitation of
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Trustees of the Village of Rockville Centre 2-22-1971 by L.L. No.
1-1971 as Ch. 30 of the 1971 Code. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Awnings — See Ch. 96.
Bowling alleys and pool halls — See Ch. 105.
Building code — See Ch. 112.
Building drains — See Ch. 118.
Dangerous and unsafe buildings — See Ch. 122.
Moving of buildings — See Ch. 126.
Escalators — See Ch. 169.
Fire escapes — See Ch. 181.
Fire prevention and control — See Ch. 185.
Lodging and boarding houses — See Ch. 225.
Plumbing — See Ch. 256.
Solid waste — See Ch. 283.
Streets and sidewalks — Ch. 287.
Trees, shrubs and hedges — See Ch. 303.
Zoning — See Ch. 340.
§ 132-1. Definitions and word usage.
Definitions. Certain words, when used in this chapter, unless otherwise expressly stated or unless
the context or subject matter otherwise requires, are defined as follows:
BUILDING or BUILDINGS
Refers exclusively to residence buildings now or hereafter existing. "Residence buildings" are
buildings or structures in any part of which sleeping accommodations are provided, except
such as for other reasons may be classed as public buildings, hotels and convents.
CELLAR OR BASEMENT DWELLING UNIT
A space in a residence building, or any part of which is below the grade of the property
nearest to such space.
DWELLING UNIT
A building or each portion of a building occupied by one family.
NUISANCE
Embraces public nuisances known at common law or in equity jurisprudence; and whatever is
dangerous to human life or detrimental to health, and whatever dwelling is overcrowded or is
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 74/441
B.
not provided with adequate means of ingress and egress or is not sufficiently supported,
ventilated, sewered, drained or cleaned, and whatever renders the air or human food or drink
unwholesome, are also severally, in contemplation of this chapter, "nuisances." All such
nuisances are hereby declared illegal.
OCCUPIED or OCCUPANCY
As applied to any building or dwelling unit, shall be construed as though followed by the
words "or intended, arranged or designed to be occupied (or occupancy)."
OWNER
Includes the record owner of the title to any premises and also anyone exercising the rights of
ownership therein at the time of the making of any order with respect thereto by the Village
Board, and shall include a lessee of the entire building or structure (other than a single-family
private dwelling) or a mortgagee in possession.
PERSONS INTERESTED
Includes the owner as herein defined, and all other persons interested in the property to which
such words refer.
PUBLIC HALL
A hall, corridor or passageway not within a dwelling unit. A "public room" or "public part" of a
building is a portion of said building used or designed or intended to be used in common by
the occupants of two or more dwelling units in such building or by persons who are not
tenants of said building, or exclusively for mechanical equipment of such building, or for
storage purposes. A "living room" is a room which is not a public hall, public room or other
public part of a dwelling; provided, however, that except as hereinafter stated, every room
used for sleeping purposes shall be deemed a living room. Closets, water closet
compartments, bathrooms, cooking spaces less than 49 square feet in area, and halls,
corridors and passageways entirely within a dwelling unit shall not be deemed to be living
rooms.
REPAIR
Includes any alteration, structural change or the performance of any act necessary or
requisite to make any building or structure or any part thereof found by the Village Board to be
a dangerous building or a substandard building within the purview of this chapter, comply with
and conform to the requirements of law.
SUPERINTENDENT OF PUBLIC WORKS
The person in charge of the Building Department of the Village of Rockville Centre, or his duly
authorized representative.
TOILET
Includes a washbasin and a water closet, including the space occupied by them, together with
all proper water connections.
VILLAGE
The Village of Rockville Centre.
VILLAGE BOARD
The Board of Trustees of the Village of Rockville Centre.
VILLAGE COUNSEL
The Counsel of the Village of Rockville Centre and any other counsel appointed by the Village
Board to enforce the provisions of this chapter.
Word. usage.
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 75/441
(1)
(2)
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
[1]
[2]
F.
(1)
[1]
(2)
A.
Where necessary, the singular shall include the plural, and the plural, the singular. The word
"person" shall include a partnership, corporation, association or trustee.
"Or" and "and" as used herein may be construed interchangeably, where such meaning is
necessary to effectuate the purpose of this chapter.
§ 132-2. Dangerous buildings defined.
All buildings or structures which have any or all of the following defects shall be deemed "dangerous
buildings":
Those whose interior walls or other vertical structural members list, lean or buckle to such an
extent that a plumb line passing through the center of gravity falls outside the middle third of its
base.
Those which have been damaged or have deteriorated so as to have become, in the judgment of
the Village Board, dangerous to the life, health, morals or general welfare of the occupants thereof
or to the people of the Village of Rockville Centre. Any building or structure which, exclusive of the
foundations, shows 33 1/3% or more of damage to or deterioration of the supporting member or
members or 50% or more damage to or deterioration of the nonsupporting enclosing or outside
walls or coverings shall be deemed a dangerous building.
Those which have improperly distributed loads upon the floors or roofs or in which the same are
overloaded or which have insufficient strength to be reasonably safe for the purpose used.
Those having inadequate facilities for ingress or egress in case of fire or panic or those having
insufficient stairways, elevators, fire escapes or other means of communication.
Those which have parts thereof which are so attached that they may fall and injure the occupants
thereof or members of the public or property.
Those buildings existing in violation of any provision of the Building Code of the Village of
Rockville Centre[1] or any provision of the fire prevention laws or regulations[2] of said Village or
other ordinance of the Village of Rockville Centre.
Editor's Note: See Ch. 112, Building Code.
Editor's Note: See Ch. 185, Fire Prevention and Control.
§ 132-3. Residence building standards defined.
The following standards are hereby established as the minimum requirements necessary to render
a dwelling unit or residence building fit for human occupancy:
Every living room in every dwelling unit shall have one or more windows opening directly
upon a street or other open public space, or upon a court or open space located upon the
same lot or plot as the building. Every window shall have a minimum width of 20 inches
between stop beads.
Each building containing one or more dwelling units shall have a minimum of a private toilet
and bathing facilities (consisting of either a shower or tub connected for use by running water)
for each dwelling unit. Such toilet and bathing facilities may be contained in the same room,
but said room may not be used for any other purpose. The room in which such toilet and
bathing facilities are contained shall have proper ventilation in accordance with the
regulations prescribed by the Building Code of the Village and/or the Plumbing Code of the
Village.[1]
Editor's Note: See Ch. 112, Building Code, and Ch. 256, Plumbing.
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 76/441
(3)
(4)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(5)
(6)
B.
(1)
(2)
C.
Each dwelling unit shall have facilities for adequate running water and hot water in the
bathroom and kitchen or room furnished with kitchen equipment, and each room in such
dwelling unit shall have one or more electric fixtures suitably located therein so as to afford
adequate lighting facilities.
No dwelling unit shall be occupied by more persons than twice the number of living rooms in
the dwelling unit less one, except that two persons may occupy a dwelling unit containing one
room. No living room in any dwelling unit shall be so overcrowded that there shall be afforded
less than 400 cubic feet of air to each adult and 200 cubic feet of air to each child under 12
years of age occupying such room. No room in any dwelling unit shall have sleeping
accommodations for more persons than such room can accommodate without overcrowding
such room in violation of this section.
Minimum heat standards.
[Amended 9-8-1980 by L.L. No. 9-1980]
Every dwelling, multiple dwelling and rooming house shall have heating facilities which
shall be properly installed and maintained in good working order and shall safely and
adequately heat all habitable rooms, bathrooms, shower rooms and water closet
compartments. The use of unvented flame space heaters and space heaters without
back-draft diverters and automatic controls is prohibited.
A person who shall have contracted or undertaken or who is required by law to furnish
heat to any dwelling, dwelling unit, multiple dwelling, or rooming house shall furnish heat
to all habitable rooms, bathrooms, shower rooms and water closet compartments so as
to maintain therein a temperature of not less than 68º F. during the hours of 6:00 a.m. to
11:00 p.m. and not less than 65º F. during the hours of 11:00 p.m. to 6:00 a.m. at a
distance of 18 inches above floor level and three feet from an outside wall. Such
temperatures shall be maintained during the heating season of October 1 through the
following May 31.
Where fuel rationing is imposed or an energy crisis or an emergency exists the
Superintendent, Department of Buildings, is authorized to grant a general variance or
exemption from the provisions of this section and the ordinance and to take such action
as he deems necessary or appropriate under the circumstances in the interest of public
health, for the period of the fuel rationing, energy crisis or emergency.
All windows in all living rooms shall be so arranged that they can be opened by the occupant
and shall have an aggregate glazed area of not less than 1/10 of the floor area of the room
served thereby, and such windows shall be so arranged that when fully opened the total open
space shall not be less than 50% of the total required window space. No alterations of such
rooms shall be made whereby the rooms are made smaller in order to conform to the above
standards.
Any building wherein conditions exist which fail to conform to the foregoing standards are hereby
declared to be substandard and the use thereof for human occupancy declared unlawful.
Any buildings which shall have any or all of the following defects shall also be deemed and are
hereby declared substandard buildings and shall not be used for human occupancy:
Any cellar or basement unit, any living room in which 2/3 or more is below the grade nearest
thereto, provided that if such cellar or basement dwelling unit shall be vacated and shall
cease to be used for dwelling purposes, then and in that event such building shall cease to be
a substandard building because of the existence therein of such dwelling units.
Those which have become or are so dilapidated, decayed, unsafe and insanitary that they are
unfit for human habitation or are likely to cause sickness or disease, so as to work injury to
the health, morals, safety or general welfare of those who live or may live therein.
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 77/441
(3)
(4)
A.
B.
C.
A.
B.
A.
B.
C.
D.
Those having light, air and sanitation facilities which are inadequate to protect the health,
morals, safety or general welfare of human beings who do or may live therein.
Those which, because of their condition, are unsafe, insanitary or dangerous to the health,
morals, safety or general welfare of the people of the Village.
§ 132-4. Remedies to be applied for removal and repair.
The following remedies shall be applied in substance by the Superintendent of Public Works and the
Village Board in ordering removal or repair:
If the dangerous building or substandard building can reasonably be repaired so that it will no
longer exist in violation of the terms of this chapter, it shall be ordered repaired. In all cases where
a building cannot be repaired so that it will no longer exist in violation of the terms of this chapter, it
shall be ordered removed.
In all cases where a dangerous building or a substandard building is a fire hazard existing or
erected in violation of any ordinance of this Village or statute of the State of New York, it shall be
ordered removed unless such hazard or violation can be cured, in which event the building shall
be ordered repaired.
Any structures or part of a structure or premises that from any cause may at any time become
dangerous or unsafe structurally or as a fire hazard shall be repaired and secured or taken down
and removed. A vacant building unguarded or open at door or window shall be deemed dangerous
or unsafe as a fire hazard within the meaning of this chapter.
§ 132-5. Dangerous buildings; nuisances.
All dangerous buildings within the terms of § 132-2 of this chapter are hereby declared to be public
nuisances and shall be repaired or removed as herein provided.
All substandard buildings within the terms of § 132-3 of this chapter are hereby declared to be
unsafe and dangerous to the public and to be public nuisances and shall be repaired or removed
as herein provided or otherwise made to comply with the standards set forth in this chapter.
§ 132-6. Duties of Superintendent of Public Works.
The Superintendent of Public Works shall:
Inspect or cause to be inspected as often as may be necessary to insure the enforcement of this
chapter, all buildings in the Village for the purpose of determining whether any conditions exist
therein which render such places a dangerous building within the terms of § 132-2 of this chapter
and whether any conditions exist therein not in compliance with the standards of this chapter.
Inspect any building, wall or structure about which a complaint is filed by a person to the effect that
the same is or may be existing in violation of the terms of this chapter.
Notify in writing the owner of any building found by him to be a dangerous building within the
standards set forth in § 132-2 of this chapter, and of any building found by him not conforming to
the standards set forth in § 132-3 hereof, that he must repair or remove said building in
accordance with the terms of the notice and this chapter or otherwise comply with the standards
set forth in this chapter within a reasonable time to be fixed by said notice.
Set forth in the notice provided for in Subsection C hereof, a description of the building or structure
or parts thereof deemed to violate the provisions of this chapter, a statement of the particulars in
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 78/441
E.
F.
G.
(1)
(2)
H.
I.
A.
B.
which the building is dangerous or fails to comply with the standards set forth in § 132-3 and a
direction requiring compliance with the standards set forth in this chapter or that the building or
structure be put in such condition as to comply with the terms of this chapter or that said building
or structure be removed.
Report to the Village Board any noncompliance with the notice provided for in Subsections C and
D.
Appear at all hearings conducted by the Village Board and testify as to the condition of the
dangerous building and/or substandard building.
With the assistance of the Village Counsel, do such acts and take such proceedings as may be
required to bring about the repair or removal of buildings as ordered by the Village Board and take
such steps as may be required by the provisions of § 89, Subdivision 7-A, of the Village Law to
cause the removal or repair of any building which is dangerous or unsafe to the public, and to
cause the assessment of all costs and expenses incidental thereto against the land on which said
buildings are located.
Firmly affix a notice in a conspicuous place in front of all dangerous buildings and substandard
buildings immediately after the issuance of the order provided for in § 132-7D of this chapter, as
follows:
Where the building is a substandard building, such notice shall read as follows:
"This building has been found to be a substandard building by the Board of Trustees of the
Village of Rockville Centre. This notice is to remain on this building until it is repaired or
removed or made to comply with the direction which has been given the owner. It is unlawful
to remove this notice until such direction is complied with."
Where the building is a dangerous building, such notice shall read as follows:
"This building has been found to be a dangerous building by the Board of Trustees of the
Village of Rockville Centre. This notice is to remain on this building until it is repaired or
removed or made to comply with the direction which has been given the owner. It is unlawful
to remove this notice until such direction has been complied with."
Notwithstanding any inconsistent section of this chapter, the Superintendent, Department of
Buildings, shall have the authority to immediately issue a summons, returnable in the Village
Court, for any violation of the standards of § 132-3A(5) of this chapter.
[Added 9-8-1980 by L.L. No. 9-1980]
§ 132-7. Procedures for Village Board.
The Village Board shall:
Upon receipt of a report of the Superintendent of Public Works as provided for in § 132-6E hereof,
give written notice to the persons interested in said building to appear before them on a certain
date, within 15 days of the date of the notice, to show cause why compliance with the standards
set forth in this chapter should not be made, or why the building or structure reported to be a
dangerous building should not be repaired or removed, or why the building reported to be a
substandard building should not be repaired or removed, in accordance with a statement of
particulars set forth in the Superintendent of Public Works' notice provided for by § 132-6C and D
of this chapter.
Hold a hearing and hear such testimony as the persons interested in said building may offer
relative to the dangerous building or substandard building.
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 79/441
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
Make a written finding of facts as to whether or not the building in question is a dangerous building
within the meaning of § 132-2 hereof or a substandard building within the meaning of § 132-3
hereof.
Issue an order commanding the persons interested in said building to repair or remove any
building found to be a dangerous building within the terms of this chapter, or to repair or remove
any building found to be a substandard building within the terms of this chapter, or to comply with
the standards set forth in this chapter. Such order shall fix the time when compliance therewith
shall commence, not more than 10 days after the making thereof, and shall fix a reasonable time
within which such compliance shall be completed. The Village Board may, in its discretion and
upon good cause shown, extend the time for full compliance with said order.
If the owner fails to comply with the order provided for in Subdivision D hereof, or any extension
thereof, the Village Board may direct the Superintendent of Public Works to cause such
dangerous building or structure to be repaired or removed or to cause such substandard building
or structure to be repaired or removed as the facts may warrant under the standards hereinbefore
set forth; provided that before proceeding to repair or to remove or cause the repair or removal of
any dangerous or unsafe building, the Superintendent of Public Works may, with the advice and
assistance of the Village Counsel, proceed in accordance with the provisions of Section 89,
Subdivision 7-a of the Village Law, and institute appropriate proceedings before a court of
competent jurisdiction to obtain an order or judgment directing or authorizing such repair or
removal. The Superintendent of Public Works shall, with the assistance of the Village Counsel,
take such legal action as may be necessary to cause the costs of such repair or removal and all
costs and expenses incurred by the Village in connection with said proceedings to be charged
against the land on which the building stands or did stand, as a municipal lien, or cause such
costs to be added to the tax duplicate as an assessment or to be levied as a special tax against
the land upon which the building stands or did stand. The lien of the Village or any expense
incurred in respect to the repair or removal of any dangerous building shall have priority over all
other liens and encumbrances except taxes, assessments and water rates. Except with respect to
the lien imposed for expenses incurred in respect to the repair or removal of any dangerous
building, nothing herein contained shall be construed as placing upon the property a lien which
supersedes or is superior to the lien of any mortgage in respect to any building and property
executed and recorded prior to the existence of such lien.
Report to the Village Counsel the names of all persons not complying with the order provided for
in Subdivision D hereof.
The Village Board may, in the first instance and without service of any notice by the
Superintendent of Public Works, give notice to the persons interested in any building which they
have reason to believe may be a dangerous building or a substandard building, to appear before
them on a certain date, within 15 days from the date of such notice, to show cause why the
building or structure specified in such notice should not be repaired or removed or otherwise made
to comply with the provisions of this chapter. Such notice shall contain the same particulars as are
required by § 132-6D of this chapter. Upon the return day of said notice, the Village Board shall
thereupon proceed in the same manner as prescribed in Subdivisions B, C, D, E and F of this
section.
The Village Board may, from time to time and upon due notice, vacate, modify or amend any order
made by them as herein provided, and may, either on their own motion or upon the motion of any
person interested, reopen any proceedings in which they have made an order, for the purpose of
taking further testimony, and upon such rehearing, render any decision and make any order
consistent with the provisions of this chapter that they shall deem just and equitable.
§ 132-8. Penalties for offenses.
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 80/441
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
The owner of any dangerous building or of any substandard building who, after the date of the
adoption of this chapter, knowingly permits such dangerous building or substandard building to be
used for human occupancy, or who shall fail to comply with any order of the Village Board to repair
or remove said building or otherwise make it comply with the standards set forth in this chapter,
shall be guilty of disorderly conduct and shall be a disorderly person and, upon conviction thereof,
shall be fined not exceeding $100 for each offense.
For the purpose of Subdivision A of this section, each day during which there is a failure to comply
with the provisions of this chapter or of any order issued by the Village Board shall constitute a
separate offense.
In any prosecution under this section, the fact that any dangerous building or substandard building
or any part of either of said buildings was used for human occupancy shall be presumptive
evidence that the same was so used with the knowledge and consent of the owner.
Any person removing the notice provided for in § 132-6H hereof shall be guilty of disorderly
conduct and shall be a disorderly person and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not
exceeding $100 for each offense.
All penalties collected under this chapter shall be the property of the Village, but no provision of
this chapter shall be construed to prohibit the Village from creating and maintaining out of such
penalties a separate revolving fund, not to exceed the sum of $10,000, out of which payment may
be made for repairs or removals made or caused to be made as provided herein.
§ 132-9. Duties of Village Counsel.
Counsel shall:
Prosecute all persons failing to comply with the terms of the order provided to be given under
§ 132-7D.
Prosecute all persons who shall in any way violate the terms of this chapter.
Appear at all hearings before the Village Board in regard to dangerous buildings and substandard
buildings.
In his discretion, bring suit to collect all municipal liens, assessments or cost incurred by the
Village for repairing or causing to be removed dangerous buildings or in repairing or causing to be
removed substandard buildings.
Take such other legal action as is necessary to carry out the terms and provisions of this chapter,
including actions to abate nuisances or for the enforcement of this chapter by injunction or
otherwise.
§ 132-10. Service of notice or order.
All notices or orders required to be given hereunder may be served by delivering to and leaving a copy
of the same with the person entitled to such notice. In cases where any such person is absent from the
Village, all notices or orders provided for herein shall be sent by registered mail to said person, so
absent, to the last known address of said person or to the last address of said person as shown by the
records of the Receiver of Taxes and/or in the office of the County Clerk of Nassau County. Whenever
such service is made by registered mail, a copy of such notice or order shall also be posted in a
conspicuous place on the front of said dangerous building or substandard building to which it relates.
Such mailing and posting shall be deemed adequate service.
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 81/441
A.
B.
§ 132-11. Administrative liability.
No officer, agent or employee of the Village shall render himself personally liable for any damage that
may accrue to persons or property as a result of any act required or permitted in the discharge of his
duties under this chapter. Any suit brought against any officer, agent or employee of the Village as a
result of any act required or permitted in the discharge of his duties under this chapter shall be
defended by the Village Counsel until the final determination of the proceedings therein.
§ 132-12. Duties of Fire and Police Department employees.
The employees of the Fire Department of the Village and the employees of the Police Department of
the Village shall make a report in writing to the Superintendent of Public Works of all buildings and
structures which in the discharge of their respective duties are found or may be suspected to be
dangerous buildings or substandard buildings within the terms of this chapter. Such reports must be
delivered to the Superintendent of Public Works within 24 hours of the discovery of such building by
any employee of said Fire Department and Police Department.
§ 132-13. Privileges of owner.
The owner of any building used in whole or in part for human occupancy against whom no
proceedings hereunder are pending with respect to such building may request the Superintendent
of Public Works to cause an inspection thereof to be made, whereupon the Superintendent of
Public Works shall cause an inspection of such building to be made, and if, upon such inspection
and a report thereon to the Village Board, it shall be disclosed that the same is not a dangerous
building or a substandard building, the Village Board will direct the Superintendent of Public Works
to issue a certificate to that effect to such applicant. The issuance of such certificate is not to be
construed as a finding that such building is not a dangerous building or a substandard building
beyond the date of issuance thereof. Should, however, such inspection disclose said building or
structure to be a dangerous building or a substandard building, the Village Board will direct the
Superintendent of Public Works to give written notice to the applicant to appear before them on a
certain date, within 15 days from the date of said notice, and shall thereupon proceed in the same
manner as prescribed in § 132-7B, C, D, E and F of this chapter. Such notice shall contain the
same particulars as are required by § 132-6D hereof.
No qualified owner who has applied for inspection pursuant to Subdivision A of this section shall
be prosecuted under § 132-8 hereof, with respect to any building of which inspection has been
requested, unless he fails to comply with the order of the Village Board made pursuant to
Subdivision A hereof.
§ 132-14. Review of determination.
Any person deeming himself aggrieved by any order or direction of the Village Board may have the
determination reviewed by the Supreme Court in the manner prescribed by Article 78 of the Civil
Practice Act.
§ 132-15. Time for compliance.
All repairs required by this chapter upon buildings erected prior to the date when this chapter became
effective shall, unless otherwise in this chapter expressly provided, be made prior to the date of
adoption of this chapter, or at such earlier date as may be deemed necessary by the Village Board in
order to remove a condition dangerous or detrimental to life or health.
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 82/441
§ 132-16. Saving clause.
Whenever the provisions of any local ordinance, resolution or regulation impose requirements in
respect to residence buildings inconsistent with the terms and provisions of this chapter or any part
thereof, the provisions of this chapter shall govern, provided that should any such ordinance, resolution
or regulation impose more stringent requirements with respect to dangerous buildings or substandard
dwellings, as herein defined, than the provisions of this chapter impose, then such more stringent
requirements shall be construed to apply.
§ 132-17. Application of remedies.
The several remedies herein provided with respect to the repair or removal of dangerous buildings or
of substandard buildings or the assessment and recovery of the cost of repair or removal thereof
incurred by the Village, and any other remedies legal or equitable available, shall be deemed
cumulative, and any and all thereof may be pursued concurrently or consecutively; the pursuit of any
remedy shall not be construed as an election of the waiver of the right to pursue any and all of the
others.
Chapter 135. Burning, Open
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Trustees of the Village of Rockville Centre 2-22-1971 by L.L. No.
1-1971 as Ch. 31 of the 1971 Code. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Firearms and explosives — See Ch. 178.
Fire prevention and control — See Ch. 185.
Gasoline sale and service stations — See Ch. 204.
Smoke emission — See Ch. 276.
Solid waste — See Ch. 283.
Trees, shrubs and hedges — See Ch. 303.
§ 135-1. Burning to constitute a health and fire hazard.
It is hereby declared and found that the burning of leaves, trees, bushes, paper, rubbish or any other
combustible material in an open fire constitutes a health and fire hazard and causes contamination of
air with resultant harmful effects upon persons suffering from respiratory ailments.
§ 135-2. Open fire defined.
OPEN FIRE
As used in this chapter, shall mean any fire lighted and maintained other than a fire in stove,
furnace or incinerator designed and constructed for the burning of material. The term "open fire"
shall not include barbecue pits, outdoor fireplaces and grills designed and used for the purpose of
cooking food for home consumption, and shall not include the use of a fire in a fireplace by
recognized organizations such as Girl Scouts or Boy Scouts or Fire Department, where such
fireplace is used under the constant supervision of responsible officials of such organizations.
§ 135-3. Open fires prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to light, permit or maintain an open fire in or upon any premises,
streets, roads, highways, sidewalks or public places within the Village.
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 83/441
A.
§ 135-4. Nonapplicability.
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to the burning of material by any agency of the Village
when such burning is done under the supervision of the officials in charge of such agency.
Chapter 138. Businesses
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Trustees of the Village of Rockville Centre as indicated in article
histories. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Agent for service of process — See Ch. 74.
Auctioneers — See Ch. 90.
Secondhand automobile sales— See Ch. 93.
Bowling alleys and pool halls — See Ch. 105.
Entertainment — See Ch. 163.
Fortune-telling, clairvoyance, phrenology — See Ch. 194.
Gasoline sale and service stations — See Ch. 204.
Junk and secondhand dealers — See Ch. 215.
Landscapers and gardeners — See Ch. 219.
Licenses — See Ch. 222.
Pawnbrokers — See Ch. 244.
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 250.
Special sales — See Ch. 265.
Article I. Transient
[Adopted 2-22-1971 by L.L. No. 1-1971 as Ch. 33, Art. I, of the 1971 Code]
§ 138-1. License required.
No person shall engage in a transient business in the Village without first obtaining a license therefor.
§ 138-2. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
TRANSIENT BUSINESS
A business conducted in an open lot, from a stationary motor vehicle, car, truck, tent, wagon, cart,
public room or any temporary structure, for the exhibition, selling or offering for sale of goods,
wares and merchandise to the public.
§ 138-3. Bond required.
Before any license shall be issued for engaging in transient business, the applicant therefor shall
file with the Village Clerk a bond running to the Village in the sum of $2,500, executed by the
applicant as principal and conditioned that the said applicant shall comply fully with all of the
provisions of all ordinances and the laws of the State of New York regulating the sale of goods,
wares and merchandise, and will assure the payment of any default in fees due or that may
become due and owing to the Village, and of losses incurred by any person because of the
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 84/441
B.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
violation of any law or ordinance by the licensee or because of misrepresentations or deceptions
practiced in transacting the business thus licensed.
Such bond shall provide that action thereon may be brought by any person to whom a judgment
has been awarded because of loss caused by such licensee's fault or default.
§ 138-4. Fees.
[Amended 12-4-1972]
The fee for any license required by the provisions of this article shall be at the levels fixed from time to
time by resolution of the Board of Trustees of the Village of Rockville Centre.
Article II. Trade and Business Restricted on Memorial Day
[Adopted 2-22-1971 by L.L. No. 1-1971 as Ch. 33, Art. II, of the 1971 Code]
§ 138-5. Trade restricted.
[Amended 12-4-1972]
All trades, manufactures and mechanical employments upon Memorial Day, as the same may be
designated by the appropriate federal or state authority, are hereby prohibited, except that when the
same are works of necessity they may be performed on that day in a usual and orderly manner so as
not to interfere with the observance of that day.
§ 138-6. Business restricted.
[Amended 12-4-1972; 7-14-1980 by L.L. No. 4-1980]
All manner of public selling or offering for sale of any property upon Memorial Day is prohibited prior to
1:00 p.m., except as follows:
Articles of food may be sold, served, supplied and delivered at any time before 10:00 a.m.
Meals may be sold, to be eaten on the premises where sold, at any time of the day.
Caterers may serve meals to their patrons at any time of the day.
Prepared tobacco, bread, milk, eggs, ice, soda water, fruit, flowers, confectionery, souvenirs,
newspapers, magazines, gasoline, oil, tires, drugs, medicines and surgical instruments may be
sold and may be delivered at any time of the day.
Grocers, delicatessen dealers and bakeries may sell, supply, serve and deliver cooked and
prepared foods, and farmers' markets or roadside stands selling fresh vegetables and other farm
produce; and fishing tackle and bait stores may sell, supply, serve and deliver merchandise
usually sold by them at any time of the day.
This article shall not apply to the sale of alcoholic beverages by persons, firms or corporations
holding licenses or permits issued under the provisions of the Alcoholic Beverage Control Law.
This amendment shall take effect immediately.
§ 138-7. Penalties for offenses.
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 85/441
A.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
B.
Violations of this article shall be punishable by a fine of not more than $50 or by imprisonment for not
more than 30 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment.
Article III. Retail Businesses: Hours of Operation
[Adopted 10-20-1975 by L.L. No. 4-1975]
§ 138-8. Definitions.
The following definitions shall be applicable to this article:
ESTABLISHMENT
Any place of business in which goods or merchandise is sold or offered for sale to a purchaser.
RETAIL
The sale or the offer for sale of goods or merchandise on a direct basis to a purchaser.
SPECIAL SALE
A group endeavor sponsored by the Chamber of Commerce or other organization acting on behalf
of a group of retail establishments for a promotional sale or for a sale for a particular purpose;
such sales to be conducted over a limited period of time not to exceed three days for any one
sale.
§ 138-9. Hours of operation; application for permit.
It shall be unlawful for any retail establishment, except those set forth in § 138-10 hereof, to
operate and remain open to the public between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.; provided,
however, that a permit may be issued by the Board of Trustees for the conduct of a special sale on
such terms and conditions as may be approved by the Board of Trustees.
An application for such permit must be made at least 30 days before the beginning of such special
sale and must contain information as to:
The times when such sale shall take place.
The hours during which the retail establishments are to remain open.
The area included in such sale.
The purpose of such sale.
The approximate number of retail establishments participating in such sale.
§ 138-10. Exceptions.
This article shall not apply to restaurants, ice-cream parlors, bars and grills, billiard parlors, gasoline
stations, drugstores and bowling alleys.
Chapter 144. Clothing Bins
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Trustees of the Village of Rockville Centre 10-6-2009 by L.L. No.
3-2009. Amendments noted where applicable.]
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 86/441
A.
B.
C.
D.
A.
GENERAL REFERENCES
Businesses - See Ch. 138.
Junk and secondhand dealers - See Ch. 215.
Pawnbrokers - See Ch. 244.
Peddling and soliciting - See Ch. 250.
Temporary storage containers - See Ch. 285.
§ 144-1. Legislative intent.
The Board of Trustees of the Village of Rockville Centre ("Village") hereby finds and concludes that
commercial enterprises are engaged in solicitation of donations of clothing, by use of clothing bins
having the appearance that such bins will be used for charitable purposes, and that there has been an
undesirable proliferation of clothing bins in the Village on Village property and on private property. It is
the purpose of this chapter to prohibit such commercial activities, and to regulate such noncommercial
activities.
§ 144-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the indicated meanings:
CLOTHING BIN
A container or receptacle held out to the public as a place at which articles of clothing or other
personal property may be dropped off, and in which to store such clothing or property until carted
away.
VILLAGE
The Village of Rockville Centre.
§ 144-3. Prohibitions.
No person or entity shall place or maintain, or permit the placement or maintenance of, any
clothing bin on any property in the Village if any portion of the proceeds obtained for disposition of
the clothing or other personal property deposited in such bin are disbursed or used for any
purpose other than a not-for-profit charitable purpose.
No person or entity shall place or maintain, or permit the placement or maintenance of, any
clothing bin on any residential property in the Village.
No person or entity shall place or maintain, or permit the placement or maintenance of, any
clothing bin on any public property in the Village without the prior permission of the Board of
Trustees.
No person or entity shall place or maintain, or permit the placement or maintenance of, any
clothing bin on any private nonresidential property in the Village without a permit from the Village
Building Department issued pursuant to this chapter.
§ 144-4. Requirement for permit; standards.
Any person or entity wishing to place or utilize a clothing bin on private nonresidential property in
the Village shall first obtain a permit for the same from the Village Building Department. Such
permit shall be valid for a period of one year from the date of issuance. Any such permit may be
renewed for successive additional periods of one year each upon the expiration of any existing
permit, provided that the clothing bin continues to be placed and maintained as required by this
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 87/441
B.
C.
D.
E.
A.
B.
C.
D.
chapter. Payment of a permit fee, in an amount determined by the Board of Trustees from time to
time by resolution, shall be required prior to issuance of any permit or renewal thereof.
A permit may be issued or renewed pursuant to this chapter only upon a proper demonstration
that the person or entity to whom the permit is to be issued is exempt from taxation pursuant to
Section 501(c)(3), (4) or (6) of the Internal Revenue Code, as amended.
Each clothing bin for which a permit is issued or renewed pursuant to this chapter shall have
clearly identified on at least one visible surface, in legible writing, the name, phone number and
address of the person or entity to which the clothing bin permit has been issued.
No more than two permits for clothing bins shall be permitted to be in effect for any premises in
the Village without the prior approval of the Board of Trustees.
No clothing bin shall be located in a required parking space or in any other location which is
required to remain unobstructed.
§ 144-5. Enforcement; penalties.
Each owner, lessee or other person or entity in control of, or who owns, maintains or operates, any
clothing bin located on any property without a valid permit as required by this chapter shall be
guilty of a violation.
Each owner, lessee or other person or entity in control of any property on which a clothing bin is
located or maintained in violation of §§ 144-3A, B, or D of this chapter shall be guilty of a violation.
Any violation of this chapter shall be punishable as an offense, and each person or entity
convicted of a violation of this chapter shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed $250 for each
day on which the violation occurred, or imprisonment for not more than 15 days, or both such fine
or imprisonment. Each day that a violation of this chapter occurs shall be considered a separate
violation.
The Village Attorney may, when authorized by the Board of Trustees in an appropriate case,
institute a civil action for any other available relief, including injunctive relief, and forfeiture of any
clothing bin and the contents thereof, to assure compliance with the provisions of this chapter. In
any such action, the court may award the Village reasonable attorneys' fees and expenses for
such action.
§ 144-6. Exemption.
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to any clothing bin which is located on property owned or
leased by any religious, charitable or eleemosynary institution, provided that the proceeds of the
disposition of clothing or other property deposited in such clothing bin inure solely to the benefit of such
institution or another such institution.
§ 144-7. Severability.
In the event that any provision of this chapter shall be determined by a court of appropriate jurisdiction
to be illegal or otherwise unenforceable, then only that particular provision shall not be enforced, and
all other provisions of this chapter shall remain in full force and effect.
Chapter 154. Dry-Cleaning Machines, Coin-Operated
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 88/441
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Trustees of the Village of Rockville Centre 2-22-1971 by L.L. No.
1-1971 as Ch. 43 of the 1971 Code. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire prevention and control — See Ch. 185.
Licenses — See Ch. 222.
Electric and water utilities — See Ch. 306.
Washing machines — See Ch. 315.
Unlawful use of water — See Ch. 318.
§ 154-1. License required.
No person or persons, firm, association or corporation shall engage in the business of maintaining and
operating for hire separate coin-operated dry-cleaning machines for personal and individual use within
the Village without a license.
§ 154-2. Fees.
[Amended 10-18-1971; 12-4-1972]
The fee for any license required by the provisions of this chapter shall be at the levels fixed from time
to time by resolution of the Board of Trustees of the Village of Rockville Centre.
§ 154-3. Applications for licenses; prerequisites.
Applications for such licenses shall be made in accordance with the provisions stated in Chapter 222,
and in addition the following are required:
A detailed description of the place and a plan of the building wherein the business will be
conducted.
The total number of dry-cleaning machines proposed to be operated as of the date of the
application.
Establishments containing coin-operated dry-cleaning machines shall be classified as Group C-2
occupancy as defined in the New York State Construction Code.
A plot plan shall be provided showing the location and height of existing buildings and the distance
to the nearest window or other building opening.
Installation shall not be permitted in buildings of Groups A, B, C-1, C-5 or C-6 occupancies (as
defined in the New York Building Construction Code), in spaces that are below grade or in spaces
that have direct access to below-grade spaces.
Only machines listed in Underwriters' Laboratories Electrical Appliance and Utilization Equipment
List, under Dry-Cleaning Equipment, shall be approved. Machines shall be securely attached to
the floor.
Only the solvent specified by the equipment manufacturer shall be used. Solvents shall be
nonflammable at ordinary temperatures and only slightly flammable at higher temperatures.
Approved solvents are listed in Underwriters' Laboratories Gas and Oil Equipment List, in Section
II, under Cleaning Liquids.
An approved type gas mask shall be available for immediate use.
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 89/441
I.
J.
K.
L.
M.
N.
O.
P.
Space shall be provided for customer areas, service areas and areas for fuel-burning, heatproducing
equipment. Separations between such areas shall have a minimum fire-resistance
rating of one hour. Permanent openings shall be provided for outside air to flow into each area.
Service area shall be provided with a sheet metal, liquid-tight pan not less than 22 gauge with
walls at least four inches high and capable of containing all the solvent in the machines. Pan shall
pitch to a low point to permit drainage to a vented storage tank or to an approved means of
disposal.
Mechanical exhaust fans shall be provided and shall have a minimum capacity of 225 cfm per
machine and in no case less than 1,500 cfm. Fans shall normally operate all the time that the
establishment is open. At least 75% of air flow shall be from the customer area and 25% from the
service area. Air exhaust shall be at least 25 feet from windows of adjacent buildings, 10 feet
above the top of windows within the same building, and six feet above the roof.
Service areas shall be provided with an emergency exhaust fan. A remote-control switch,
externally operable, shall be located near the exit. Emergency fans shall have a capacity at least
125% of the total capacity of the fans normally operating, and shall be on a separate circuit
independent of any other outlet.
Storage of solvent shall not exceed one fifty-five-gallon drum for each multiple of eight machines.
Residue of solvent shall be stored in metal containers with tight-fitting covers. Storage shall be
limited to the service area. Transfer of fluids shall be made by means of closed leakproof pipe and
pump system.
Spotting operations shall be limited to water.
A sign shall be placed in the premises warning the patrons to have a window open in cars when
transporting clothes from the dry-cleaning establishment.
Each owner, operator or management of a licensed business of maintaining and operating coinoperated
dry-cleaning machines for personal and individual use, where made available to the
public, shall provide an attendant who is familiar with the operations of such dry-cleaning
machines and any other machine installed therein, and who shall be in attendance at all times
when such machines are made available for hire.
Chapter 157. Dumps and Dumping
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Trustees of the Village of Rockville Centre 2-22-1971 by L.L. No.
1-1971 as Ch. 45 of the 1971 Code. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Landscapers and gardeners — See Ch. 219.
Licenses — See Ch. 222.
Solid waste — See Ch. 283.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 287.
§ 157-1. License to dump required.
No person, firm, association or corporation shall hereafter deposit, dump or abandon grass cuttings,
tree cuttings, shrubbery, leaves or like substances ordinarily removed from gardens, nurseries or like
places on any part of the Village Dump, owned and operated by the Village, without first obtaining a
license for such privilege.
§ 157-2. Application for license.
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 90/441
A.
B.
A.
B.
Any person, firm, association or corporation which shall hereafter desire to obtain the privilege to
deposit, dump or abandon the substances referred to in the preceding section shall apply in writing to
the Mayor of the Village for the issuance to him, them or it of a license therefor, which application shall
state in detail such information as may be required by the Mayor of the Village.
§ 157-3. License fee and display.
[Amended 12-4-1972]
The fees for any license required by the provisions of this chapter shall be at the levels fixed from
time to time by resolution of the Board of Trustees of the Village of Rockville Centre.
Whenever a license is issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, there shall be affixed to a
conspicuous part of such truck, cart or vehicle a plate or sign which shall set forth the official
number of such license.
§ 157-4. Penalties for offenses.
Any person, firm, association or corporation violating the provisions of this chapter or any part thereof,
or failing to obtain the license herein provided, shall be liable for and pay a penalty not exceeding $100
for each offense. Any violation of this chapter or any part thereof shall constitute disorderly conduct,
and any person violating the same or any part thereof shall be and is hereby declared a disorderly
person.
Chapter 160. Electricians, Master
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Trustees of the Village of Rockville Centre 2-22-1971 by L.L. No.
1-1971 as Ch. 49 of the 1971 Code. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building code — See Ch. 112.
Building code administration — See Ch. 115.
Licenses — See Ch. 222.
Electric and water utilities — See Ch. 306.
§ 160-1. License required.
[Amended 4-26-2011 by L.L. No. 8-2011]
Whenever pursuant to any law, rule, regulation or ordinance it is provided that no one except a master
electrician shall engage in installing, altering or repairing electrical wiring, apparatus, fittings,
appliances or equipment, it shall be a violation hereof for any person not licensed as herein provided to
perform any of the work thus specified.
§ 160-2. Eligibility and qualifications for license; license fees.
[Amended 12-4-1972]
Any individual may make application for a master electrician's license, such application to be
made to the License Board hereinafter designated. Such Board is vested with authority to
determine the fitness of each applicant by proper examination.
The fees for any license, renewal of license or for the examination required by the provisions of
this ordinance shall be at the levels fixed from time to time by resolution of the Board of Trustees
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 91/441
A.
B.
C.
of the Village of Rockville Centre.
§ 160-3. Application for license.
All applications for licenses and for endorsements thereon shall be made to the Village Clerk in such
form as he may prescribe. All licenses shall be issued by the Mayor and countersigned by the Village
Clerk.
§ 160-4. Suspension and revocation.
Any license may be revoked or suspended, for good cause shown, by the Board of Trustees, upon
recommendation of the License Board, after specific charge has been made, a fair hearing held and a
finding of the unfitness of the licensee made.
§ 160-5. Master Electricians' License Board.
The Board of Trustees hereby appoints a Master Electricians' License Board in the person of the Chief
Engineer of the village or his duly appointed deputy and which shall be vested with the following
powers:
By examination and investigation of their qualifications, to determine the fitness of applicants for
master electrician's license and to recommend to the Mayor the issuance of a license to those
found worthy and well qualified.
For good cause shown, to recommend to the Board of Trustees the suspension or revocation of
any license issued under the provisions of § 160-2A hereof.
To take proper action with respect to any matter referred to it under the terms of this ordinance or
of the rules and regulations of the Electric Light Department of the Village of Rockville Centre.
§ 160-6. Procedure.
Applicants for licenses under § 160-2A shall file their applications with the Village Clerk, who shall refer
them to the License Board for determination. The Board shall, with reasonable expedition, conduct its
examinations and investigations and report to the Mayor its recommendations based upon candidates'
qualifications and fitness. The Board may act on its own initiative or upon complaint when charges
reflecting upon the worthiness of a licensee are made.
Chapter 163. Entertainment
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Trustees of the Village of Rockville Centre as indicated in article
histories. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Amusement and gaming devices — See Ch. 84.
Bowling alleys and pool halls — See Ch. 105.
Building Code — See Ch. 112.
Fire escapes — See Ch. 181.
Fire prevention and control — See Ch. 185.
Fortune-telling, clarvoyance, phrenology — See Ch. 194.
Licenses — See Ch. 222.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 247.
Zoning — See Ch. 340.
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 92/441
Article I. Dancing, Cabaret Shows and Performances
[Adopted 2-22-1971 by L.L. No. 1-1971 as Ch. 52, Art. I, of the 1971 Code]
§ 163-1. License required.
[Amended 3-11-2002 by L.L. No. 3-2002]
No person or persons, firm, association or corporation owning, leasing, managing, conducting or
operating any establishment within the Village wherein food or drink is sold or given away or offered for
sale shall permit or suffer any dancing, cabaret show or other exhibition, amusement, performance or
entertainment therein without first procuring a license for such dancing, cabaret show or other
exhibition, amusement, performance or entertainment; nor shall any person or persons, firm,
association or corporation owning, leasing, managing, conducting or operating any theater, dance hall
or place of amusement in the Village permit any dancing, cabaret show or other exhibition or
performance therein without first procuring a license therefor. To obtain a license, an adult
entertainment establishment, as defined in § 340-116 of the Village of Rockville Centre Code, must
comply with the requirements of § 340-116.
§ 163-2. Application.
[Amended 3-11-2002 by Ord. No. 3-2002]
Any applicant for such license shall apply in writing to the Mayor of the Village for the issuance of a
license. The application for such license shall state in detail the nature of the dancing, cabaret show or
other exhibition, amusement, performance or entertainment for which a license is desired, the location
of the building wherein the same is to be conducted or permitted, and the name of the person or
persons, firm, association or corporation which desires to conduct such dance, cabaret show or other
exhibition, amusement, performance or entertainment. Said application must specify the residence of
the persons comprising any such firm, association or corporation and the particular place of business
of any such corporation and the name of the officer, in the case of a corporation, upon whom process
or other legal notice may be served within the Village. To obtain a license, an adult entertainment
establishment, as defined in § 340-116 of the Village of Rockville Centre Code, must comply with the
requirements of § 340-116.
§ 163-3. Fees.
[Amended 10-18-1971; 12-4-1972]
The fee for any license required by the provisions of this article shall be at the levels fixed from time to
time by resolution of the Board of Trustees of the Village of Rockville Centre.
§ 163-4. Penalties for offenses.
Any person or persons, firm, association or corporation violating any provision of this article shall be
liable for and forfeit and pay a penalty of $50 for each violation thereof, for the use of said Village; and
it is further ordained and enacted that the violation of any of the provisions of this article shall constitute
disorderly conduct, and the person so violating the same shall be and is hereby declared a disorderly
person.
§ 163-5. Exceptions.
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 93/441
The provisions of this article shall not apply to a religious body, a school, the Rockville Centre Fire
Department or a recognized association of war veterans.
Article II. Theaters and Motion Picture Houses
[Adopted 2-22-1971 by L.L. No. 1-1971 as Ch. 52, Art. II, of the 1971 Code]
§ 163-6. License required.
[Amended 3-11-2002 by L.L. No. 3-2002]
No person or persons, firm or corporation shall maintain any theater or motion-picture house or
building in which any theatrical performance or motion picture shall be given or shown without first
obtaining an annual license therefor. To obtain a license, an adult entertainment establishment, as
defined in § 340-116 of the Village of Rockville Centre Code, must comply with the requirements of
§ 340-116.
§ 163-7. Fees.
[Amended 10-8-1971; 12-4-1972]
The fees for any license required by the provisions of this article shall be at the levels fixed from time to
time by resolution of the Board of Trustees of the Village of Rockville Centre.
Article III. Admitting Children to Theaters
[Adopted 2-22-1971 by L.L. No. 1-1971 as Ch. 52, Art. III, of the 1971 Code]
§ 163-8. License required.
No child under the age of 16 years unaccompanied by a parent, guardian or other adult person shall
be admitted to any theater or motion-picture house in the Village unless such further license is
obtained as is hereinafter provided.
§ 163-9. Terms for permitting children to attend.
The Village Clerk shall issue to any owner or management of any theater or motion-picture house a
license to admit to such theater children over the age of eight years and under 16 years
unaccompanied by a parent, guardian or other adult person, upon application in writing on forms to be
furnished by said Clerk.
§ 163-10. Fees.
[Amended 12-4-1972]
The fees for any license required by the provisions of §§ 163-8 and 163-9 shall be at the levels fixed
from time to time by resolution of the Board of Trustees of the Village of Rockville Centre.
§ 163-11. Seating provisions.
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 94/441
[1]
Each owner, operator or management licensed under the provisions of this article shall set aside a
separate section of seats on the main or orchestra floor to be used exclusively for unaccompanied
children. Such section shall be clearly marked or designated. During the time this section is reserved
for said children, adults shall not be permitted to use such section. The size of such section may be
varied at any time. However, a seat in such section shall be provided for each unaccompanied child.
No unaccompanied child shall be permitted in any balcony or box. Unaccompanied children shall not
be admitted to said licensed theater during the time their school classes, within the Village, are in
session or after the hour of 6:00 in the evening.
§ 163-12. Matron to be in attendance.
Each owner, operator or management of such licensed theater shall provide at least one matron or
supervisor who shall give undivided attention to said supervision during the time such children shall be
in such theater. Each such matron or supervisor shall be licensed by the Village Clerk, upon
application in conformity with § 222-2 of Chapter 222, Licenses. Such matron or supervisor shall, while
on duty, conspicuously wear a badge, sash or uniform or other identifying insignia approved by the
Village Clerk.
§ 163-13. Fees for matrons.
[Amended 10-18-1971; 12-4-1972]
The fees for any license required by the provisions of § 163-12 shall be at the levels fixed from time to
time by resolution of the Board of Trustees of the Village of Rockville Centre.
Article IV. Auxiliary Electric Circuit
[Adopted 2-22-1971 by L.L. No. 1-1971 as Ch. 52, Art. IV, of the 1971 Code]
Editor's Note: See Ch. 160, Electricians, Master and Ch. 306, Utilities: Electric and Water.
§ 163-14. Auxiliary service required.
No theater or moving picture house shall be operated within the Village unless the same is provided
with an auxiliary electric circuit service connected with the exit and stairway lights of such theater or
moving picture place, so as to provide auxiliary service to such lights in case of the failure of the main
electric service, and such auxiliary service shall be separately metered.
§ 163-15. License not be construed as waiver.
The fact that the Village may have issued a license to any such theater or moving picture house to
operate shall not be construed in any way as a waiver of the requirements of this article.
§ 163-16. Penalties for offenses.
For any and every violation of the provisions of this article, the owner of such theater or moving picture
house, the operator thereof, the manager or assistant manager thereof, or any other person who
commits, takes part or assists in such violation or in the operation of such theater or moving picture
house shall, for each and every violation thereof, and for each and every day that such violation
continues, be subject to a fine of not less than $50 per day, and in addition thereto any violation of the
provisions of this article or of any part thereof shall be and is hereby declared to be disorderly conduct,
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 95/441
A.
B.
[1]
A.
B.
[1]
and any person violating this article or any part thereof shall be and is hereby declared to be a
disorderly person.
Chapter 166. Environmental Quality Review
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Trustees of the Village of Rockville Centre 3-21-1977 by L.L. No.
4-1977. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building code — See Ch. 112.
Building code administration — See Ch. 115.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 188.
Freshwater wetlands — See Ch. 197.
Planning Board; site plan review; subdivision of land — See Ch. 330.
Zoning — See Ch. 340.
§ 166-1. Definitions.
Unless the context shall otherwise require, the terms, phrases, words and their derivatives used in
this chapter shall have the same meaning as those defined in § 8-0105 of the Environmental
Conservation Law and Part 617 of Title 6 NYCRR.
The term "Village" shall mean the Incorporated Village of Rockville Centre.
§ 166-2. (Reserved)
Editor’s Note: Former § 166-2, Compliance with requirements; exceptions, was repealed 9-8-2015 by
L.L. No. 7-2015.
§ 166-3. Actions affecting and not affecting environment.
Consistent with Part 617 of Title 6 NYCRR and the criteria therein, the following actions, in
addition to those listed in Section 617.12 of Title 6 NYCRR as Type I actions, are likely to have a
significant effect on the environment: none.
Consistent with Part 617 of Title 6 NYCRR and the criteria therein, the following actions, in
addition to those listed in Section 617.12 of Title 6 NYCRR as Type II actions, are deemed not to
have a significant effect on the environment: none.
§ 166-4. through § 166-6. (Reserved)
Editor's Note: Former § 166-4, Filing of statement regarding effect of proposed action; § 166-5, Notice
to public of proposed action; and § 166-6, Time limit for determination by chief Engineer, were repealed
9-8-2015 by L.L. No. 7-2015.
§ 166-7. Fees.
Every application for determination under this chapter shall be accompanied by such reasonable fee
as may be fixed, from time to time, by resolution of the Board of Trustees of the Village to defray the
expenses incurred in rendering such determination.
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 96/441
[1]
§ 166-8. through § 166-17. (Reserved)
Editor’s Note: Former § 166-8, Procedures regarding exempt and nonexempt actions; § 166-9,
Preparation of draft environmental impact statement; § 166-10, Notice of completion and public hearing
on draft environmental impact statement; § 166-11, Processing of actions not affecting environment; §
166-12, Preparation of final environmental impact statement; § 166-13, Notice of completion of final
environmental impact statement; § 166-14, Procedure and time limit for final decisions on proposed
actions; § 166-15, Written determination by Chief Engineer; § 166-16, Maintenance of files for public
inspection; and § 166-17, Actions involving more than one agency, were repealed 9-8-2015 by L.L. No.
7-2015.
§ 166-18. Actions undertaken prior to specified date;
modifications.
Actions undertaken or approved prior to the dates specified in Article 8 of the Environmental
Conservation Law for local agencies shall be exempt from this chapter and the provisions of Article 8
of the Environmental Conservation Law and Part 617 of Title 6 NYCRR; provided, however, that if,
after such dates, the Chief Engineer of the Village modifies an action undertaken or approved prior to
that date and the Chief Engineer of the Village determines that the modification may have a significant
adverse effect on the environment, such modification shall be an action subject to this chapter and Part
617 of Title 6 NYCRR.
Chapter 169. Escalators
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Trustees of the Village of Rockville Centre 2-22-1971 by L.L. No.
1-1971 as Ch. 54 of the 1971 Code.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Village liability — See Ch. 66.
Building Code — See Ch. 112.
Fire prevention and control — See Ch. 185.
Lodging and boarding houses — See Ch. 225.
§ 169-1. Amendment to the Consolidated Laws.
Section 89 of Chapter 64 of the Laws of 1909, entitled "An Act Relating to Villages, Constituting
Chapter Sixty-Four of the Consolidated Laws," as amended, is hereby amended by inserting therein a
new subdivision, to be Subdivision 41-a, to read as follows:
§ 41-a. Escalators.
May construct, maintain and operate an escalator for the purpose of gaining convenient access by
the public to an elevated station or platform leading to and from railroad facilities where a grade
crossing elimination has resulted in raising or lowering railroad or railway tracks, and may purchase
all equipment, apparatus and machinery necessary therefor, and for the purposes thereof may
acquire by purchase, gift or lease any lands or rights therein. The cost of the construction,
maintenance and operation of such escalator and the lands or rights in lands acquired therefor shall
be a general Village charge.
Chapter 175. Fences
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 97/441
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Trustees of the Village of Rockville Centre 2-22-1971 by L.L. No.
1-1971 as Ch. 58 of the 1971 Code. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 287.
Swimming pools — See Ch. 291.
Trees, shrubs and hedges — See Ch. 303.
Planning Board; site plan review; subdivision of land — See Ch. 330.
Zoning — See Ch. 340.
§ 175-1. Fences required.
It shall be the duty of each and every person, firm, association or corporation owning land within the
Village, upon which land there is any excavation or depression as a result of which the surface of any
portion of the land is lower than three feet below the grade of the nearest street adjacent to said land,
or where the land is used for a legal use or a nonconforming use pursuant to Article III of Chapter 340,
whenever and wherever such use or nonconforming use includes the outdoor storage of any materials
such as building material, mason materials and supplies, building equipment and machinery, or where
land is used for a purpose which is dangerous to children who may be attracted to such premises, to
construct solid-type fence made of rust-resistant metals and/or wood properly treated to repel insect
attack, rot and decay around the boundaries of such land, which fence shall be at least six feet in
height and shall be so constructed as to prevent children from gaining access through said fence to
such premises and to prevent a view through said fence of such premises in which the excavation or
depression or use is located. The street front setback for such fence shall conform to the average
setback of the adjoining buildings. Where this chapter effects a nonconforming use, the average
setback distances as described above may be altered to a minimum setback distance of eight feet
except that where existing fences are installed the new fence line may coincide with such existing
fence line. This shall not apply to swimming pools, which are otherwise regulated by Chapter 291,
Swimming Pools.
§ 175-2. Penalties for offenses.
Any person, firm, association or corporation violating provisions of this chapter shall be liable for and
pay a penalty of $50 for each offense and an additional penalty of $10 for every day during which such
violation shall continue. And in addition thereto any violation of this chapter shall constitute disorderly
conduct and any person violating this chapter shall be and is hereby declared a disorderly person.
§ 175-3. Exceptions.
This chapter does not apply in the case of road excavations for utilities, nor does it apply during
construction pursuant to a valid building permit obtained from the Chief Engineer of the Village.
Chapter 176. Filming, Commercial
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Trustees of the Village of Rockville Centre 5-25-2010 by L.L. No.
8-2010. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Entertainment — See Ch. 163.
Licenses — See Ch. 222.
§ 176-1. Findings.
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 98/441
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
A.
The Board of Trustees hereby finds that it would serve the public interest to require a permit for use of
public or private property in the Village for filming, as defined in this chapter, and to establish the
standards and requirements which will govern application for such permits.
§ 176-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
FILMING
The recording, on film, tape, or other medium, of motion pictures, commercials, documentaries,
shows, performances, athletic or sport events or other similar events or activities, including still
photography, with the intention that the end product be distributed commercially or shown or
exhibited at any place or locale where an admission fee is charged. The term "filming" shall not
include recording of news, political events and local sports or school district events for the
purposes of providing news or information about such activities or events, nor activities contained
wholly within any building in the Village and which involve no physical activity or presence outside
such building. The term "filming" shall not include any recording by the Village or the Rockville
Centre School District, nor any recording where not more than two persons are involved in the
recording activity and there is no use of public property for storage or placement of equipment or
vehicles used in connection with or furtherance of such recording. As used herein, "filming" shall
include the use of public property for persons, equipment, vehicles, props, cameras and any other
items or materials used in connection with such filming.
§ 176-3. Permit required.
No person, firm, association or corporation shall commence, conduct, permit, or cause filming in the
Village of Rockville Centre unless a permit therefor has been issued by the Mayor, and unless such
filming is in compliance with the terms and conditions of such permit. Where a permit for filming has
been issued in accordance with this chapter, such activity shall be authorized in accordance with the
conditions of such permit. The Mayor may delegate to one or more other persons the authority to issue
permits or make other determinations pursuant to this chapter.
§ 176-4. Permit application.
An application for a filming permit shall be made on forms provided by the Village Clerk and shall
contain at least the following information:
Name, address and telephone number of the person or entity owning the rights to the film.
Name, address, telephone number, and written consent of the owner of the property where
the proposed filming is to be conducted, and the name, address, and telephone number of the
location coordinator or other contact person.
Purpose of the filming.
Specific location of the property to be used.
Dates and times of day that the property will be used.
A description of the number and type of all vehicles and bulky equipment to be used in
connection with the filming, and all locations where such vehicles will be located during the
period when the filming permit will be in effect.
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 99/441
(7)
(8)
B.
C.
D.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
Details of whether any streets are proposed to be closed during such filming, and the periods
of time of such anticipated closing.
Such other information as may be required by the Mayor.
Any application for a filming permit shall include the written consent of the owners of all property
located within a radius of 400 feet from any location where such filming, or any part of such filming
activity, is proposed to take place; provided, however, where such consent is not provided as part
of the application, the application shall include the names and addresses of the owners of all such
properties. Where the application does not include such consent of all owners, the applicant shall
give at least five days' written notice, by first class mail, return receipt requested, to all such
owners, stating a time and place designated by the Mayor when such owners may be heard to
object or comment on such application. No application for a filming permit shall be granted unless
the application includes such consents or the Mayor grants such application after all owners have
had an opportunity to be heard as provided herein.
Any material change in the date, time, place or scope of the filming activities for which a permit
has been requested or obtained shall be submitted in advance of the filming, and shall be
approved or denied in the same manner as the original application.
Application for a filming permit must be submitted at least 20 business days prior to the first date
of filming, unless the Mayor waives this condition for good cause.
§ 176-5. Denial or issuance; permit contents; restrictions.
The Mayor may deny an application for a filming permit if it does not comply with the purpose and
intent of this chapter or if the public interest will be served by such denial. The Mayor may also
deny any application for a permit in connection with filming which, in the Mayor's judgment, would
conflict with other scheduled events in the area of the filming location, would be detrimental to the
community because of anticipated excessive noise, illumination or other effect caused by the
proposed filming, including but not limited to the use of explosives, or would unduly interfere for an
extended period of time with the day-to-day activities of citizens, property owners or merchants.
Every permit shall contain a date of commencement and an expiration date and shall contain the
location where and specific hours during which filming shall occur. No filming shall take place
except in accordance with the terms and conditions of the permit.
At no time shall filming, or the use of equipment in connection with or furtherance thereof, be
conducted in a residential area between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m., or on Sundays
prior to 10:00 a.m., except that the Mayor may authorize filming during such hours upon good
cause shown and upon a finding that such filming will not have any adverse effect on the
neighborhood in which such filming is proposed to be conducted.
There shall be no rerouting of traffic in connection with the filming activity except as specifically
authorized by the Mayor as a condition of the permit approval.
Filming shall be conducted so as not to interfere with access to fire stations and fire hydrants.
Equipment, materials or obstructions shall not be placed within 15 feet of fire hydrants.
Passageways leading to fire escapes or fire-fighting equipment shall be kept free of equipment,
materials or obstructions. Parking spaces for the handicapped shall be kept free of equipment,
materials or obstructions.
In granting a permit for filming, the Mayor may impose reasonable conditions and/or limitations on
the activity, including hours of operation, based on the needs of the particular neighborhood or the
existence of conflicting scheduled events, or to protect the public health, safety and general
welfare.
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 100/441
G.
A.
B.
(1)
(2)
(3)
A.
B.
C.
D.
A.
B.
A decision by the Mayor to grant or deny a filming permit, or to impose or not impose conditions
on a filming permit, shall be appealable by any person aggrieved thereby to the Board of Trustees,
whose decision thereon shall be final.
§ 176-6. Fees.
The fee for a filming permit shall be established, and may be amended, by the Board of Trustees
by resolution. The fee shall be paid in cash or certified check prior to the issuance of the permit.
In addition, the applicant shall pay the actual cost for the use of any Village personnel, services or
equipment in connection with the filming, as determined by the Mayor. The applicant shall, prior to
the issuance of a filming permit, pay such costs on an estimated basis and shall also post
adequate security to ensure the payment of any such costs which cannot be reliably estimated.
§ 176-7. Suspension or revocation of permit.
The Mayor, on the Mayor's own initiative or upon the request of any person, may suspend or
revoke a filming permit for any of the following reasons:
Violation of any law, rule or regulation of the United States, the State of New York, the County
of Nassau, the Village of Rockville Centre or any department or agency thereof.
Violation of any condition of the permit.
Conduct that is detrimental to the health, safety or welfare of the residents of the Village of
Rockville Centre or that is detrimental to public or private property within the Village.
A decision by the Mayor to suspend or revoke a permit shall be appealable to the Board of
Trustees, whose decision thereon shall be final. The Mayor's decision shall remain in effect until
the determination of any such appeal.
In the event that a permit is suspended or revoked, the fee paid therefor, and any actual costs
paid, shall be forfeited and shall not be refunded to the applicant except as may be authorized by
the Board of Trustees.
Revocation of a filming permit shall bar the offender from applying for a new permit within one (1)
year from the date of the revocation, and shall bar any further application for a filming permit at the
same premises for a period of one year from the date of revocation.
§ 176-8. Insurance and bond.
No filming permit shall be issued until the applicant has deposited with the Village Clerk a policy of
liability, personal, bodily injury, automobile, and property damage insurance coverage in an
amount not less than $5,000,000, or an endorsement to any such policy, naming the Village of
Rockville Centre, its officers, agents and employees as additional named insured, thereby
providing defense and indemnity from and against any claim, loss or damage resulting from the
filming for which the permit is issued. The applicant also shall file proof of any other insurance
required by law, including workers' compensation and New York State disability insurance, and
any other insurance as may reasonably be required by the Mayor.
In addition, the applicant shall deposit with the Village Clerk a cash bond or letter of credit in an
amount to be determined by the Mayor to guarantee the reconstruction or restoration of any public
or private property damaged as a result of the filming. Such bond or letter of credit shall be in a
form acceptable to and approved by the Village Attorney.
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 101/441
A.
B.
[1]
A.
§ 176-9. Penalties for violations.
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate or fail, neglect or refuse to comply with any
provision of this chapter or any rule or determination made thereunder, or who shall undertake
filming without a permit therefor, shall, upon conviction thereof, be guilty of a violation, and shall be
punished as provided for violations of this Code.
In addition to the penalties set forth hereinabove, the Village may enforce any provision of this
chapter by injunction or by civil action to recover a civil penalty in an amount not greater than
$2,500 for each day on which a violation occurs.
Chapter 178. Firearms and Explosives
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Trustees of the Village of Rockville Centre 2-22-1971 by L.L. No.
1-1971 as Ch. 60 of the 1971 Code. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire prevention and control — See Ch. 185.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 247.
§ 178-1. Discharge prohibited.
No person shall discharge any firearms, rockets, gunpowder, firecrackers, torpedoes or other
explosives in any of the streets, avenues, highways, parks or public places within the Village of
Rockville Centre.
Chapter 181. Fire Escapes
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Trustees of the Village of Rockville Centre 2-22-1971 by L.L. No.
1-1971 as Ch. 61 of the 1971 Code. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building Code — See Ch. 112.
Entertainment — See Ch. 163.
Fire prevention and control — See Ch. 185.
Lodging and boarding houses — See Ch. 225.
§ 181-1. Requirement.
It shall be the duty of every owner of a building occupied as a hotel, a factory, a theater, an opera
house, a music hall or other places of amusement, assembly hall, church, hospital, literary or
charitable institution more than two stories in height, to erect suitable fire escapes connected with all
stories above the second story, to afford easy and convenient access to the ground on the outside of
the building in question, and constructed in the manner prescribed by the Building Code of the Village.
[1]
Editor's Note: See Ch. 112, Building Code.
§ 181-2. Penalties for offenses.
Any person, persons or corporation who shall fail to comply with the provisions of this chapter
shall be subject to a penalty of $50. Any violation of this chapter or any part thereof shall constitute
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 102/441
B.
A.
B.
disorderly conduct, and the person violating this chapter or any part thereof shall be and is hereby
declared to be a disorderly person.
A failure to comply with the provisions of this chapter within 20 days after any conviction therefor
shall be deemed a new and separate offense for which such person, persons or corporations shall
become liable anew to each and all of the penalties herein prescribed.
Chapter 185. Fire Prevention and Control
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Trustees of the Village of Rockville Centre as indicated in article
histories. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Escalators — See Ch. 54.
Alarm systems — See Ch. 81.
Secondhand automobile sales — See Ch. 93.
Awnings — See Ch. 96.
Bowling alleys and pool halls — See Ch. 105.
Building Code — See Ch. 112.
Emergency lighting in residential structures — See Ch. 115, Art. II.
Dangerous and unsafe buildings — See Ch. 122.
Moving of buildings — See Ch. 126.
Rehabilitation of buildings — See Ch. 132.
Open burning — See Ch. 135.
Coin-operated dry-cleaning machines — See Ch. 154.
Dumps and dumping — See Ch. 157.
Entertainment — See Ch. 163.
Firearms and explosives — See Ch. 178.
Fire escapes — See Ch. 181.
Gasoline sale and service stations — See Ch. 204.
Junk and secondhand dealers — See Ch. 215.
Lodging and boarding houses — See Ch. 225.
Peace and good order generally — See Ch. 247.
Plumbing — See Ch. 256.
Smoke emission — See Ch. 276.
Solid waste — See Ch. 283.
Removal of vehicles during emergencies — See Ch. 309, Art. XI.
Article I. Bureau of Fire Prevention; General Provisions
[Adopted 2-22-1971 by L.L. No. 1-1971 as Ch. 62, Art. I, of the 1971 Code]
§ 185-1. Establishment of Bureau.
A Bureau of Fire Prevention in the Fire Department of the Incorporated Village of Rockville Centre
is hereby established, which shall be operated under the supervision of the Chief Engineer of the
Rockville Centre Fire Department.
The Chief Engineer of the Fire Department shall designate members of the Fire Department as
inspectors of the Fire Prevention Bureau as shall from time to time be necessary.
§ 185-2. Duties.
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 103/441
A.
B.
C.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
It shall be the duty of the inspectors of the Fire Prevention Bureau to enforce all laws and ordinances
of the state, county, town and Village covering the following:
The prevention of fires.
The storage and use of explosives and inflammables.
The installation and maintenance of automatic and other private fire alarm systems and fireextinguishing
equipment.
§ 185-3. Investigation of fires.
The Fire Prevention Bureau shall, under the direction of the officer in charge, investigate the cause,
origin and circumstances of every fire occurring in the Village of Rockville Centre and its fire protection
districts, and so far as possible shall determine whether the fire is the result of carelessness or design.
If the fire is of suspicious or undetermined origin, the officer in charge of the fire shall take charge
immediately of the physical evidence and shall notify the proper authorities.
§ 185-4. Inspections.
The Chief Engineer of the Fire Department, members or inspectors of the Fire Prevention Bureau
may, at all reasonable hours, enter any building or premises within their jurisdiction for the purpose
of making an inspection or investigation he or they may deem necessary to be made.
The Chief Engineer and inspectors of the Fire Prevention Bureau shall inspect as often as may be
deemed necessary, or upon complaint, all buildings, structures and premises except the interior of
one-family dwellings, for the purpose of ascertaining and causing to be corrected any conditions
liable to cause fire or any violations of the provisions or intent of any law or ordinance affecting the
fire hazard.
It shall be the duty of the Chief Engineer of the Fire Department to require the teachers, principals
or other persons in charge of every public, private, parochial school and educational institutions to
conduct at least 12 fire drills in each school year and to keep all doors and exits unlocked during
school hours and during all times said building is being used by students, teachers or the public.
If the Chief Engineer of the Fire Department or any inspector of the Fire Prevention Bureau shall
find in any building, structure, premises or any other place, combustible or explosive matter or
dangerous accumulations of rubbish or unnecessary accumulations of rubbish, wastepaper,
boxes, shavings, dead trees, branches or any other highly inflammable materials, and which is so
situated as to endanger property or lives, or shall find obstructions to or on fire escapes, on or
under stairs, steps, passageways, hallways, doors or windows, liable to interfere with the
operations of the Fire Department or egress of the occupants in case of fire, such dangerous
conditions or materials shall be ordered removed and remedied forthwith.
Whenever the Chief Engineer or inspectors of the Fire Prevention Bureau shall find any building or
other structure which, for want of automatic or other fire alarm apparatus or fire extinguishing
equipment, or by reason of age or dilapidated condition, or from any other cause, is especially
liable to fire, and which is so situated as to endanger other property or the occupants thereof, and
whenever such officer or officers shall find in any building combustible or flammable materials or
conditions dangerous to the safety of such building or the occupants thereof, he shall order such
dangerous condition or materials to be removed or to be remedied in accordance with recognized
standards and practices for the prevention of fire.
The recognized standards and practices for the prevention of fire shall be held to mean the
standard practices and requirements as set forth by the Insurance Services Office, National Fire
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 104/441
A.
B.
A.
Protection Association and the National Board of Fire Underwriters. Compliance with these
standards or other approved nationally recognized safety standards shall be deemed to be prima
facie evidence of compliance with this intent.
[Amended 10-21-1974 by L.L. No. 4-1974]
§ 185-5. Service of orders.
The service of orders hereunder may be made upon the owner or occupant of the premises either
by delivering a copy thereof to such owner or occupant personally or by delivering such copy to
any person in charge of the premises. In case no such person is found on the premises, service
may be made by affixing a copy thereof upon a conspicuous part of the premises and by mailing
an additional copy of such order to the owner at his last known address by registered mail.
Any such order shall forthwith be complied with by the owner or occupant of such premises or
building; provided, however, that such owner or occupant may, within 24 hours, appeal to the
Chief Engineer of the Fire Department, who shall, within three days, review such order and file his
decision thereon, and unless by his authority the order is revoked or modified, it shall remain in full
force and be complied with within the time fixed in said order or decision of the Chief Engineer;
provided, however, that any such owner or occupant may, after the revoking or affirming of any
such order by the Chief Engineer of the Fire Department, apply for a review of such order to the
courts pursuant to Article 78 of the Civil Practice Act.
§ 185-6. Definition of person.
As used in this article, the following term shall have the meaning indicated:
PERSON
Includes person, persons, firms or corporations.
§ 185-7. Chief Engineer's power to modify.
The Chief Engineer of the Fire Department shall have power to modify any of the provisions of this
article upon application in writing by the owner, lessee or occupant, when there are practical difficulties
in the may of carrying out the strict letter of this article, provided that the same are not inconsistent with
the general intent of this article and public safety and substantial justice be done. Such modifications
shall be in writing by the Chief Engineer.
§ 185-8. Lights in multiple dwellings and other buildings.
In every multiple-family dwelling, office building, public hall, places of public assembly or such
other places used by the public for business, fraternal, educational or social purposes, the owner
shall provide a light or lights which shall be of not less than 15 watts or equivalent photometric
rating for the vestibule and entrance hall and in every public hall, stair, fire stair and fire tower, on
every floor and basement corridor. Such light or lights shall be located as prescribed by the
department charged with the enforcement of this section. Except as hereinafter otherwise
provided with respect to fire stairs, fire towers and in stairs, public halls and basement corridors
without windows, every such light or lights shall be turned on by the owner or his agent at sunset
every day and shall not be turned off by the owner or his agent until the following sunrise. Such
light or lights shall be kept burning daily from sunset until sunrise, but if the same become
extinguished and remain extinguished without the knowledge and consent of the owner he shall
not be liable. The burden shall be upon the owner to show that said light or lights became and
remained extinguished without the knowledge and consent of the owner or his agent. Every light in
every fire stair and fire tower at every floor where there is no window opening to the outer air, and
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 105/441
B.
C.
in every public hall and basement corridor where there is no window opening to the outer air, shall
be kept burning continuously.
The light or lights in stair, fire stair, fire tower, public hall and basement corridor shall be so located
that all portions of such stair, fire stair, fire tower, public hall or basement corridor shall be lighted.
This section shall apply to all multiple-family dwellings, office buildings, public halls, places of
public assembly or such other places used by the public for business, fraternal, educational or
social purposes now used for the above-mentioned purposes, as well as all buildings hereafter
erected for said purposes.
§ 185-9. Fire alarm boxes.
Appropriate signs indicating the location of the nearest fire alarm box shall be installed at all entrances
of all multiple dwellings and places of public assembly by the owner, tenant or person in charge of said
building, said signs to be approved by the Bureau of Fire Prevention as to size, material, wording,
place and manner of installation. No person or persons, firm, association or corporation shall refuse to
permit the installation of such signs as provided herein, or shall remove any such sign so installed.
§ 185-10. Guards for boiler rooms, fire rooms, cellars.
Any boiler room, fire room or cellar which has a depression in the floor, and any inside or outside
grease pit, shall be properly guarded with metal rails or chains. All outside openings or areaways shall
be protected with a grating at grade level or with a rail. It shall be the duty of the inspectors to
investigate any such condition and to see that the provisions of this section are complied with. This
section shall apply to all buildings, with the exception of one-family residences.
§ 185-11. Trap doors, windows and shafts.
All trap doors in any factory or storage building shall be closed at the completion of the business of
each day. Every outside window in any such building which opens directly on any hoistway or other
vertical means of communication between two or more floors in such building shall be plainly marked
with the word "Shaftway" in red letters at least six inches high on a white background, such warning
sign to be so placed as to be easily discernible from the outside of the building. Every door or window
opening on such shaftway from the interior of the building, unless the construction of the partition
surrounding the shaftway is of such distinctive nature as to make the purpose evident at a glance, shall
be similarly marked with the warning word "Shaftway" so placed to be easily visible to anyone
approaching the shaftway from the interior of the building. Any open shaftway shall be properly
protected by a suitable guardrail at all times.
§ 185-12. Inflammable decorations.
Inflammable materials of whatever nature or texture shall not be used for decoration purposes in show
windows, stores nor any place of public assembly unless such materials are first rendered flameproof
in a manner acceptable to the enforcing officer; provided, however, that nothing herein shall be held to
prohibit the display of salable goods, permitted and offered for sale, in stores. Electric light bulbs in
stores or public halls shall not be decorated with paper or other combustible materials unless such
materials shall first have been rendered flameproof.
§ 185-13. Chimneys and smokestacks.
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 106/441
All chimneys, smokestacks or similar devices for conveying smoke or hot gases to the outer air, and
the stoves, furnaces, fireboxes or boilers to which they are connected, shall be maintained in such a
manner as not to endanger property.
Article II. Fire Department's Assistance Outside Village
[Adopted 2-22-1971 by L.L. No. 1-1971 as Ch. 62, Art. II, of the 1971 Code]
§ 185-14. Aid authorized.
The Fire Department of the Village or any one or more fire companies thereof are hereby authorized
and permitted to go to the aid of another city, village, town or fire district outside of the Village limits to
assist in extinguishing fire or to give assistance in other public disasters or emergencies.
§ 185-15. Power vested in Chief.
The Chief Engineer of the Fire Department, in this article designated as the Fire Chief, is empowered
to direct that aid be extended to other communities as herein provided. In the absence or disability of
the Chief, the First Assistant Chief, and, in the absence or disability of both the Chief and First
Assistant, the Second Assistant Chief, shall have the power to direct that such aid be extended.
§ 185-16. Privileges of firemen.
While extending such aid, the members of the Fire Department shall have the same immunities and
privileges as though they were performing similar duties within the Village.
Article III. Clearance of Inflammable Material
[Adopted 2-22-1971 by L.L. No. 1-1971 as Ch. 62, Art. III, of the 1971 Code]
§ 185-17. Accumulation forbidden.
Every owner or occupant of any house, store or other building, and every person or corporation owning
or being entitled to possession of any vacant lot or unimproved property, shall at all times keep the
premises owned or occupied by them or to the possession of which they are entitled, free from papers,
boxes, rubbish or other inflammable material which is likely to cause damage by fire. All weeds, grass,
vines or other growth within 25 feet of any building or structure, when same endangers property or is
liable to be fired, shall be cut down and removed by the owner or occupant.
§ 185-18. Notice to be served.
The Bureau of Fire Prevention shall serve a notice in writing, either personally or by mail, on any
owner, lessee or occupant of real property in the Village, to remove or destroy any accumulations of
such grass, weeds, brush and all other forms of refuse or rubbish thereon likely to cause or spread
fires.
§ 185-19. Violation defined.
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 107/441
A.
B.
A.
B.
A person so served who, for five days after service, shall neglect or fail to comply with such notice,
shall be deemed to have violated this article.
Article IV. Disposal of Rubbish
[Adopted 2-22-1971 by L.L. No. 1-1971 as Ch. 62, Art. IV, of the 1971 Code]
§ 185-20. Bonfires.
No person shall kindle, maintain, authorize or permit any bonfire or other open fire on or in any
street, alley, road, land or public grounds or upon any private lot where such fire may endanger
other property.
No person shall deposit hot ashes, smoldering coals or embers, greasy or oily substances or other
materials liable to create spontaneous ignition, within 10 feet of any wooden or plastered wall,
partition, fence, floor, sidewalk, lumber, hay, shavings, rubbish or other combustible materials,
except in metallic or other noncombustible receptacles. Such receptacles, unless resting on a
noncombustible floor or on the ground outside the building, must be placed two feet away from
any combustible wall or partition and from under any stairs, stairways or fire escapes.
§ 185-21. Storage of combustible containers.
The storage of empty packing cases, boxes, barrels or other similar combustible containers is
forbidden except in the open and except such as may be required by a manufacturer, merchant or
other establishment to properly carry on its operations, which storage shall be orderly and not so
located as to endanger exits from the building. All storage in the open, of packing cases, boxes,
barrels or other similar combustible containers, shall be in a compact and orderly manner.
The storage of all merchandise or raw materials shall be in a compact and orderly manner so as to
leave an aisle or aisles from the front to the rear of the building at least three feet wide.
§ 185-22. Receptacles.
No person making, using, storing or having charge of or control of any shavings, excelsior, rubbish,
sacks, bags, litter, hay, straw or combustible trash, waste or fragments shall fail, neglect or refuse, at
the close of each day, to cause all such material which is not compactly baled or stacked in an orderly
manner, to be removed from the premises or stored in suitable vaults or in metal or metal-lined
covered receptacles or bins provided with a fusible link.
Article V. Vehicles Delivering Fuel Oil
[Adopted 2-22-1971 by L.L. No. 1-1971 as Ch. 62, Art. V, of the 1971 Code]
§ 185-23. Jurisdiction; specifications; fire extinguishers.
Any vehicle using the streets and roads of the Incorporated Village of Rockville Centre to deliver fuel
oil or inflammable liquids shall be under the jurisdiction of the Fire Prevention Bureau inspectors. The
tanks must meet with the requirements of the laws of the State of New York, and shall be required to
carry proper fire extinguishers.
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 108/441
A.
B.
C.
D.
Article VI. Heating Devices
[Adopted 2-22-1971 by L.L. No. 1-1971 as Ch. 62, Art. VI, of the 1971 Code]
§ 185-24. Open flames and artificial lighting systems.
No heating device with an open flame, and no artificial lighting system other than electric lights, shall
be used in any warehouse for the storage of rags, excelsior, hair or other inflammable or combustible
material, nor in any shop or factory used for the manufacture, repair or renovation of mattresses or
bedding, nor in any establishment for the upholstering of furniture, nor in any manufacturing
establishment using or manufacturing any inflammable materials.
Article VII. Outdoor Storage of Vehicles
[Adopted 2-22-1971 by L.L. No. 1-1971 as Ch. 62, Art. VII, of the 1971 Code]
§ 185-25. Interference with the operation of the Fire Department.
No automobile or truck, either dismantled, jacked up or in dead storage, shall be stored or maintained
in any alley, driveway or rear yard unless such automobile or truck is stored or maintained not less
than 25 feet from any building, or in any position which will interfere with the operation of the Fire
Department.
Article VIII. Regulations for Bowling Alleys
[Adopted 2-22-1971 by L.L. No. 1-1971 as Ch. 62, Art. VIII, of the 1971 Code]
§ 185-26. Safety requirements.
Resurfacing of bowling alleys shall not be permitted or carried on while the establishment is in
operation or open for business. All motorized or other equipment in the area which might be a
source of ignition shall be disconnected and all smoking and open flames prohibited during
resurfacing operations involving the application of flammable finishes, and for one hour thereafter.
Bowling-pin refinishing shall not be done on the premises while the establishment is in operation
or open for business. A special room shall be provided for this purpose and it shall not be located
in the cellar, basement or below grade. Storage of flammable liquids in such rooms shall not
exceed 60 gallons in original metal containers or approved safety containers not exceeding five
gallons' individual capacity. A metal waste can with self-closing cover shall be provided for all
waste materials and rags, and contents shall be removed daily. Smoking shall be prohibited at all
times in refinishing rooms.
Rooms for bowling-pin refinishing shall have one or more windows, and walls shall have a fireresistance
rating of not less than one hour and be continuous from floor to ceiling and securely
anchored.
Floors and ceilings shall have one-hour fire-resistance rating. Door openings shall be provided
with noncombustible sills raised six inches. Such openings shall be protected by standard fire
doors of approved automatic or self-closing type.
Article IX. Sale and Storage of Christmas Trees
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 109/441
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
[Adopted 2-22-1971 by L.L. No. 1-1971 as Ch. 62, Art. IX, of the 1971 Code]
§ 185-27. Permit; requirements.
No person or persons, firm, association or corporation shall engage in or carry on the business of
selling Christmas trees or storing Christmas trees without a permit from the Chief of the Fire
Department, which permit shall not be granted unless such person or persons, firm, associations or
corporations desiring the same shall comply with the following requirements:
Such person or persons, firm, association or corporation shall deposit with the Clerk of the Village
of Rockville Centre the sum of $50. Such deposit shall be made to guarantee the removal of any
trees, branches and accumulation of rubbish left on the premises on or before December 26 of the
same year.
Upon completion of the removal of all trees, branches and accumulation of rubbish left on the
premises, in accordance with the permit, to be evidenced by a certificate of the Fire Prevention
Bureau, the Clerk of said Village shall return to said applicant the sum so deposited, less whatever
expenses shall have been incurred by said Village for the removal of said trees, branches or
accumulation of rubbish.
Each and every permit issued in pursuance of the terms and provisions of this article shall at all
times be in the possession of the parties actually selling or storing Christmas trees.
In the event of the failure of the applicant to remove any trees, branches or accumulation of
rubbish on or before December 26 of the same year, said trees, branches, accumulation of
rubbish shall be removed by the Village of Rockville Centre and the costs thereof charged against
the applicant.
No permit issued in pursuance of this article shall be construed to relieve any applicant for such
permit of the duty to properly store and maintain said trees so as not to endanger property or
interfere with the operations of the Fire Department or egress of occupants of the premises in
case of fire.
Every application for a permit as herein provided shall be in writing and signed by the applicant,
and it shall be the duty of the Clerk of the Village of Rockville Centre to have printed forms on
which applications can be made (which forms shall contain a provision that in consideration of the
granting of the permit, the applicant therefor shall save and keep harmless the Village of Rockville
Centre from all damages caused by the negligence of the applicant).
Article X. Sawmills and Woodworking Plants
[Adopted 2-22-1971 by L.L. No. 1-1971 as Ch. 62, Art. X, of the 1971 Code]
§ 185-28. Removal of refuse.
Sawmills, planing mills and other woodworking plants shall be equipped with refuse-removal systems
which will collect and remove sawdust and shavings as produced; or suitable metal or metal-lined bins
provided with normally closed covers or automatically closing covers shall be installed at or near such
machines, and shavings and sawdust shall be swept up and deposited in such bins at sufficiently
frequent intervals as to keep the premises clean.
§ 185-29. Burning of shavings.
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 110/441
A.
The burning of shavings, sawdust and refuse material shall be permitted only under boilers, in furnaces
or in properly constructed incinerators or refuse burners; provided that these materials may be burned
in the open if surrounded by a metal or other wall at least six feet high and distant at least 50 feet from
any building or storage of lumber. All stacks shall be provided with suitable spark arresters.
Article XI. Manufacturing and Storage of Plastics
[Adopted 2-22-1971 by L.L. No. 1-1971 as Ch. 62, Art. XI, of the 1971 Code]
§ 185-30. Storage and manufacturing prohibited.
It shall be unlawful to manufacture or store pyroxylin plastic or to use it in the manufacture of other
articles within the Incorporated Village of Rockville Centre.
§ 185-31. Term defined.
PYROXYLIN PLASTIC
As used herein, shall be held to mean and include any plastic substance, material or compound,
other than nitrocellulose film, having soluble cotton or similar nitrocellulose as a base, including
celluloid, fiberloid, pyralin, viscoloid, zylonite and similar products, materials and compounds by
whatever name known.
Article XII. Paint Burning
[Adopted 2-22-1971 by L.L. No. 1-1971 as Ch. 62, Art. XII, of the 1971 Code]
§ 185-32. Fire-extinguishing requirements; failure to comply.
Any person using a torch or other flame-producing device for removing paint from any building or
structure shall provide at least one fire extinguisher of an approved type or water hose connected to
the water supply on the premises where such burning is being done. In all cases the person or persons
doing the burning shall remain on the premises one hour after the torch or flame-producing devices
have been used. Failure to comply with the requirements herein and failure to provide the equipment
required herein and to maintain said equipment in operative condition shall be considered a violation
punishable as indicated hereinafter in this article.
Article XIII. Storage of Charcoal
[Adopted 2-22-1971 by L.L. No. 1-1971 as Ch. 62, Art. XIII, of the 1971 Code]
§ 185-33. Storage requirements.
Sacked charcoal may be stored only in the following manner:
All sacked charcoal shall be piled in tiers with at least six inches of open space between each tier.
The bottom sacks shall be placed on two-by-fours or scantlings two feet apart. Each tier shall not
be more than 16 feet long, six feet wide or six feet high. No tier of charcoal may be more than six
feet in height unless scantlings are placed at each five-foot level in height.
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 111/441
B. In establishments offering sacked charcoal for sale at retail, this section shall only apply if more
than 100 sacks of charcoal are kept in stock in said premises.
Article XIV. Welding and Cutting
[Adopted 2-22-1971 by L.L. No. 1-1971 as Ch. 62, Art. XIV, of the 1971 Code]
§ 185-34. Adequate protection of combustible material.
During the construction, repair or demolition of any building, structure, machinery equipment or any
appurtenance thereto, welding or cutting shall not be conducted where sparks or molten material will
come in contact with any combustible material unless such material is adequately shielded and
portable extinguishing equipment provided nearby.
§ 185-35. Protection from drums containing flammable liquids.
No welding, brazing, soldering or cutting of any tank drum or other container which contains or has
contained any flammable liquid shall be carried out unless such container has been rendered free of
such liquid through steaming and scouring or the interior airspace has been tested and found to
contain an inert gas mixture of less than 5% oxygen.
Article XV. Ammonia Tanks
[Adopted 2-22-1971 by L.L. No. 1-1971 as Ch. 62, Art. XV, of the 1971 Code]
§ 185-36. Safety or bleeding valve.
It shall be the duty of the occupant of every building occupied for commercial, mercantile or industrial
purposes in which an ammonia tank is located to cause to be installed on the outside of such building
in a place which is accessible to the members of the Fire Department of the Village of Rockville
Centre, Nassau County, New York, a safety or bleeding valve, and deliver a key which will fit the same
to the Chief Engineer of the Fire Department of the Village of Rockville Centre, such safety or bleeding
valve to be connected with such installation therein so that in the event of a fire the ammonia fumes
arising from the installation of such ammonia tank may be destroyed by the turning of such valve.
§ 185-37. Penalties for offenses.
Any person, persons or corporation who shall fail to comply with the conditions of this article shall be
subject to a penalty not exceeding $50 and an additional penalty not exceeding $50 per day for each
day such violation continues. Any violation of this article or any part thereof shall constitute disorderly
conduct, and any person violating this article or any part thereof shall be and is hereby declared a
disorderly person.
Article XVI. Inspection of Fire Extinguishers
[Adopted 2-22-1971 by L.L. No. 1-1971 as Ch. 62, Art. XVI, of the 1971 Code]
§ 185-38. Inspections.
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 112/441
The Chief Engineer of the Fire Department and inspectors of the Fire Prevention Bureau shall survey
each mercantile and manufacturing establishment; each garage, school, public hall, place of assembly,
hospital, apartment house, sanatorium and convalescent home; each boarding- , rooming, tourist and
paying guest house; and each hotel, club, restaurant and eating place, and shall designate suitable
hand fire extinguishers. Such fire appliances may consist of fixed, wheeled or portable chemical
extinguishers of a type suitable for the probable class of fire. The size, number and location of such fire
appliances shall be determined by the Fire Prevention Bureau.
§ 185-39. Penalties for offenses.
Failure to install or provide the equipment ordered by the Fire Prevention Bureau or Chief Engineer of
the Fire Department and failure to maintain it in operative condition at all times shall be considered a
violation punishable as indicated hereinafter in this article. Repeated disregard of such orders shall
constitute sufficient basis for the Chief Engineer to recommend to the Board of Trustees of the Village
of Rockville Centre revocation of any permit held.
Article XVII. Maintenance and Inspection of Approved
Automatic Sprinkler Equipment
[Adopted 7-19-1976 by L.L. No. 6-1976]
§ 185-40. Yearly inspection report.
It shall be required that, in any premises where approved automatic sprinkler equipment is installed, a
yearly inspection report by an approved sprinkler contractor or business holding a certificate of
competency for the inspection of such approved sprinkler equipment be made to the Bureau of Fire
Prevention and Superintendent of Buildings, such report to be filed no later than January 10 of each
year.
§ 185-41. Contents of report.
The maintenance and inspection report shall contain all such pertinent information concerning the
condition of the water supply, control valves, wet and dry pipe systems and special equipment,
sprinkler equipment alarms, maintenance, fires, impairments and obstructions, or such other
information as from time to time may be set forth in regulations of the Bureau of Fire Prevention or the
Superintendent of Buildings.
§ 185-42. Notification of sprinkler system shutdown.
In the event of the shutdown of a sprinkler system for any reason whatever, the Bureau of Fire
Prevention and the Superintendent of Buildings shall be notified as to the duration of the shutdown;
and the owner or occupant shall take such steps as may be required by the Bureau of Fire Prevention
or Superintendent of Buildings in protecting the property during the period of such shutdown.
§ 185-43. Reports of alterations.
Any alterations to the approved sprinkler system must be reported to the Bureau of Fire Prevention
and the Superintendent of Buildings, and plans must be submitted prior to the installation of a new,
improved sprinkler system or prior to the modification of any existing sprinkler system.
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 113/441
§ 185-44. Application of provisions.
The provisions of this article shall apply equally to new and existing automatic sprinkler systems and
equipment.
Article XVIII. Responsibility for Defects and Inspections
[Adopted 2-22-1971 by L.L. No. 1-1971 as Ch. 62, Art. XVIII, of the 1971 Code]
§ 185-45. Responsibility for defects; liability.
This article shall not be construed to affect the responsibility of any party owning, operating or installing
any equipment for damage to persons or property caused by any defect therein; nor shall the
Incorporated Village of Rockville Centre be held as assuming any such liability by reason of the
inspection or reinspection authorized herein or by reason of the approval or disapproval of any
equipment authorized herein.
Article XIX. Regulating Vehicles and Persons in Time of Fire
[Adopted 2-22-1971 by L.L. No. 1-1971 as Ch. 62, Art. XIX, of the 1971 Code]
§ 185-46. Interference or obstruction of Fire Department.
No person shall, at the time of any fire, interfere with, obstruct or hinder the work or operation of the
Fire Department.
§ 185-47. Control of vehicles.
No person while in control of any vehicle shall fail, upon the approach of any fire apparatus, to
immediately drive or place such vehicle close to and parallel with the nearest curb and immediately
bring such vehicle to a stop and remain there until the fire apparatus has moved from the vicinity.
§ 185-48. Obstructing fire hydrants.
No person, during a fire at which any fire apparatus is in attendance, or to or from which any fire
apparatus is traveling, shall stop any vehicle within 50 feet of any fire hydrant situated within a radius
of 500 feet of such fire.
§ 185-49. Moving of vehicles from the vicinity of fire hydrants.
No person in control of any vehicle shall fail to move it from the vicinity of any fire hydrant upon orders
so to do from any Fire Department officer or member.
Article XX. Misuse of Fire Authority, Insignia and Apparatus
[Adopted 2-22-1971 by L.L. No. 1-1971 as Ch. 62, Art. XX, of the 1971 Code]
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 114/441
§ 185-50. Authorized use of letters, emblems, insignia.
No person, other than a member of the Fire Department, shall display or maintain on any vehicle
owned or controlled by him any letters, emblem or insignia indicating or purporting to indicate
membership in or connection with the Fire Department.
§ 185-51. Driving over fire hoses restricted.
No person, except the Fire Chief or an Assistant Fire Chief or surgeon of the Fire Department, shall, at
any time, drive any vehicle (other than an ambulance in actual service or a vehicle carrying United
States mail) over any fire hose lying on any street in the Village.
§ 185-52. Permission to remain within fire lines required.
No person, except a fireman or policeman, without permission of the Fire Chief or an Assistant Fire
Chief or surgeon of the Fire Department shall go or remain within any fire lines.
Article XXI. Gas Pipe Shutoffs
[Adopted 2-22-1971 by L.L. No. 1-1971 as Ch. 62, Art. XXI, of the 1971 Code]
§ 185-53. Installation provisions.
No person shall install any pipe designed to convey gas from a main for lighting or heating a building,
unless it is provided with a stopcock placed the sidewalk area at or near the curb and also provided
with a stopcock box readily accessible so that the gas may be shut off at that point.
Article XXII. Penalty
[Adopted 2-22-1971 by L.L. No. 1-1971 as Ch. 62, Art. XXII, of the 1971 Code]
§ 185-54. Penalties for offenses.
Any person, persons, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this chapter or failing to
comply therewith, or violating or failing to comply with any order or regulation made thereunder, shall
be punishable by a fine not exceeding $100 or by imprisonment not exceeding 30 days, or both, for
each and every such violation and noncompliance. The imposition of the penalty for any violation shall
not excuse the violation or permit it to continue, and all such person, persons, firms or corporations
shall be required to correct or remedy such violations or defects within a reasonable time; and each
five days that prohibited conditions are maintained shall constitute a separate offense.
Chapter 188. Flood Damage Prevention
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Trustees of the Village of Rockville Centre 8-10-2009 by L.L. No.
2-2009[1]. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building code — See Ch. 112.
Building code administration — See Ch. 115.
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 115/441
[1]
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
A.
B.
C.
D.
Environmental quality review — See Ch. 166.
Freshwater wetlands — See Ch. 197.
Planning Board; site plan review; subdivision of land — See Ch. 330.
Zoning — See Ch. 340.
Editor's Note: This local law also repealed former Ch. 188, Flood Damage Prevention, adopted 6-15-
1987 by L.L. No. 1-1987, as amended.
Article I. Statutory Authorization and Purpose
§ 188-1. Findings.
The Board of Trustees of the Village of Rockville Centre finds that the potential and/or actual damages
from flooding and erosion may be a problem to the residents of the Village of Rockville Centre and that
such damages may include: destruction or loss of private and public housing, damage to public
facilities, both publicly and privately owned, and injury to and loss of human life. In order to minimize
the threat of such damages and to achieve the purposes and objectives hereinafter set forth, this
chapter is adopted.
§ 188-2. Statement of purpose.
It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety and general welfare and to
minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to:
Regulate uses which are dangerous to health, safety and property due to water or erosion hazards
or which result in damaging increases in erosion or in flood heights or velocities;
Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected
against flood damage at the time of initial construction;
Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels and natural protective barriers which
are involved in the accommodation of floodwaters;
Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase erosion or flood
damages;
Regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may
increase flood hazards to other lands; and
Qualify and maintain for participation in the National Flood Insurance Program.
§ 188-3. Objectives.
The objectives of this chapter are:
To protect human life and health;
To minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects;
To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally
undertaken at the expense of the general public;
To minimize prolonged business interruptions;
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 116/441
E.
F.
G.
H.
To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric,
telephone and sewer lines and streets and bridges located in areas of special flood hazard;
To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of areas of
special flood hazard so as to minimize future flood blight areas;
To provide that developers are notified that property is in an area of special flood hazard; and
To ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard assume responsibility for their
actions.
Article II. Definitions and Word Usage
§ 188-4. Definitions.
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter shall be interpreted to give
them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable
application.
APPEAL
A request for a review of the local administrator's interpretation of any provision of this chapter or
a request for a variance.
AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING
A designated AO, AH or VO Zone on a community's Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) with a
one-percent or greater annual chance of flooding to an average annual depth of one to three feet
where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and
where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow.
AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD
The land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one-percent or greater chance of
flooding in any given year. This area may be designated as Zone A, AE, AH, AO, A1-A30, A99, V,
VO, VE or V1-V30. It is also commonly referred to as the "base floodplain" or "one-hundred-year
floodplain." For purposes of this chapter, the term "special flood hazard area (SFHA)" is
synonymous in meaning with the phrase "area of special flood hazard."
BASE FLOOD
The flood having a one-percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.
BASEMENT
That portion of a building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides.
BUILDING
See "structure."
CELLAR
Has the same meaning as "basement."
CRAWL SPACE
An enclosed area beneath the lowest elevated floor, 18 inches or more in height, which is used to
service the underside of the lowest elevated floor. The elevation of the floor of this enclosed area,
which may be of soil, gravel, concrete or other material, must be equal to or above the lowest
adjacent exterior grade. The enclosed crawl space area shall be properly vented to allow for the
equalization of hydrostatic forces which would be experienced during periods of flooding.
CUMULATIVE SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 117/441
(1)
(2)
A.
B.
Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition or other improvement of a structure that equals or
exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure at the time of improvement or repair when
counted cumulatively for 10 years.
DEVELOPMENT
Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to
buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, paving, excavation or drilling operations or
storage of equipment or materials.
ELEVATED BUILDING
A nonbasement building built, in the case of a building in Zone A1-A30, AE, A, A99, AO, AH, B, C,
X or D, to have the top of the elevated floor or, in the case of a building in Zone V1-30, VE or V, to
have the bottom of the lowest horizontal structure member of the elevated floor elevated above
the ground level by means of pilings, columns (posts and piers) or shear walls parallel to the flow
of the water and adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of the building
during a flood of up to the magnitude of the base flood. In the case of Zone A1-A30, AE, A, A99,
AO, AH, B, C, X or D, "elevated building" also includes a building elevated by means of fill or solid
foundation perimeter walls with openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movement of
floodwaters. In the case of Zone V1-V30, VE or V, "elevated building" also includes a building
otherwise meeting the definition of "elevated building," even though the lower area is enclosed by
means of breakaway walls that meet the federal standards.
FEDERAL EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY
The Federal agency that administers the National Flood Insurance Program.
FLOOD BOUNDARY AND FLOODWAY MAP (FBFM)
An official map of the community published by the Federal Emergency Management Agency as
part of a riverine community's Flood Insurance Study. The FBFM delineates a regulatory floodway
along watercourses studied in detail in the Flood Insurance Study.
FLOOD ELEVATION STUDY
An examination, evaluation and determination of the flood hazards and, if appropriate,
corresponding water surface elevations, or an examination, evaluation and determination of floodrelated
erosion hazards.
FLOOD HAZARD BOUNDARY MAP (FHBM)
An official map of a community, issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, where
the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard have been designated as Zone A but no flood
elevations are provided.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM)
An official map of a community on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency has
delineated both the areas of special flood hazard and the risk premium zones applicable to the
community.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY
See "flood elevation study."
FLOOD or FLOODING
A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land
areas from:
The overflow of inland or tidal waters;
The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source.
“Flood or flooding" also means the collapse or subsidence of land along the shore of a lake or
other body of water as a result of erosion or undermining caused by waves or currents of
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 118/441
A.
B.
C.
(1)
(2)
D.
water exceeding anticipated cyclical levels or suddenly caused by an unusually high water
level in a natural body of water, accompanied by a severe storm or by an unanticipated force
of nature, such as a flash flood or an abnormal tidal surge or by some similarly unusual and
unforeseeable event which results in flooding as defined in Subsection A(1) above.
FLOODPLAIN or FLOOD-PRONE AREA
Any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source. (See definition of
"Flooding.")
FLOODPROOFING
Any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes or adjustments to structures
which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and
sanitary facilities, structures and their contents.
FLOODWAY
Has the same meaning as "regulatory floodway."
FUNCTIONALLY DEPENDENT USE
A use which cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close
proximity to water, such as a docking or port facility necessary for the loading and unloading of
cargo or passengers, shipbuilding and ship repair facilities. The term does not include long-term
storage, manufacturing, sales or service facilities.
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE
The highest natural elevation of the ground surface, prior to construction, next to the proposed
walls of a structure.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE
Any structure that is:
Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the
Department of the Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as
meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register;
Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the
historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by
the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district;
Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation
programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or
Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic
preservation programs that have been certified either:
By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior; or
Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs.
LOCAL ADMINISTRATOR
The Superintendent of Buildings.
LOWEST FLOOR
The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement or cellar). An unfinished or flood
resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area
other than a basement area is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such
enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable nonelevation
design requirements of this chapter.
MANUFACTURED HOME
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 119/441
A.
B.
C.
D.
A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and
designed to be used with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required
utilities, where such structures are otherwise permitted by law, rule or regulation. The term does
not include a recreational vehicle.
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION
A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent
or sale, where such uses are otherwise permitted by law, rule or regulation.
MEAN SEA LEVEL
For purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the National Geodetic Vertical Datum
(NGVD) of l929, the North American Vertical Datum of 1988 (NAVD 88) or other datum, to which
base flood elevations shown on a community's Flood Insurance Rate Map are referenced.
MOBILE HOME
Has the same meaning as "manufactured home."
NEW CONSTRUCTION
Structures for which the start of construction commenced on or after the effective date of a
floodplain management regulation adopted by the community and includes any subsequent
improvements to such structure.
ONE-HUNDRED-YEAR FLOOD or 100-YEAR FLOOD
Has the same meaning as "base flood."
PRINCIPALLY ABOVE GROUND
At least 5l % of the actual cash value of the structure, excluding land value, is above ground.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE
A vehicle which is:
Built on a single chassis;
Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projections;
Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-duty truck; and
Not designed primarily for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for
recreational, camping, travel or seasonal use.
REGULATORY FLOODWAY
The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in
order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more
than a designated height as determined by the Federal Emergency Management Agency in a
Flood Insurance Study or by other agencies as provided in § 188-14B of this chapter.
START OF CONSTRUCTION
The date of permit issuance for new construction and substantial improvements to existing
structures, provided that actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition
placement or other improvement is within 180 days after the date of issuance. The actual start of
construction means the first placement of permanent construction of a building on a site, such as
the pouring of a slab or footings, installation of pilings or construction of columns. Permanent
construction does not include land preparation (such as clearing, excavation, grading or filling) or
the installation of streets or walkways or excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations
or the erection of temporary forms or the installation of accessory buildings such as garages or
sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main building. For a substantial
improvement, the actual "start of construction” means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor
or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions
of the building.
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 120/441
A.
B.
(1)
(2)
A.
B.
STRUCTURE
A walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage tank, that is principally above
ground, as well as a manufactured home.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE
Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its
condition before damage would equal or exceed 50% of the market value of the structure before
the damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT
Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which
equals or exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure before the start of construction of the
improvement. "Substantial improvement" also means cumulative substantial improvement. The
term includes structures which have incurred substantial damage, regardless of the actual repair
work performed. The term does not, however, include either:
Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local health,
sanitary or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code
enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or
Any alteration of an historic structure, provided that the alteration will not preclude the
structure's continued designation as an historic structure.
VARIANCE
A grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter which permits construction or use in a
manner that would otherwise be prohibited by this chapter.
VILLAGE
The Village of Rockville Centre.
Article III. General Provisions
§ 188-5. Applicability.
This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the jurisdiction of the Village of
Rockville Centre.
§ 188-6. Basis for establishing areas of special flood hazard.
The areas of special flood hazard for the Village, Community Number 360488, are identified and
defined on the following documents prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency:
Flood Insurance Rate Map Panel Numbers 36059C0210G, 36059C0216G, 36059C0217G,
36059C0218G, 36059C0219G, 36059C0228G, 36059C0236G, 36059C0238G, whose
effective date is September 11, 2009, and any subsequent revisions to these map panels that
do not affect areas under our community's jurisdiction.
A scientific and engineering report entitled "Flood Insurance Study, Nassau County, New
York, All Jurisdictions," dated September 11, 2009.
The above documents are hereby adopted and declared to be a part of this chapter. The Flood
Insurance Study and/or maps are on file at the office of the Building Department, 110 Maple
Avenue, Rockville Centre, New York.
§ 188-7. Interpretation; conflict with other laws.
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 121/441
A.
B.
This chapter includes all revisions to the National Flood Insurance Program through October 27,
1997, and shall supersede all previous laws adopted for the purpose of flood damage prevention.
In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter shall be held to be minimum
requirements adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety and welfare. Whenever the
requirements of this chapter are at variance with the requirements of any other lawfully adopted
rules, regulations or ordinances, the most restrictive, or that imposing the higher standards, shall
govern.
§ 188-8. Severability.
The invalidity of any section or provision of this chapter shall not invalidate any other section or
provision thereof.
§ 188-9. Penalties for offenses.
No structure in an area of special flood hazard shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended,
converted or altered and no land shall be excavated or filled without full compliance with the terms of
this chapter and any other applicable regulations. Any infraction of the provisions of this chapter by
failure to comply with any of its requirements, including infractions of conditions and safeguards
established in connection with conditions of the permit, shall constitute a violation. Any person who
violates this chapter or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall, upon conviction thereof, be
subject to a fine not to exceed $250 or imprisonment for not more than l5 days, or both such fine and
imprisonment. Each day of noncompliance shall be considered a separate offense. Nothing herein
contained shall prevent the Village from taking such other lawful action as necessary to prevent or
remedy an infraction. Any structure found not compliant with the requirements of this chapter for which
the developer and/or owner has not applied for and received an approved variance under Article VI will
be declared noncompliant, and notification will be sent to the Federal Emergency Management
Agency.
§ 188-10. Warning and disclaimer of liability.
The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory
purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur
on rare occasions. Flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes. This chapter does
not imply that land outside the area of special flood hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be
free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the Village, any
officer or employee thereof, or the Federal Emergency Management Agency for any flood damages
that result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder.
Article IV. Administration
§ 188-11. Designation of local administrator.
The Superintendent of Buildings is hereby appointed local administrator to administer and implement
this chapter by granting or denying floodplain development permits in accordance with its provisions.
§ 188-12. Floodplain development permit.
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 122/441
A.
B.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
Purpose. A floodplain development permit is hereby established for all construction and other
development to be undertaken in areas of special flood hazard in this community for the purpose
of protecting its citizens from increased flood hazards and insuring that new development is
constructed in a manner that minimizes its exposure to flooding. It shall be unlawful to undertake
any development in an area of special flood hazard, as shown on the Flood Insurance Rate Map
enumerated in § 188-6, without a valid floodplain development permit. Application for a permit
shall be made on forms furnished by the local administrator and may include, but not be limited to:
plans, in duplicate, drawn to scale and showing the nature, location, dimensions and elevations of
the area in question; existing or proposed structures, fill, storage of materials, drainage facilities
and the location of the foregoing.
Fees. All applications for a floodplain development permit shall be accompanied by an application
fee in an amount to be established by resolution of the Board of Trustees. In addition, the
applicant shall be responsible for reimbursing the Village for any additional costs necessary for
review, inspection and approval of this project. The local administrator may require a deposit of no
more than $500 to cover these additional costs.
§ 188-13. Application for permit.
The applicant shall provide the following information, as appropriate. Additional information may be
required on the permit application form.
The proposed elevation, in relation to mean sea level, of the lowest floor (including basement or
cellar) of any new or substantially improved structure to be located in Zone A1-A30, AE or AH, or
Zone A if base flood elevation data are available. Upon completion of the lowest floor, the
permitee shall submit to the local administrator the as-built elevation, certified by a licensed
professional engineer or surveyor.
The proposed elevation, in relation to mean sea level, to which any new or substantially improved
nonresidential structure will be floodproofed. Upon completion of the floodproofed portion of the
structure, the permitee shall submit to the local administrator the as-built floodproofed elevation,
certified by a professional engineer or surveyor.
A certificate from a licensed professional engineer or architect that any utility floodproofing will
meet the criteria in § 188-16C, Utilities.
A certificate from a licensed professional engineer or architect that any nonresidential floodproofed
structure will meet the floodproofing criteria in § 188-18, Nonresidential structures.
A description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of
proposed development. Computations by a licensed professional engineer must be submitted that
demonstrate that the altered or relocated segment will provide equal or greater conveyance than
the original stream segment. The applicant must submit any maps, computations or other material
required by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) to revise the documents
enumerated in § 188-6, when notified by the local administrator, and must pay any fees or other
costs assessed by FEMA for this purpose. The applicant must also provide assurances that the
conveyance capacity of the altered or relocated stream segment will be maintained.
A technical analysis, by a licensed professional engineer, if required by the local administrator,
which shows whether proposed development to be located in an area of special flood hazard may
result in physical damage to any other property.
In Zone A, when no base flood elevation data are available from other sources, base flood
elevation data shall be provided by the permit applicant for subdivision proposals and other
proposed developments (including proposals for manufactured home and recreational vehicle
parks and subdivisions) that are greater than either 50 lots or five acres.
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 123/441
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
A.
(1)
(2)
B.
(1)
(2)
C.
(1)
D.
§ 188-14. Duties and responsibilities of local administrator.
Duties of the local administrator shall include, but not be limited to the following:
Permit application review. The local administrator shall conduct the following permit application
review before issuing a floodplain development permit:
Review all applications for completeness, particularly with the requirements of subsection
§ 188-13, Application for permit, and for compliance with the provisions and standards of this
chapter.
Review subdivision and other proposed new development, including manufactured home
parks, to determine whether proposed building sites will be reasonably safe from flooding. If a
proposed building site is located in an area of special flood hazard, all new construction and
substantial improvements shall meet the applicable standards of Article V, Construction
Standards and, in particular, § 188-15A, Subdivision proposals.
Determine whether any proposed development in an area of special flood hazard may result
in physical damage to any other property (e.g., stream bank erosion and increased flood
velocities). The local administrator may require the applicant to submit additional technical
analyses and data necessary to complete the determination. If the proposed development
may result in physical damage to any other property or fails to meet the requirements of
Article V, Construction Standards, no permit shall be issued. The applicant may revise the
application to include measures that mitigate or eliminate the adverse effects and resubmit
the application.
Determine that all necessary permits have been received from those governmental agencies
from which approval is required by state or federal law.
Use of other flood data.
When the Federal Emergency Management Agency has designated areas of special flood
hazard on the community's Flood Insurance Rate map (FIRM) but has neither produced water
surface elevation data (These areas are designated Zone A or V on the FIRM.) nor identified
a floodway, the local administrator shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood
elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state or other source, including data
developed pursuant to § 188-13G, as criteria for requiring that new construction, substantial
improvements or other proposed development meet the requirements of this chapter.
When base flood elevation data are not available, the local administrator may use flood
information from any other authoritative source, such as historical data, to establish flood
elevations within the areas of special flood hazard, for the purposes of this chapter.
Alteration of watercourses.
Notify adjacent communities and the New York State Department of Environmental
Conservation prior to permitting any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit
evidence of such notification to the Regional Director, Region II, Federal Emergency
Management Agency.
Determine that the permit holder has provided for maintenance within the altered or relocated
portion of said watercourse so that the flood carrying capacity is not diminished.
Construction stage.
In Zones A1-A30, AE and AH, and also Zone A if base flood elevation data are available,
upon placement of the lowest floor or completion of floodproofing of a new or substantially
improved structure, obtain from the permit holder a certification of the as-built elevation of the
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 124/441
(2)
E.
(1)
(2)
F.
(1)
(2)
(3)
G.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
H.
lowest floor or floodproofed elevation, in relation to mean sea level. The certificate shall be
prepared by or under the direct supervision of a licensed land surveyor or professional
engineer and certified by same. For manufactured homes, the permit holder shall submit the
certificate of elevation upon placement of the structure on the site. A certificate of elevation
must also be submitted for a recreational vehicle if it remains on a site for 180 consecutive
days or longer (unless it is fully licensed and ready for highway use).
Any further work undertaken prior to submission and approval of the certification shall be at
the permit holder's risk. The local administrator shall review all data submitted. Deficiencies
detected shall be cause to issue a stop-work order for the project unless immediately
corrected.
Inspections. The local administrator and/or the developer's engineer or architect shall make
periodic inspections at appropriate times throughout the period of construction in order to monitor
compliance with permit conditions and enable said inspector to certify, if requested, that the
development is in compliance with the requirements of the floodplain development permit and/or
any variance provisions.
Stop-work orders.
The local administrator shall issue, or cause to be issued, a stop-work order for any floodplain
development found ongoing without a development permit. Disregard of a stop-work order
shall subject the violator to the penalties described in § 188-9 of this chapter.
The local administrator shall issue, or cause to be issued, a stop-work order for any floodplain
development found noncompliant with the provisions of this law and/or the conditions of the
development permit. Disregard of a stop-work order shall subject the violator to the penalties
described in § 188-9 of this chapter.
Certificate of compliance.
In areas of special flood hazard, as determined by documents enumerated in § 188-6, it shall
be unlawful to occupy or to permit the use or occupancy of any building or premises, or both,
or part thereof, hereafter created, erected, changed, converted or wholly or partly altered or
enlarged in its use or structure until a certificate of compliance has been issued by the local
administrator stating that the building or land conforms to the requirements of this chapter.
A certificate of compliance shall be issued by the local administrator upon satisfactory
completion of all development in areas of special flood hazard.
Issuance of the certificate shall be based upon the inspections conducted as prescribed in
Subsection E, Inspections, and/or any certified elevations, hydraulic data, floodproofing,
anchoring requirements or encroachment analyses which may have been required as a
condition of the approved permit.
Information to be retained. The local administrator shall retain and make available for inspection
copies of the following:
Floodplain development permits and certificates of compliance;
Certifications of as-built lowest floor elevations of structures, required pursuant to Subsection
A(1) and (2), and whether or not the structures contain a basement;
Floodproofing certificates required pursuant to Subsection D(1) and whether or not the
structures contain a basement;
Variances issued pursuant to Article VI, Variance Procedures; and
Notices required under Subsection C, Alteration of watercourses.
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 125/441
(1)
(2)
(3)
A.
(a)
(b)
(1)
(a)
(b)
(2)
(3)
B.
Article V. Construction Standards
§ 188-15. General standards.
The following standards apply to new development, including new and substantially improved
structures, in the areas of special flood hazard shown on the Flood Insurance Rate Map designated in
§ 188-6.
Subdivision proposals. The following standards apply to all new subdivision proposals and other
proposed development in areas of special flood hazard (including proposals for manufactured
home and recreational vehicle parks and subdivisions):
Proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage;
Public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems shall be located
and constructed so as to minimize flood damage; and
Adequate drainage shall be provided to reduce exposure to flood damage.
Encroachments.
Within Zones A1-A30 and AE, on streams without a regulatory floodway, no new construction,
substantial improvements or other development (including fill) shall be permitted unless:
The applicant demonstrates that the cumulative effect of the proposed development,
when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the
water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any location; or
The Village agrees to apply to the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) for
a conditional FIRM revision, FEMA approval is received and the applicant provides all
necessary data, analyses and mapping and reimburses the Village for all fees and other
costs in relation to the application. The applicant must also provide all data, analyses and
mapping and reimburse the Village for all costs related to the final map revision.
On streams with a regulatory floodway, as shown on the Flood Boundary and Floodway Map
or the Flood Insurance Rate Map adopted in § 188-6, no new construction, substantial
improvements or other development in the floodway (including fill) shall be permitted unless:
A technical evaluation by a licensed professional engineer shows that such an
encroachment shall not result in any increase in flood levels during occurrence of the
base flood; or
The Village agrees to apply to the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) for
a conditional FIRM and floodway revision, FEMA approval is received and the applicant
provides all necessary data, analyses and mapping and reimburses the Village for all
fees and other costs in relation to the application. The applicant must also provide all
data, analyses and mapping and reimburse the Village for all costs related to the final
map revisions.
Whenever any portion of a floodplain is authorized for development, the volume of space
occupied by the authorized fill or structure below the base flood elevation shall be
compensated for and balanced by a hydraulically equivalent volume of excavation taken from
below the base flood elevation at or adjacent to the development site. All such excavations
shall be constructed to drain freely to the watercourse. No area below the waterline of a pond
or other body of water can be credited as a compensating excavation.
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 126/441
A.
(1)
(2)
[1]
[2]
(a)
(b)
(3)
B.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
C.
§ 188-16. Standards for all structures.
Anchoring. New structures and substantial improvement to structures in areas of special flood
hazard shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement during the base flood.
This requirement is in addition to applicable state and local anchoring requirements for resisting
wind forces.
Construction materials and methods.
New construction and substantial improvements to structures shall be constructed with
materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage.
New construction and substantial improvements to structures shall be constructed using
methods and practices that minimize flood damage.
For enclosed areas below the lowest floor of a structure within Zone A1-A30, AE or AH, and
also Zone A if base flood elevation data are available, new and substantially improved
structures shall have fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are useable solely for
parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement and which
are subject to flooding, designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior
walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters.
Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a licensed professional
engineer or architect or meet or exceed the following minimum criteria:
A minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch
for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding; and
The bottom of all such openings is no higher than one foot above the lowest
adjacent finished grade.
Openings may be equipped with louvers, valves, screens or other coverings or devices,
provided they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters. Enclosed areas
subgrade on all sides are considered basements and are not permitted.
Utilities.
New and replacement electrical equipment, heating, ventilating, air conditioning, plumbing
connections and other service equipment shall be located at or above the base flood
elevation or be designed to prevent water from entering and accumulating within the
components during a flood and to resist hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and stresses.
Electrical wiring and outlets, switches, junction boxes and panels shall be elevated to or
above the base flood elevation unless they conform to the appropriate provisions of the
electrical part of the Building Code of New York State or the Residential Code of New York
State for location of such items in wet locations;
New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate
infiltration of floodwaters into the system;
New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate
infiltration of floodwaters. Sanitary sewer and storm drainage systems for buildings that have
openings below the base flood elevation shall be provided with automatic backflow valves or
other automatic backflow devices that are installed in each discharge line passing through a
building's exterior wall; and
On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them or contamination
from them during flooding.
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 127/441
A.
B.
C.
D.
(1)
(2)
A.
(1)
(2)
B.
C.
§ 188-17. Elevation of residential structures.
The following standards apply to new and substantially improved residential structures located in areas
of special flood hazard, in addition to the requirements in § 188-15A, Subdivision proposals, and
§ 188-15B, Encroachments, and § 188-16, Standards for all structures.
Within Zones A1-A30, AE and AH, and also Zone A if base flood elevation data are available, new
construction and substantial improvements shall have the lowest floor (including basement)
elevated to or above two feet above the base flood elevation.
Within Zone A, when no base flood elevation data are available, new and substantially improved
structures shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated at least three feet above the
highest adjacent grade.
Within Zone AO, new and substantially improved structures shall have the lowest floor (including
basement) elevated above the highest adjacent grade at least as high as two feet above the depth
number specified in feet on the community's Flood Insurance Rate Map enumerated in § 188-6 (at
least two feet if no depth number is specified).
Within Zones AH and AO, adequate drainage paths are required to guide floodwaters around and
away from proposed structures on slopes.
§ 188-18. Nonresidential structures.
The following standards apply to new and substantially improved commercial, industrial and other
nonresidential structures located in areas of special flood hazard, in addition to the requirements in
§ 188-15A, Subdivision proposals, and § 188-15B, Encroachments, and § 188-16, Standards for all
structures.
Within Zones A1-A30, AE and AH, and also Zone A if base flood elevation data are available, new
construction and substantial improvements of any nonresidential structure, together with attendant
utility and sanitary facilities, shall either:
Have the lowest floor, including basement or cellar, elevated to or above two feet above the
base flood elevation; or
Be floodproofed so that the structure is watertight below two feet above the base flood
elevation with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water. All structural
components located below the base flood level must be capable of resisting hydrostatic and
hydrodynamic loads and the effects of buoyancy.
Within Zone AO, new construction and substantial improvements of nonresidential structures
shall:
Have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated above the highest adjacent grade at least
as high as two feet above the depth number specified in feet on the community's FIRM (at
least two feet if no depth number is specified); or
Together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, be completely floodproofed to that level
to meet the floodproofing standard specified in Subsection A(2).
If the structure is to be floodproofed, a licensed professional engineer or architect shall develop
and/or review structural design, specifications and plans for construction. A floodproofing
certificate or other certification shall be provided to the local administrator that certifies the design
and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 128/441
D.
E.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(1)
(2)
A.
B.
C.
D.
A.
B.
the provisions of Subsection A(2), including the specific elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to
which the structure is to be floodproofed.
Within Zones AH and AO, adequate drainage paths are required to guide floodwaters around and
away from proposed structures on slopes.
Within Zone A, when no base flood elevation data are available, the lowest floor (including
basement) shall be elevated at least three feet above the highest adjacent grade.
§ 188-19. Manufactured homes and recreational vehicles.
The following standards, in addition to the standards in § 188-15, General standards, and § 188-16,
Standards for all structures, apply, as indicated, in areas of special flood hazard to manufactured
homes and to recreational vehicles which are located in areas of special flood hazard and which are
otherwise permitted by law.
Recreational vehicles.
Recreational vehicles placed on sites within Zones A1-A30, AE and AH shall either:
Be on site fewer than 180 consecutive days;
Be fully licensed and ready for highway use; or
Meet the requirements for manufactured homes in Subsections B, D, and E.
A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is
attached to the site only by quick disconnect-type utilities and security devices and has no
permanently attached additions.
A manufactured home that is placed or substantially improved in Zones A1-A30, AE and AH shall
be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor is elevated to or above two feet
above the base flood elevation and is securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation
system to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement.
Within Zone A, when no base flood elevation data are available, new and substantially improved
manufactured homes shall be elevated such that the manufactured home chassis is supported by
reinforced piers or other foundation elements of at least equivalent strength that are no less than
36 inches in height above grade and are securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation
system to resist flotation, collapse or lateral movement.
Within Zone AO, the floor shall be elevated above the highest adjacent grade at least as high as
the depth number specified on the Flood Insurance Rate Map enumerated in § 188-6 (at least two
feet if no depth number is specified).
Article VI. Variance Procedure
§ 188-20. Appeals Board.
The Village Board of Appeals shall hear and decide appeals and requests for variances from the
requirements of this chapter.
The Board of Appeals shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged there is an error in any
requirement, decision or determination made by the local administrator in the enforcement or
administration of this chapter.
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 129/441
C.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
(11)
(12)
D.
E.
F.
A.
B.
Those aggrieved by the decision of the Board of Appeals may appeal such decision to the
Supreme Court pursuant to Article 78 of the Civil Practice Law and Rules.
In passing upon such applications, the Board of Appeals shall consider all technical evaluations,
all relevant factors, standards specified in other applicable laws and in sections of this chapter
and:
The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others;
The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;
The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of
such damage on the individual owner;
The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the community;
The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable;
The availability of alternative locations for the proposed use which are not subject to flooding
or erosion damage;
The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development;
The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and floodplain management
program of that area;
The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles;
The costs to local governments and the dangers associated with conducting search-andrescue
operations during periods of flooding;
The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment transport of the floodwaters
and the effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at the site; and
The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions, including
search-and-rescue operations, maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as
sewer, gas, electrical and water systems and streets and bridges.
Upon consideration of the factors of Subsection D and the purposes of this chapter, the Board of
Appeals may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further
the purposes of this chapter.
The local administrator shall maintain the records of all appeal actions including technical
information, and report any variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency upon
request.
§ 188-21. Conditions for variances.
Generally, variances may be issued for new construction and substantial improvements to be
erected on a lot of 1/2 acre or less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing
structures constructed below the base flood level, provided that items in Subsection D(1) through
(12) have been fully considered. As the lot size increases beyond the 1/2 acre, the technical
justification required for issuing the variance increases.
Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon determination
that:
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 130/441
(1)
(2)
(1)
(2)
C.
D.
E.
(1)
(2)
(3)
F.
(a)
(b)
(1)
(2)
G.
The proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as
an historic structure; and
The variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the
structure.
Variances may be issued by a community for new construction and substantial improvements and
for other development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use, provided that:
The criteria of Subsections A, D, E and F of this section are met; and
The structure or other development is protected by methods that minimize flood damages
during the base flood and create no additional threat to public safety.
Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during
the base flood discharge would result.
Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary,
considering the flood hazard, to afford relief.
Variances shall only be issued upon receiving written justification of:
A showing of good and sufficient cause;
A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship to the
applicant; and
A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights,
additional threats to public safety or extraordinary public expense or create nuisances, cause
fraud on or victimization of the public or conflict with existing laws, rules or regulations.
Notice.
Any applicant to whom a variance is granted for a building with the lowest floor below the
base flood elevation shall be given written notice over the signature of a community official
that:
The issuance of a variance to construct a structure below the base flood level will result
in increased premium rates for flood insurance up to amounts as high as $25 for $100 of
insurance coverage; and
Such construction below the base flood level increases risks to life and property.
Such notification shall be maintained with the record of all variance actions as required in
§ 188-14H of this chapter.
Chapter 191. Food and Drink Dispensers
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Trustees of the Village of Rockville Centre 2-22-1971 by L.L. No.
1-1971 as Ch. 64 of the 1971 Code. Amended in its entirety 6-8-2010 by L.L. No. 10-2010; subsequent
amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Bowling alleys and pool halls — See Ch. 105
Businesses — See Ch. 138.
Entertainment — See Ch. 163.
Licenses — See Ch. 222.
Parades and processions — See Ch. 239.
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 250.
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 131/441
Merchandise displays on sidewalks — See Ch. 287, Art. V.
§ 191-1. License required.
No person or entity shall engage in the business of operating a restaurant, eating place, lunch counter,
soft drink counter, delicatessen, grocery, liquor store, supermarket, convenience store or similar place
in the Village for the sale of, or the consumption upon the premises of, food or beverages of any class
or description without obtaining an annual license therefor. No license application will be considered
unless there is presented a certification of approval by the Nassau County Department of Health.
§ 191-2. Inspection required.
In addition to receiving information as required of applicants by Chapter 222, Licenses, of this Code,
the Mayor shall cause an investigation to be made as to the physical characteristics and
appurtenances of the premises for whose operations hereunder a license is sought. If such inspection
discloses that such premises are inadequate, unsafe, improperly equipped, screened from public view,
or of such nature as to be inimical to the health, safety or welfare of the patrons thereof or of the public
at large, the license shall not be granted, or, if granted, shall be revoked. Such inspections after the
granting of a license shall be regularly repeated at intervals of no longer than a year.
§ 191-3. Fees.
The fee for any license required by the provisions of this chapter shall be at the levels fixed from time
to time by resolution of the Board of Trustees of the Village of Rockville Centre. In fixing the amount of
such license fees, the Board may establish different fees for premises which sell alcoholic beverages
and premises which do not sell alcoholic beverages, and for premises which sell such beverages for
consumption on the premises or for consumption solely off the premises.
Chapter 194. Fortune-Telling, Clairvoyance, Phrenology
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Trustees of the Village of Rockville Centre 2-22-1971 by L.L. No.
1-1971 as Ch. 66 of the 1971 Code. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Businesses — See Ch. 138.
Entertainment — See Ch. 163.
Licenses — See Ch. 222.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 247.
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 250.
Merchandise displays on sidewalks — See Ch. 287, Art. V.
§ 194-1. Practices prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, association or corporation to engage in or practice
clairvoyance, astrology, phrenology, mind reading, palmistry, divination or other physical means or
pretense of fortune-telling for gain, either direct or indirect within the Village.
§ 194-2. Advertising and soliciting prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, association or corporation in said Village to print, publish, post
or circulate any advertisement, circular, handbill, placard or other printed matter advertising, soliciting
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 132/441
[1]
or announcing the practice of clairvoyance, astrology, phrenology, mind reading, palmistry, divination or
other physical means or pretense of fortune-telling within the Village.
Editor's Note: As to signs and posting bills, see Ch. 335; see also Ch. 250, Peddling and Soliciting.
§ 194-3. Penalties for offenses.
Any person, firm, association or corporation violating any provision of this chapter shall be liable to a
fine not exceeding $100, and any violation thereof shall constitute and is hereby declared to be
disorderly conduct, and any person or persons violating this chapter or any provision thereof shall be
and is hereby declared a disorderly person.
Chapter 197. Freshwater Wetlands
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Trustees of the Village of Rockville Centre 7-19-1976 by L.L. No.
7-1976. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building code — See Ch. 112.
Building code administration — See Ch. 115.
Environmental quality review — See Ch. 166.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 188.
Planning Board; site plan review; subdivision of land — See Ch. 330.
Zoning — See Ch. 340.
§ 197-1. Legislative intent.
It is declared to be the public policy of the State of New York and the Village of Rockville Centre to
preserve, protect and conserve freshwater wetlands and the benefits derived therefrom, to prevent the
despoliation and destruction of freshwater wetlands and to secure the natural benefits of freshwater
wetlands, consistent with the general welfare and beneficial economic, social and agricultural
development of the state and Village.
§ 197-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
FRESHWATER WETLANDS
Lands and waters of the Village of Rockville Centre, as shown on the Freshwater Wetlands Map,
which wetlands contain any and all of the flora and fauna described in Article 24 of the
Environmental Conservation Law of the State of New York.
FRESHWATER WETLANDS MAP
A map on which are indicated the boundaries of any freshwater wetlands in the Village of
Rockville Centre.
PERSON
Any corporation, firm, partnership association, trust, estate, one or more individuals, or any unit of
government or agency or subdivision thereof.
POLLUTION
The presence in the environment of man-induced conditions or contaminants in quantities or
having characteristics which are or may be injurious to human, plant or wildlife, or other animal life
or to the property.
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 133/441
A.
B.
A.
B.
VILLAGE
The Village of Rockville Centre.
VILLAGE BOARD
The Village Board of the Village of Rockville Centre.
VILLAGE CLERK
The Village Clerk of the Village of Rockville Centre.
§ 197-3. Permit; when required.
A permit shall be required for any form of draining, dredging, excavation, removal of soil, mud,
sand, shells, gravel or other aggregate from any freshwater wetland, either directly or indirectly;
and for any form of dumping, filling or depositing of any soil, stones, sand, gravel, mud, rubbish or
fill of any kind, either directly or indirectly; for erecting any structures, roads, driving of pilings or
placing any other obstructions, whether or not changing the ebb and flow of the water; for any
form of pollution, including but not limited to installing a septic tank, running a sewer outfall,
discharging sewage treatment effluent or other liquid wastes into or so as to drain into a
freshwater wetland; and for any other activity which substantially impairs any of the several
functions served by freshwater wetlands or the benefits derived therefrom which are set forth in
Article 24 of the Environmental Conservation Law. These activities are subject to regulation,
whether or not they occur upon the wetland itself, if they impinge upon or otherwise substantially
affect the wetlands; provided, however, that no regulation shall apply to any area more than 100
feet from the boundary of such wetland or any such lesser or greater distance therefrom as
determined by the Department of Public Works of the Village of Rockville Centre and approved by
the Village Board.
The depositing or removal of the natural products of the freshwater wetlands by recreational or
commercial fishing, shellfishing, aquaculture, hunting or trapping shall be excluded from the
regulated activities where otherwise legally permitted and regulated.
§ 197-4. Exemptions.
The activities of farmers and other landowners in grazing and watering livestock, making
reasonable use of water resources, harvesting natural products of the wetlands, selectively cutting
timber, draining land or wetlands for growing agriculture products and otherwise engaging in the
use of wetlands or other land for growing agricultural products shall be excluded from regulated
activities and shall not require a permit hereunder, except that structures not required for
enhancement or maintenance of the agricultural productivity of the land and any filling activities
shall not be excluded hereunder, and provided that the use of the land designated as a freshwater
wetland upon the Freshwater Wetlands Map at the effective date thereof for uses other than those
referred to in this section shall be subject to the provisions of this chapter. Each farmer or
landowner who intends to conduct an activity described in this section which would otherwise be
regulated shall notify the Department of Public Works of the Village of Rockville Centre, in writing,
of his intention to engage in such activity, stating the approximate acreage to be affected, the
general location thereof, the use or uses to be made of such land and the methods to be
employed.
Public health activities, orders and regulations of the Department of Health of the County of
Nassau shall be excluded from regulated activities. Copies of all such public health orders and
regulations affecting wetlands shall be filed with the Department of Public Works of the Village of
Rockville Centre. The Chief Engineer of the Department of Public Works of the Village of Rockville
Centre may request modification of such orders or regulations if he deems said modification
necessary to implement the policy of this chapter.
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 134/441
A.
B.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
§ 197-5. Application for permit; application fee.
Any person proposing to conduct or cause to be conducted a regulated activity upon any
freshwater wetland within the town shall file an application for a permit with the Village Clerk. In
the event that the freshwater wetland is located in more than one village or town, said application
shall be filed with the County Clerk of Nassau County. Determination of the application shall be
made by the Village Board in accordance with applicable law and any rules and regulations as
may be adopted by the Commissioner of Environmental Conservation of the State of New York.
Each application shall include a detailed description of the proposed activity and a map showing
the area of the freshwater wetland directly affected, with the location of the proposed activity
thereon.
The application fee shall be $50.
§ 197-6. Post-application procedure.
No sooner than 30 days and no later than 60 days after the receipt of an application hereunder, and
after notice of application has been published by the applicant in two newspapers, one having general
circulation in the Village and the other having general circulation in the Town of Hempstead, the Village
Board shall hold a public hearing on said application, unless no notice of objection has been filed or
unless the Village Board, upon the advice of the Chief Engineer of the Department of Public Works of
the Village of Rockville Centre, finds the proposed activities to be of such a minor nature as not to
affect or endanger the balance of systems within the wetlands, and in those cases the public hearings
shall be waived.
§ 197-7. Granting permits.
In granting, denying or limiting any permit, the Village Board shall consider the effect of the
proposed activity with reference to the public health and welfare, fishing, flood, hurricane and
storm dangers, and protection or enhancement of the several functions of the freshwater wetlands
and the benefits derived therefrom, which are set forth in Article 24 of the Environmental
Conservation Law.
A duly filed notice, in writing, that the state or any agency or subdivision thereof is in the process
of acquiring any freshwater wetlands by negotiation or condemnation shall be sufficient basis for
denial of any permit.
In granting a permit, the Village Board may limit same or impose conditions or limitations designed
to carry out the public policy set forth in this chapter and require a bond in an amount and with
surety and conditions satisfactory to it securing compliance with the conditions and limitations set
forth in the permit. The Village Board may suspend or revoke a permit if it finds that the applicant
has not complied with any of the conditions or limitations set forth in the permit or has exceeded
the scope of the activity as set forth in the application.
The Village Board shall state upon the record the findings and reasons for all actions taken
pursuant to this section.
A review of the determination of the Village Board shall be within a period of 30 days after the
filing thereof, pursuant to the provisions of Title 11 of Article 24 of the Environmental Conservation
Law or Article 78 of the Civil Practice Law and Rules. Any owner of the wetland affected and any
resident or citizen of the Village shall be deemed to have the requisite standing to seek review.
§ 197-8. Appeals; judicial review.
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 135/441
A.
B.
A.
Appeals from any determination or order of the Village Board shall be taken before the Freshwater
Wetlands Appeal Board in accordance with the provisions of Article 24 of the Environmental
Conservation Law.
The institution of judicial proceedings to review a determination or an order of the Village Board
shall be taken only in accordance with the terms and provisions of Article 78 of the Civil Practice
Law and Rules.
§ 197-9. Penalties for offenses.
Any person committing an offense against this chapter, or any section or provision thereof, shall be
guilty of a Class B misdemeanor, punishable by a fine not exceeding $250 for each such offense.
§ 197-10. When effective.
This chapter shall become effective upon completion of the Freshwater Wetlands Map pertaining to the
Village of Rockville Centre.
Chapter 201. Garage Sales
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Trustees of the Village of Rockville Centre 12-8-1980 by L.L. No.
14-1980. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Special sales — See Ch. 265.
Merchandise displays on sidewalks — See Ch. 287, Art. V.
§ 201-1. License required.
It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to conduct a garage sale in the Incorporated Village of
Rockville Centre without first obtaining a license and complying with the regulations set forth herein.
§ 201-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meaning indicated:
GARAGE SALE
Includes all sales entitled "garage sale," "lawn sale," "attic sale," "rummage sale" or "flea market
sale," or any similar casual sale of tangible personal property which is advertised by any means
whereby the public at large is or can be made aware of said sale.
PERSON
Includes individuals, partnerships, voluntary associations and corporations.
§ 201-3. Regulations.
Garage sales in the Village of Rockville Centre shall be regulated in the following manner:
Merchandise. Garage sales shall offer only used, unwanted items of personal property owned by
the resident of the property where the sale is held. No new merchandise shall be offered for sale,
nor may new merchandise from other sources be brought in and offered for sale.
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 136/441
B.
C.
(1)
(2)
(3)
D.
[1]
E.
F.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
A.
B.
Hours. Garage sales shall not commence before 10:00 a.m. and must terminate by 6:00 p.m.
No person shall conduct more than one garage sale on his premises in any one calendar year.
Such sale may not extend for a period of more than three days.
Signs.
Garage sales may be advertised through the newspaper or other news media. A sign, not
greater in size than three feet by three feet may be installed on the property where the sale is
being conducted.
No sign shall be placed on the public right-of-way or on property other than where the sale is
being conducted. No lighted sign shall be used.
The sign shall be displayed only during the sale and shall be promptly removed after the sale.
Zoning. It is not the intention of this chapter to change or amend the Zoning Ordinance[1] of the
Village of Rockville Centre.
Editor's Note: See Ch. 340, Zoning.
License. Upon application, either in person or by mail, the Village Clerk is authorized to issue a
license upon payment of the fee established by resolution of the Board of Trustees of the Village
of Rockville Centre.
§ 201-4. Information to be filed with Clerk.
The information to be filed with the Village Clerk pursuant to this chapter shall be as follows:
The name of the person, firm, group, corporation, association or organization conducting said
sale.
The name of the owner of the property on which said sale is to be conducted and the consent of
the owner if the applicant is other than the owner.
The location at which the sale is to be conducted.
The number of days of the sale.
The date and nature of any past sale.
The relationship or connection the applicant may have had with any other person, firm, group,
organization, association or corporation conducting said sale and the date or dates of such sale.
Whether or not the applicant has been issued any other vendor's license by any local, state or
federal agency.
A sworn statement or affirmation by the person signing that the information therein given is full and
true and known to him to be so.
§ 201-5. Persons and sales exempted.
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to or affect the following persons or sales:
Persons selling goods pursuant to an order of process of a court of competent jurisdiction.
Persons acting in accordance with their powers and duties as public officials.
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 137/441
C.
D.
E.
F.
A.
B.
Any person selling or advertising for sale an item or items of personal property which are
specifically named or described in the advertisement and which separate items do not exceed five
in number.
Any publisher of a newspaper, magazine or other publication or other communication media who
publishes or broadcasts in good faith without knowledge of its false, deceptive or misleading
character or without knowledge that the provisions of this chapter have not been complied with.
Any sale conducted by any merchant or mercantile or other business establishment from or at a
place of business wherein such sale would be permitted by the zoning regulations of the Village of
Rockville Centre or under the protection of the nonconforming use section thereof or any other
sale conducted by a manufacturer, dealer or vendor and which sale would be conducted from
properly zoned premises and not otherwise prohibited.
Any bona fide charitable, eleemosynary, educational, cultural or governmental institution or
organization; provided, however, that the burden of establishing the exemption under this
subsection shall be on the organization or institution claiming such exemption.
§ 201-6. Enforcement; responsibility for good order.
This chapter shall be enforced by the Police Department and the Superintendent of Public Works.
The person to whom such license is issued and the owner or tenant of the premises on which
such sale or activity is conducted shall be jointly and severally responsible for the maintenance of
good order and decorum on the premises during all hours of such sale or activity. No such person
shall permit loud or boisterous conduct on said premises nor permit vehicles to impede the
passage of traffic on any roads or streets in the area of such premises. All such persons shall
obey the reasonable orders of any member of the Police Department or Fire Department of the
Village of Rockville Centre in order to maintain the public health, safety and welfare.
§ 201-7. Penalties for offenses.
Any person, association or corporation conducting any such sale or similar activity without being
properly licensed therefor or who shall violate any of the other terms and regulations of this chapter
shall, upon conviction, be fined not less than $25 nor more than $100. Each day that such sale
continues without being duly licensed shall be considered a separate violation.
Chapter 204. Gasoline Sale and Service Stations
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Trustees of the Village of Rockville Centre as indicated in article
histories. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Secondhand automobile sales — See Ch. 93.
Building Code — See Ch. 112.
Open burning — See Ch. 135.
Firearms and explosives — See Ch. 178.
Fire prevention and control — See Ch. 185.
Licenses — See Ch. 222.
Smoke emission — See Ch. 276.
Planning Board; site plan review; subdivision of land — See Ch. 330.
Zoning — See Ch. 340.
Article I. Gasoline Service Stations
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 138/441
A.
B.
[1]
[2]
[Adopted 2-22-1971 by L.L. No. 1-1971 as Ch. 69, Art. I, of the 1971 Code]
§ 204-1. License required.
No person, persons, firm, association or corporation shall engage in the business of conducting or
operating a service station, public garage, fuel station or repair station for the furnishing, dispensing or
selling of gasoline, oil, air or water to motor vehicles within the limits of the Village, without a license.
Said license shall be required both in the event such person, persons, firm, association or corporation
is engaged solely and exclusively in said business, or said person, persons, firm, association or
corporation is engaged in said business as a part of or along with some other business.
§ 204-2. Fees and duration of license.
[Amended 10-18-1971; 12-4-1972]
The fee for the license required by the provisions of § 204-1 shall be at the levels fixed from time
to time by resolution of the Board of Trustees of the Village of Rockville Centre.
All licenses issued hereunder shall expire on the first day of October next succeeding the issuance
thereof, and a license may be issued by the Mayor, who is hereby empowered to issue such
license, to the person applying therefor, in the name of the Village. Every such license shall be
countersigned by the Clerk and have endorsed thereon the receipt of the Treasurer showing
payment to him of such license fee.
§ 204-3. Right to revoke.
The license mentioned in the preceding section of this article may be suspended or revoked at any
time by the Mayor of the Village or by the Board of Trustees thereof if such licensee shall violate any of
the provisions of any other ordinance of the Village or do anything to the detriment of the safety, health,
comfort and general welfare of the inhabitants of the Village or visitors thereto.
§ 204-4. Availability of license.
Every person holding a license under any provision of this article shall exhibit the same upon the
demand of any person and shall report to the Chief of Police and the Village Clerk any change of
residence or place of business within three days of such change. All such service stations shall be
regularly inspected.
§ 204-5. Existing ordinances not affected.
Nothing herein contained shall be construed as in anywise amending or limiting the provisions of the
ordinances of the Village of Rockville Centre commonly known as the "Zoning Ordinance"[1] and the
"Building Code,"[2] nor either of them.
Editor's Note: See Ch. 340, Zoning.
Editor's Note: See Ch. 112, Building Code.
§ 204-6. Penalties for offenses.
Any person or persons violating any of the provisions of this article shall be liable for and forfeit and
pay a penalty of not less than $25 for each violation thereof, for the use of said Village. Any violation of
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 139/441
this article or any part thereof shall constitute disorderly conduct, and any person violating this article
or any part thereof shall be and is hereby declared a disorderly person.
Article II. Retail Sale of Gasoline
[Adopted 2-22-1971 by L.L. No. 1-1971 as Ch. 69, Art. II, of the 1971 Code]
§ 204-7. Posting and size of signs.
[Amended 6-7-1976 by L.L. No. 1-1976]
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to sell or offer for sale at retail, for use in
internal-combustion engines in motor vehicles, any gasoline unless such sellers shall post and keep
continuously posted on the individual pump or other dispensing device from which gasoline is sold or
offered for sale a sign or placard not less than seven inches in height and eight inches in width, nor
larger than 12 inches in height and 12 inches in width, and stating clearly and legibly, in numbers at
least six inches in height, three inches in width and one inch in stroke, the selling price per gallon,
including taxes, of such gasoline offered for sale from such pump or other dispensing device, together
with the name, trade name, brand, mark or symbol, and grade or quality classification, if any, of such
gasoline. Numerals indicating fractions of a cent shall be 1/2 the size of other numerals.
§ 204-8. Tax to be posted.
The amount of governmental tax to be collected in connection with the sale of such gasoline shall be
stated on such sign or placard and separately and apart from such selling price or prices.
§ 204-9. Comparative price signs prohibited.
No sign or placard stating the price or prices of gasoline other than such signs or placards as
hereinbefore provided shall be posted or maintained on the premises on which said gasoline is sold or
offered for sale.
§ 204-10. Deceit.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to sell or offer for sale gasoline at retail in any
manner so as to deceive the purchasers as to the price, quality or identity thereof, or sell or to offer for
sale from any pump or dispensing device any gasoline other than gasoline manufactured or distributed
by the manufacturer or distributor marketing such gasoline under the name, trade name, brand, symbol
or mark affixed to or maintained on such pump or other dispensing device, or to substitute, mix or
adulterate gasoline sold or offered for sale under a trade name, name, brand, symbol or mark.
§ 204-11. Penalties for offenses.
Any person or persons violating any of the provisions of this article shall be liable to a fine of not
exceeding $100, and any violation thereof shall constitute and is hereby declared to be disorderly
conduct, and any person or persons violating this article or any provision thereof shall be and is hereby
declared a disorderly person.
Chapter 212. Illicit Discharges, Activities and Connections
to Storm Sewer System
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 140/441
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Trustees of the Village of Rockville Centre 4-28-2008 by L.L. No.
4-2008. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building code administration — See Ch. 115.
Building drains — See Ch. 118.
Environmental quality review — See Ch. 166.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 188.
Freshwater wetlands — See Ch. 197.
Solid waste — See Ch. 283.
Stormwater management and erosion and sediment control — See Ch. 286.
Planning Board; site plan review; subdivision of land — See Ch. 330.
Zoning — See Ch. 340.
§ 212-1. Purpose; objectives.
The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the health, safety and general welfare of the citizens of the
Village of Rockville Centre through the regulation of nonstormwater discharges to the municipal
separate storm sewer system (MS4) to the maximum extent practicable as required by federal and
state law. This chapter establishes methods for controlling the introduction of pollutants into the MS4 in
order to comply with requirements of the SPDES general permit for municipal separate storm sewer
systems. The objectives of this chapter are:
To meet the requirements of the SPDES general permit for stormwater discharges from MS4s,
Permit No. GP-02-02, or as amended or revised;
To regulate the contribution of pollutants to the MS4 since such systems are not designed to
accept, process or discharge nonstormwater wastes;
To prohibit illicit connections, activities and discharges to the MS4;
To establish legal authority to carry out all inspection, surveillance and monitoring procedures
necessary to ensure compliance with this chapter; and
To promote public awareness of the hazards involved in the improper discharge of trash, yard
waste, lawn chemicals, pet waste, wastewater, grease, oil, petroleum products, cleaning products,
paint products, hazardous waste, sediment and other pollutants into the MS4.
§ 212-2. Definitions.
Whenever used in this chapter, unless a different meaning is stated in a definition applicable to only a
portion of this chapter, the following terms will have meanings set forth below:
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMPs)
Schedules of activities, prohibitions of practices, general good housekeeping practices, pollution
prevention and educational practices, maintenance procedures and other management practices
to prevent or reduce the discharge of pollutants directly or indirectly to stormwater, receiving
waters, or stormwater conveyance systems. BMPs also include treatment practices, operating
procedures and practices to control site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or water disposal, or
drainage from raw materials storage.
CLEAN WATER ACT
The Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.), and any subsequent
amendments thereto.
CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 141/441
A.
B.
A.
B.
C.
Activities requiring authorization under the SPDES permit for stormwater discharges from
construction activity, GP-02-01, as amended or revised. These activities include construction
projects resulting in land disturbance of one or more acres. Such activities include but are not
limited to clearing and grubbing, grading, excavating and demolition.
DEPARTMENT
The New York State Department of Environmental Conservation.
DESIGN PROFESSIONAL
A New-York-State-licensed professional engineer or licensed architect, or other licensed
professional authorized by law to provide a particular service.
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS
Any material, including any substance, waste, or combination thereof, which because of its
quantity, concentration or physical, chemical or infectious characteristics may cause, or
significantly contribute to, a substantial present or potential hazard to human health, safety,
property or the environment when improperly treated, stored, transported, disposed of or
otherwise managed.
ILLICIT CONNECTIONS
Any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface, which allows an illegal discharge
to enter the MS4, including but not limited to:
Any conveyances which allow any nonstormwater discharge, including treated or untreated
sewage, process wastewater and wash water, to enter the MS4 and any connections to the
storm drain system from indoor drains and sinks, regardless of whether said drain or
connection had been previously allowed, permitted or approved by an authorized
enforcement agency; or
Any drain or conveyance connected from a commercial or industrial land use to the MS4
which has not been documented in plans, maps or equivalent records and approved by an
authorized enforcement agency.
ILLICIT DISCHARGE
Any direct or indirect nonstormwater discharge to the MS4, except as exempted in this chapter.
INDIVIDUAL SEWAGE TREATMENT SYSTEM
A facility serving one or more parcels of land or residential households, or a private, commercial or
institutional facility, that treats sewage or other liquid wastes for discharge into the groundwaters of
New York State, except where a permit for such a facility is required under the applicable
provisions of Article 17 of the Environmental Conservation Law.
INDUSTRIAL ACTIVITY
Activities requiring the SPDES permit for discharges from industrial activities except construction,
GP-98-03, as amended or revised.
MS4
Municipal separate storm sewer system.
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM
A conveyance or system of conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, municipal
streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels or storm drains):
Owned or operated by the Village;
Designed or used for collecting or conveying stormwater;
Which is not a combined sewer; and
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 142/441
D.
A.
B.
(1)
(2)
C.
Which is not part of a publicly owned treatment works (POTW) as defined at 40 CFR 122.2.
NONSTORMWATER DISCHARGE
Any discharge to the MS4 that is not composed entirely of stormwater.
PERSON
Any individual, association, organization, partnership, firm, corporation or other entity recognized
by law and acting as either the owner or as the owner's agent.
POLLUTANT
Dredged spoil, filter backwash, solid waste, incinerator residue, treated or untreated sewage,
garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, chemical wastes, biological materials, radioactive materials,
heat, wrecked or discarded equipment, rock, sand and industrial, municipal, agricultural waste and
ballast discharged into water which may cause or might reasonably be expected to cause pollution
of the waters of the state in contravention of the standards.
PREMISES
Any building, lot, parcel of land or portion of land, whether improved or unimproved, including
adjacent sidewalks and parking strips.
SPECIAL CONDITIONS
DISCHARGE COMPLIANCE WITH WATER QUALITY STANDARDS
The condition that applies where the Village has been notified that the discharge of
stormwater authorized under its MS4 permit may have caused or has the reasonable potential
to cause or contribute to the violation of an applicable water quality standard. Under this
condition the Village must take all necessary actions to ensure future discharges do not cause
or contribute to a violation of water quality standards.
LISTED WATERS
TERS — The condition in the Village's MS4 permit that applies where the MS4 discharges to
a 303(d) listed water. Under this condition the stormwater management program must ensure
no increase of the listed pollutant of concern to the 303(d) listed water.
TOTAL MAXIMUM DAILY LOAD (TMDL) STRATEGY
The condition in the Village's MS4 permit where a TMDL including requirements for
control of stormwater discharges has been approved by the EPA for a water body or
watershed into which the MS4 discharges. If the discharge from the MS4 did not meet
the TMDL stormwater allocations prior to September 10, 2003, the Village was required
to modify its stormwater management program to ensure that reduction of the pollutant of
concern specified in the TMDL is achieved.
The condition in the Village's MS4 permit that applies if a TMDL is approved in the future
by the EPA for any water body or watershed into which a MS4 discharges. Under this
condition the Village must review the applicable TMDL to see if it includes requirements
for control of stormwater discharges. If a MS4 is not meeting the TMDL stormwater
allocations, the Village must, within six months of the TMDL's approval, modify its
stormwater management program to ensure that reduction of the pollutant of concern
specified in the TMDL is achieved.
STATE POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (SPDES) STORMWATER DISCHARGE
PERMIT
A permit issued by the Department that authorizes the discharge of pollutants to waters of the
state.
STORMWATER
Rainwater, surface runoff, snowmelt and drainage.
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 143/441
A.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT OFFICER (SMO)
An employee, the municipal engineer or other public official(s) designated by the Village to enforce
this chapter. The SMO may also be designated by the Village to accept and review stormwater
pollution prevention plans, forward the plans to the applicable municipal board and inspect
stormwater management practices.
303(d) LIST
A list of all surface waters in the state for which beneficial uses of the water (drinking, recreation,
aquatic habitat and industrial use) are impaired by pollutants, prepared periodically by the
Department as required by Section 303(d) of the Clean Water Act. The 303(d)-listed waters are
estuaries, lakes and streams that fall short of state surface water quality standards and are not
expected to improve within the next two years.
TMDL
Total maximum daily load.
TOTAL MAXIMUM DAILY LOAD
The maximum amount of a pollutant to be allowed to be released into a water body so as not to
impair uses of the water, allocated among the sources of that pollutant.
VILLAGE
The Village of Rockville Centre.
WASTEWATER
Water that is not stormwater, is contaminated with pollutants and is or will be discarded.
§ 212-3. Applicability.
This chapter shall apply to all water entering the MS4 generated on any developed and undeveloped
lands unless explicitly exempted by an authorized enforcement agency.
§ 212-4. Responsibility for administration.
The Stormwater Management Officer(s) [SMO(s)] shall administer, implement and enforce the
provisions of this chapter. Such powers granted or duties imposed upon the authorized enforcement
official may be delegated, in writing, by the SMO as may be authorized by the Village.
§ 212-5. Severability.
The provisions of this chapter are hereby declared to be severable. If any provision, clause, sentence
or paragraph of this chapter or the application thereof to any person, establishment or circumstances
shall be held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect the other provisions or application of this chapter.
§ 212-6. Illegal discharges and illicit connections prohibited;
exceptions.
Prohibition of illegal discharges. No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged into the
MS4 any materials other than stormwater except as provided in this chapter. The commencement,
conduct or continuance of any illegal discharge to the MS4 is prohibited except as described as
follows:
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 144/441
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(1)
(2)
(3)
B.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
The following discharges are exempt from discharge prohibitions established by this chapter,
unless the Department or the Village has determined them to be substantial contributors of
pollutants: water line flushing or other potable water sources, landscape irrigation or lawn
watering, existing diverted stream flows, rising groundwater, uncontaminated groundwater
infiltration to storm drains, uncontaminated pumped groundwater, foundation or footing drains,
crawl space or basement sump pumps, air-conditioning condensate, irrigation water, springs,
water from individual residential car washing, natural riparian habitat or wetland flows,
dechlorinated swimming pool discharges, residential street wash water, water from firefighting
activities and any other water source not containing pollutants. Such exempt
discharges shall be made in accordance with an appropriate plan for reducing pollutants.
Discharges approved, in writing, by the SMO to protect life or property from imminent harm or
damage, provided that such approval shall not be construed to constitute compliance with
other applicable laws and requirements, and further provided that such discharges may be
permitted for a specified time period and under such conditions as the SMO may deem
appropriate to protect such life and property while reasonably maintaining the purpose and
intent of this chapter.
Dye testing in compliance with applicable state and local laws is an allowable discharge, but
requires a verbal notification to the SMO prior to the time of the test.
The prohibition shall not apply to any discharge permitted under a SPDES permit, waiver or
waste discharge order issued to the discharger and administered under the authority of the
Department, provided that the discharger is in full compliance with all requirements of the
permit, waiver, or order and other applicable laws and regulations, and provided that written
approval has been granted for any discharge to the MS4.
Prohibition of illicit connections.
The construction, use, maintenance or continued existence of illicit connections to the MS4 is
prohibited.
This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illicit connections made in the past,
regardless of whether the connection was permissible under law or practices applicable or
prevailing at the time of connection.
A person is considered to be in violation of this chapter if the person connects a line
conveying sewage to the Village's MS4, or allows such a connection to continue, in violation
of this chapter.
§ 212-7. Failing individual sewage treatment systems prohibited.
No person shall operate a failing individual sewage treatment system in areas tributary to the Village's
MS4. A failing individual sewage treatment system is one which has one or more of the following
conditions:
The backup of sewage into a structure.
Discharges of treated or untreated sewage onto the ground surface.
A connection or connections to a separate stormwater sewer system.
Liquid level in the septic tank above the outlet invert.
Structural failure of any component of the individual sewage treatment system that could lead to
any of the other failure conditions as noted in this section.
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 145/441
F.
(1)
(2)
A.
B.
C.
(1)
(2)
(3)
A.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(1)
B.
Contamination of off-site groundwater.
§ 212-8. Activities contaminating stormwater prohibited.
Activities that are subject to the requirements of this section are those types of activities that:
Cause or contribute to a violation of the Village's MS4 SPDES permit.
Cause or contribute to the Village being subject to the special conditions as defined in this
chapter.
Such activities include failing individual sewage treatment systems as defined in this chapter,
improper management of pet waste or any other activity that causes or contributes to violations of
the Village's MS4 SPDES permit authorization.
Upon notification to a person that such person is engaged in activities that cause or contribute to
violations of the Village's MS4 SPDES permit authorization, that person shall take all reasonable
actions to correct such activities such that the person no longer causes or contributes to violations
of the Village's MS4 SPDES permit authorization.
§ 212-9. Best management practices; individual sewage
treatment systems.
Best management practices. Where the SMO has identified illicit discharges or activities
contaminating stormwater the Village may require implementation of best management practices
(BMPs) to control those illicit discharges and activities.
The owner or operator of a commercial or industrial establishment shall provide, at his or her
own expense, reasonable protection from accidental discharge of prohibited materials or
other wastes into the MS4 through the use of structural and nonstructural BMPs.
Any person responsible for a property or premise which is, or may be, the source of an illicit
discharge or an activity contaminating stormwater may be required to implement, at said
person's expense, additional structural and nonstructural BMPs to reduce or eliminate the
source of pollutant(s) to the MS4.
Compliance with all terms and conditions of a valid SPDES permit authorizing the discharge
of stormwater associated with industrial activity, to the extent practicable, shall be deemed
compliance with the provisions of this section.
Individual sewage treatment systems; response to special conditions requiring no increase of
pollutants or requiring a reduction of pollutants. Where individual sewage treatment systems are
contributing to the Village's being subject to the special conditions as defined in this chapter, the
owner or operator of such individual sewage treatment systems shall be required to:
Maintain and operate individual sewage treatment systems as follows:
Inspect the septic tank annually to determine scum and sludge accumulation. Septic
tanks must be pumped out whenever the bottom of the scum layer is within three inches
of the bottom of the outlet baffle or sanitary tee or the top of the sludge is within 10
inches of the bottom of the outlet baffle or sanitary tee.
Avoid the use of septic tank additives.
Avoid the disposal of excessive quantities of detergents, kitchen wastes, laundry wastes
and household chemicals; and
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 146/441
(d)
(e)
(a)
[1]
[2]
[3]
(b)
(2)
(3)
A.
B.
Avoid the disposal of cigarette butts, disposable diapers, sanitary napkins, trash and
other such items.
Most tanks should be pumped out every two to three years. However, pumping may be
more or less frequent depending on use. Inspection of the tank for cracks, leaks and
blockages should be done by the septage hauler at the time of pumping of the tank
contents.
Repair or replace individual sewage treatment systems as follows:
In accordance with 10 NYCRR Appendix 75A to the maximum extent practicable.
A design professional licensed to practice in New York State shall prepare design plans
for any type of absorption field that involves:
Relocating or extending an absorption area to a location not previously approved for
such.
Installation of a new subsurface treatment system at the same location.
Use of alternate system or innovative system design or technology.
A written certificate of compliance shall be submitted by the design professional to the Village
at the completion of construction of the repair or replacement system.
§ 212-10. Suspension of access to MS4; illicit discharges in
emergency situations.
The SMO may, without prior notice, suspend MS4 discharge access to a person when such
suspension is necessary to stop an actual or threatened discharge which presents or may present
imminent and substantial danger to the environment, to the health or welfare of persons, or to the
MS4. The SMO shall notify the person of such suspension within a reasonable time thereafter, in
writing, of the reasons for the suspension. If the violator fails to comply with a suspension order
issued in an emergency, the SMO may take such steps as deemed necessary to prevent or
minimize damage to the MS4 or to minimize danger to persons.
Suspension due to the detection of illicit discharge. Any person discharging to the Village's MS4 in
violation of this chapter may have his or her MS4 access terminated if such termination would
abate or reduce an illicit discharge. The SMO will notify a violator, in writing, of the proposed
termination of its MS4 access and the reasons therefor. The violator may petition the SMO for a
reconsideration and hearing. Access may be granted by the SMO if he or she finds that the illicit
discharge has ceased and the discharger has taken steps to prevent its recurrence. Access may
be denied if the SMO determines, in writing, that the illicit discharge has not ceased or is likely to
recur. A person commits an offense if the person reinstates MS4 access to premises terminated
pursuant to this chapter without the prior approval of the SMO.
§ 212-11. Industrial or construction activity discharges.
Any person subject to an industrial or construction activity SPDES stormwater discharge permit shall
comply with all provisions of such permit. Proof of compliance with said permit may be required in a
form acceptable to the Village prior to the allowing of discharges to the MS4.
§ 212-12. Access to and inspection of facilities; monitoring of
discharges.
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 147/441
A.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
B.
Applicability. This section applies to all facilities that the SMO must inspect to enforce any
provision of this chapter or whenever the authorized enforcement agency has cause to believe
that there exists, or potentially exists, in or upon any premises any condition which constitutes a
violation of this chapter.
Access to facilities.
The SMO shall be permitted to enter and inspect facilities subject to regulation under this
chapter as often as may be necessary to determine compliance with this chapter. If a
discharger has security measures in force which require proper identification and clearance
before entry into its premises, the discharger shall make the necessary arrangements to allow
access to the SMO.
Facility operators shall allow the SMO ready access to all parts of the premises for the
purposes of inspection, sampling, examination and copying of records as may be required to
implement this chapter.
The Village shall have the right to set up on any facility subject to this chapter such devices as
are necessary in the opinion of the SMO to conduct monitoring and/or sampling of the
facility's stormwater discharge.
The Village has the right to require the facilities subject to this chapter to install monitoring
equipment as is reasonably necessary to determine compliance with this chapter. The
facility's sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and
proper operating condition by the discharger at its own expense. All devices used to measure
stormwater flow and quality shall be calibrated to ensure their accuracy.
Unreasonable delays in allowing the Village access to a facility subject to this chapter is a
violation of this chapter. A person who is the operator of a facility subject to this chapter
commits an offense if the person denies the Village reasonable access to the facility for the
purpose of conducting any activity authorized or required by this chapter.
If the SMO has been refused access to any part of the premises from which stormwater is
discharged and he or she is able to demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be
a violation of this chapter or that there is a need to inspect and/or sample as part of a routine
inspection and sampling program designed to verify compliance with this chapter or any order
issued hereunder, then the SMO may seek issuance of a search warrant from any court of
competent jurisdiction.
§ 212-13. Notification of spills.
Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as soon as any person responsible for a facility or
operation, or responsible for emergency response for a facility or operation, has information of any
known or suspected release of materials which are resulting or may result in illegal discharges or
pollutants discharging into the MS4, said person shall take all necessary steps to ensure the discovery,
containment and cleanup of such release. In the event of such a release of hazardous materials said
person shall immediately notify emergency response agencies of the occurrence via emergency
dispatch services. In the event of a release of nonhazardous materials, said person shall notify the
Village, in person or by telephone or facsimile, no later than the next business day. Notifications in
person or by telephone shall be confirmed by written notice addressed and mailed to the Village within
three business days of the telephone notice. If the discharge of prohibited materials emanates from a
commercial or industrial establishment, the owner or operator of such establishment shall also retain
an on-site written record of the discharge and the actions taken to prevent its recurrence. Such records
shall be retained for at least three years.
§ 212-14. Enforcement; penalties for offenses.
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 148/441
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(1)
(2)
A.
B.
C.
A.
Notice of violation.
When the Village's SMO finds that a person has violated a prohibition or failed to meet a
requirement of this chapter, the SMO may order compliance by written notice of violation to
the responsible person. Such notice may require without limitation:
The elimination of illicit connections or discharges;
That violating discharges, practices or operations shall cease and desist;
The abatement or remediation of stormwater pollution or contamination hazards and the
restoration of any affected property;
The performance of monitoring, analyses and reporting;
Payment of a fine; and/or
The implementation of source control or treatment BMPs.
If abatement of a violation and/or restoration of affected property is required, the notice shall
set forth a deadline within which such remediation or restoration must be completed. Said
notice shall further advise that, should the violator fail to remediate or restore within the
established deadline, the work will be done by a designated governmental agency or a
contractor, and the expense thereof shall be charged to the violator.
Penalties. In addition to or as an alternative to any penalty provided in this Code or otherwise
provided by law, any person who violates the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a violation
punishable by a fine not exceeding $350 or imprisonment for a period not to exceed six months, or
both such fine and imprisonment for conviction of a first offense; for conviction of a second
offense, both of which were committed within a period of five years, such person shall be
punishable by a fine not less than $350 nor more than $700 or imprisonment for a period not to
exceed six months, or both such fine and imprisonment; and upon conviction for a third or
subsequent offense all of which were committed within a period of five years, such person shall be
punishable by a fine not less than $700 nor more than $1,000 or imprisonment for a period not to
exceed six months, or both such fine and imprisonment. However, for the purposes of conferring
jurisdiction upon courts and judicial officers generally, violations of this chapter shall be deemed
misdemeanors and for such purpose only all provisions of law relating to misdemeanors shall
apply to such violations. Each day's continued violation shall constitute a separate additional
violation.
The enforcement provisions and penalties in this section shall not be exclusive, and any person
who violates any provision of this chapter also shall be subject to any other enforcement provision
or procedure, or penalty, as may be provided or permitted by law.
§ 212-15. Appeal of notice of violation.
Any person receiving a notice of violation may appeal the determination of the SMO to the Board of
Trustees, in writing, within 15 days of its issuance. The Board of Trustees shall hear the appeal within
45 days after the filing of the appeal and, within five days of making its decision, file its decision in the
office of the Village Clerk and mail a copy of such decision by certified mail to the discharger.
§ 212-16. Corrective measures after appeal.
If the violation has not been corrected pursuant to the requirements set forth in the notice of
violation, or, in the event of an appeal, within five business days after filing and mailing the
decision of the municipal authority upholding the decision of the SMO, then the SMO shall request
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 149/441
B.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
A.
(1)
(2)
(3)
B.
the owner's permission for access to the subject private property to take any and all measures
reasonably necessary to abate the violation and/or restore the property.
If refused access to the subject private property, the SMO may seek a warrant in a court of
competent jurisdiction to be authorized to enter upon the property to determine whether a violation
has occurred. Upon determination that a violation has occurred, the SMO may seek a court order
to take any and all measures reasonably necessary to abate the violation and/or restore the
property. The cost of implementing and maintaining such measures, including the Village's
reasonable attorneys' fees and expenses, shall be the sole responsibility of the discharger.
§ 212-17. Injunctive relief.
It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision or fail to comply with any of the requirements
of this chapter. If a person has violated or continues to violate the provisions of this chapter, the SMO
may petition for a preliminary or permanent injunction restraining the person from activities which
would create further violations or compelling the person to perform abatement or remediation of the
violation.
§ 212-18. Alternative remedies.
Any person or entity who has violated a provision of this chapter may be eligible for alternative
remedies in lieu of a civil penalty, upon recommendation of the Village Attorney and concurrence
of the Mayor, where:
The violation was unintentional;
The violator has no history of previous violations of this section;
Environmental damage was minimal;
The violator acted quickly to remedy the violation; and/or
The violator cooperated in investigation and resolution.
Alternative remedies may consist of one or more of the following:
Attendance at compliance workshops;
Storm drain stenciling or storm drain marking;
River, stream or creek cleanup activities.
§ 212-19. Violations deemed a public nuisance.
In addition to the enforcement processes and penalties provided, any condition caused or permitted to
exist in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter is a threat to public health, safety and welfare
and is declared and deemed a nuisance and may be summarily abated or restored at the violator's
expense and/or a civil action to abate, enjoin, or otherwise compel the cessation of such nuisance may
be taken. In any such civil action, the Village shall be entitled to recover its reasonable attorneys' fees
and expenses.
§ 212-20. Remedies not exclusive.
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 150/441
A.
B.
C.
The remedies listed in this chapter are not exclusive of any other remedies available under any
applicable federal, state or local law, and it is within the discretion of the authorized enforcement
agency to seek such other remedies either in place of or in addition to any remedy provided in this
chapter.
Chapter 215. Junk and Secondhand Dealers
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Trustees of the Village of Rockville Centre as indicated in article
histories. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Auctioneers — See Ch. 90.
Secondhand automobile sales — See Ch. 93.
Garage sales — See Ch. 201.
Licenses — See Ch. 222.
Pawnbrokers — See Ch. 244.
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 250.
Special sales — See Ch. 265.
Solid waste — See Ch. 283.
Zoning — See Ch. 340.
Article I. Junk Dealers
[Adopted 2-22-1971 by L.L. No. 1-1971 as Ch. 75, Art. I, of the 1971 Code]
§ 215-1. License required.
No person shall engage in the business commonly known as the "junk business" or in buying or
gathering in the streets or public places of the Village, or offering to buy or gather, any personal
property or articles of merchandise commonly referred to as "junk," without first obtaining an annual
license therefor.
§ 215-2. Information required.
In addition to the information required of an applicant under the provision of § 222-2 of Chapter 222,
Licenses, every applicant hereunder shall set forth in a sworn statement the following details:
The exact location where he will store the junk he accumulates.
The number, year of manufacture, model and license number of the vehicle in which he proposes
to make his collections of junk.
The place where such vehicles are regularly stored or garaged.
§ 215-3. Fees.
[Amended 12-4-1972]
The fee for any license required by the provisions of this article shall be at the levels fixed from time to
time by resolution of the Board of Trustees of the Village of Rockville Centre.
Article II. Dealers in Secondhand Articles
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 151/441
(1)
(2)
(3)
A.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
B.
C.
[Adopted 12-8-1980 by L.L. No. 15-1980]
§ 215-4. General provisions.
Definitions. As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
DEALER IN SECONDHAND ARTICLES
Any person who in any way, as principal, broker or agent:
Deals in the commercial purchase or sale of secondhand articles for any purpose and of
whatever nature, including but not limited to old gold or other precious metals, coins,
stamps or currency, firearms, rifles, shotguns, cameras, business machines, musical
instruments, outboard motors or electronic equipment.
Accepts or receives secondhand articles as returns of merchandise or in exchange for or
for credits on any other articles or merchandise.
Deals in the commercial purchase or sale of pawnbroker tickets or other evidence of
pledged articles.
Exceptions. Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed to apply to the following:
Automobiles, pianos, books, magazines, rugs, tapestries, artists' burlap, paintings, sculpture,
drawings, etchings and engravings.
The first purchase or sale in the country of any imported secondhand article.
The acceptance or receipt of merchandise in a new condition as a return, exchange or for
credit or refund, if such merchandise was originally purchased as new merchandise from the
person accepting or receiving the same, nor to any resale of such merchandise as new
merchandise or the first subsequent nonretail or exchange of such merchandise as used
merchandise.
The acceptance or receipt of merchandise in a used condition as a return, trade-in, exchange
or for credit or refund if such merchandise was originally purchased as new merchandise from
the person accepting or receiving the same, nor to the first subsequent nonretail sale or
exchange of such merchandise.
The first sale, at retail, of merchandise which has been rebuilt by the manufacturer or vendor
originally manufacturing it, or the licensed agents thereof, and sold as factory rebuilt
merchandise.
A thrift shop, as defined to be so classified under the United States Internal Revenue Code,
entitled to an exemption as an eleemosynary corporation or institution.
Antiques, which shall mean secondhand articles over 50 years of age, having a value of less
than $250 and void of any means of identification. Identification shall mean articles which are
serialized, monogrammed, initialed or distinctly marked.
Proof. The burden of proof that an article was originally purchased from the person accepting or
receiving it, that it was the first subsequent sale or exchange thereof to a person other than an
ultimate consumer or that it was a first sale at retail of such factory rebuilt merchandise shall be
upon the person asserting the same. Evidence of an existing trade practice in the Village of
Rockville Centre, if any, shall be admissible for the purpose of determining whether or not
merchandise is in new or used condition.
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 152/441
D.
E.
F.
A.
B.
C.
Interpretation. In interpreting and applying the provisions of this chapter, the rule of interpretation
applicable to remedial legislation shall be used so that the spirit and intent of this chapter shall be
observed. All provisions shall be considered as minimum requirements and deemed neither to
limit nor repeal any other powers granted to the Village of Rockville Centre under New York State
statutes.
Severability. If any clause, sentence, section, paragraph or provision of this chapter shall be
adjudged by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such judgment shall not affect, impair
or invalidate the remainder of this chapter but shall be confined in its operation to the clause,
sentence, section, paragraph or provision directly involved in the controversy in which such
judgment shall have been rendered.
Disclaimer of liability. This chapter shall not create any liability on the part of the Village of
Rockville Centre, its officers, agents or employees or the Rockville Centre Police Department, its
officers, agents or employees, for any act or damage caused as a result of reliance on this chapter
or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder.
§ 215-5. License required.
No person shall act as a dealer in secondhand articles without obtaining a license therefor in
accordance with the provisions of Chapter 222 of the Code of the Village of Rockville Centre.
§ 215-6. Fees.
The fee for any license required by the provisions of this article shall be at the levels fixed from time to
time by resolution of the Board of Trustees of the Village of Rockville Centre.
§ 215-7. Report to the Police Commissioner.
Every dealer in secondhand articles shall furnish to the Police Commissioner of Rockville Centre, or
his agent, at such times, in such manner and at such intervals as shall be specified by the Police
Commissioner, all information requested by the Police Commissioner relative to all records required to
be kept under this chapter. Such information shall be supplied on forms to be designated and supplied
by the Police Commissioner.
§ 215-8. Restrictions.
No dealer in secondhand articles shall carry on business without a license or at any other place
than the one designated in his license.
No dealer in secondhand articles shall purchase any secondhand goods, articles or things
whatsoever between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
No articles or things except household furniture, curtains, carpets, stoves, kitchen utensils, office
furniture, automobiles, motor and other vehicles, machinery, belting, building materials and barrels
or other articles or things that have already been kept by a dealer or pawnbroker for a period of
time in accordance with the provisions of this chapter or have been received from persons, firms
or corporations known to be jewelers, dealers, banking institutions, executors or administrators
shall be sold or disposed of by any dealer in secondhand articles until the expiration of 15 days
after such purchase or redemption, and no such dealer shall receive any article by way of pledge
or pawn or employ any subterfuge for receiving goods as security for the advancement of money.
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 153/441
D.
E.
A.
B.
A.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
B.
No dealer in secondhand articles, while licensed as such, shall be licensed as pawnbroker or junk
dealer, nor shall any sign or other device or subterfuge be displayed, used or employed by any
dealer in secondhand articles in or about the premises where such business is conducted, which
in any way resembles the emblem or sign commonly used by pawnbrokers or which is intended to
give the appearance that the business conducted on such premises is, or is connected with, the
business of a pawnbroker and calculated to so mislead; nor shall there be any sign displayed
which is calculated to deceive.
No dealer in secondhand articles shall purchase from a person less than 18 years of age.
[Added 11-9-1981 by L.L. No. 6-1981]
§ 215-9. Lost or stolen property.
[Amended 5-16-1983 by L.L. No. 5-1983]
If any goods or articles shall be advertised in any newspaper printed, circulated or distributed in
the County of Nassau as having been lost or stolen and if any goods or articles answering such
advertised description or any part thereof shall be in or come into the possession of any dealer in
secondhand articles, upon receiving actual written or oral notice of the similarity of description of
such goods or articles, such dealer shall immediately give information relating thereto to the Police
Commissioner of Rockville Centre or his agent. No disposition of such goods or articles shall be
effective until authorization to do so shall be given to such dealer by the Police Commissioner or
his authorized agent. A dealer in secondhand articles, when notified by the Commissioner of
Police or his agent that property in his possession is stolen or alleged to be stolen, shall take
immediate steps to secure that property, and it shall be marked "police stop." Thereafter, such
property shall not be sold or removed from the premises until notification allowing such removal or
sale is made to the dealer in writing by the Police Commissioner of Rockville Centre or his agent.
Every dealer in secondhand articles who shall have or receive any goods or articles alleged or
supposed to have been lost or stolen shall exhibit the same on demand to the Commissioner of
Police of Rockville Centre or to any authorized inspector of licenses, to any police officer or to any
person duly authorized in writing by the Commissioner of Police to examine such articles who
shall exhibit such written authority to the dealer.
§ 215-10. Record to be kept.
Every dealer in secondhand articles shall keep a book furnished at his own expense in a form
prescribed by the Police Commissioner, in which shall be legibly written in English, at the time of
every purchase or sale, a description of every article so purchased or sold, the number or
numbers and any monograms, inscription or other marks or identification that may appear on the
article and a description of the articles or prices comprising old gold, silver, platinum or other
metals and any monogram, inscription or marks or identification thereon, the name, residence and
general description of the person from whom such purchase was made or to whom sold and the
day and hours of the purchase or sale.
In the case of a purchase or sale of a pawnbroker ticket or other evidence of a pledged article,
there shall be written in said book at the time of such purchase, sale or redemption:
The name and address of the person, copartnership or corporation who issued the said ticket
or other evidence.
The pledge number of said pawn ticket or other evidence.
The name and address of the pledger as it appears on said pawn ticket or other evidence.
The amount loaned or advanced as it appears on said pawn ticket or other evidence.
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 154/441
(5)
(6)
(7)
C.
A.
(1)
(2)
B.
C.
[1]
The day and hour of such purchase or sale, as the case may be.
The sum paid or received for such pawn ticket or other evidence.
Such description of a pledged article as appeared on said pawn ticket or other evidence and
an accurate description of every redeemed pledged article.
Said book shall at all reasonable times be opened to the inspection of any police officer or any
inspector of licenses or any person duly authorized in writing for such purpose by the Board of
Trustees of the Village of Rockville Centre.
§ 215-11. Identity of person from whom purchase is made.
It shall be the duty of every secondhand dealer to verify the identity of every person from whom he
purchases an article and to make and keep a written record of the nature of the evidence
submitted by such person to prove his identity.
Only the following shall be deemed acceptable evidence of identity:
Any official document, except a social security account number card, issued by the United
States government, any state, county, municipality or subdivision thereof, any public agency
or department thereof, or any public or private employer, which requires and bears signature
of the person to whom issued.
Other identification documentation which, under the circumstances of any particular purchase,
would lead a reasonable man to believe to be accurate and reliable, when identification under
Subsection B(1) hereof is not available.
It shall be the duty of every dealer in secondhand articles to require that every person from whom
an article is purchased to sign his name in the presence of the secondhand dealer and to compare
the signature with the signature on the identifying document, if any, and retain on his premises the
person's signature, together with the number and description of the identifying document, if any.
§ 215-12. Penalties for offenses.
Any person or persons, association, corporation or any officer of any corporation violating any of the
provisions of this chapter or failing to comply therewith or with any of the requirements thereof shall be
liable to a fine up to $250, and each day such violation shall be permitted to exist shall constitute a
separate offense. Any violation of this chapter or any part thereof shall constitute disorderly conduct,
and any person violating this or any part thereof shall be and is hereby declared a disorderly person.
Chapter 219. Landscapers and Gardeners; Tree Services
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Trustees of the Village of Rockville Centre 8-16-1982 by L.L. No.
1-1982.[1] Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Licenses — See Ch. 222.
Solid waste — See Ch. 283.
Trees, shrubs and hedges — See Ch. 303.
Editor's Note: This local law also provided that it would become effective on 1-1-1983.
§ 219-1. Definitions.
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 155/441
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
As used in this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the following meanings:
GARDENING or LANDSCAPING or TREE SERVICING
The business of tending, planting, preparation, installation, maintaining, trimming, removing,
relocating or managing of lawns, gardens, flower beds, shrubbery, trees or landscaping of every
nature and description on real property which the person performing such work does not own.
Persons engaged in the business of spraying lawns, gardens, flower beds, shrubbery or trees
shall be considered for the purposes of this chapter as engaged in the business of gardening or
landscaping or tree servicing.
[Amended 5-3-2010 by L.L. No. 5-2010]
PERSON
Includes any individual, firm, partnership, corporation or business of any form, style or nature.
PUBLIC HIGHWAY
Includes any street open to the public for its full width from property line to property line, including
the sidewalk area, whether or not installed.
PUBLIC PROPERTY
Includes any real property owned by the Village of Rockville Centre.
§ 219-2. License required.
[Amended 5-3-2010 by L.L. No. 5-2010]
No person over the age of 16 years shall engage in the business of gardening or landscaping or tree
servicing in the Village of Rockville Centre without first having obtained a license therefor from the
Village Clerk.
§ 219-3. Exceptions.
This chapter shall not apply to any person who operates, at a fixed location within the Village, any
garden supply or florist shop, commercial nursery or greenhouse or similar type of business, nor to
any agent or employee of such person.
This chapter shall not be applicable to any person authorized by the State of New York by license
or otherwise to conduct any of the businesses or operations regulated under this chapter.
This chapter shall not be applicable to any person engaged solely in the business of landscape
engineering or garden planning who does not perform any of the functions heretofore described
under the definition of gardening or landscaping.
This chapter shall not require a license for gardening or landscaping or tree servicing done
pursuant to certification from the Superintendent of Building Department or such Superintendent's
designee that such work is necessary to protect public health or safety in the case of an
emergency, provided that the person performing such work files with the Village documentation of
insurance as required from persons licensed by the Village to perform such work.
[Added 5-3-2010 by L.L. No. 5-2010]
This chapter shall not apply to gardening or landscaping or tree servicing done pursuant to
contract with the Village of Rockville Centre or any other governmental agency or any public utility
company.
[Added 5-3-2010 by L.L. No. 5-2010]
§ 219-4. Authority to grant licenses.
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 156/441
A.
B.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
The Village Clerk shall have the power to grant the licenses required by this chapter.
§ 219-5. Application.
License applications under this chapter shall be submitted to the Village Clerk and shall comply with
the requirements specified in Chapter 222, Licenses.
§ 219-6. Fee; expiration.
The fee for the license required by this chapter shall be at the levels fixed from time to time by
resolution of the Board of Trustees of the Village of Rockville Centre, which fee is hereby declared
to be for the purpose of defraying the cost of the enforcement of this chapter and not solely for the
purpose of revenue.
All licenses issued under this chapter shall expire on February 28 of each year.
§ 219-7. Suspension or revocation.
Any license required by this chapter may be suspended or revoked in accordance with the provisions
of Chapter 222, Licenses.
§ 219-8. Rules and regulations.
No licensee under this chapter shall make any false promise or willful misrepresentation in
connection with the business or operation licensed, nor shall any licensee, in describing the
services to be rendered by him, either by an act of commission or omission, knowingly
misrepresent the nature of such services.
No licensee shall conduct himself other than in a courteous, honest and lawful manner at all times.
No licensee shall operate any power or manual lawn mower or other gardening or tree servicing
equipment at any time between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m., local time, on any day, or at
any time on Sunday or public holidays, except in the case of emergency as determined by the
Superintendent of Buildings.
[Amended 7-7-2008 by L.L. No. 9-2008; 5-3-2010 by L.L. No. 5-2010]
No licensee shall burn any wastepaper, rubbish, leaves, cuttings, wood or other waste materials at
any time.
No licensee shall place any garbage, refuse, cuttings, leaves, wood or other materials upon any
public highway or public property.
No licensee shall scatter any garbage, refuse, cuttings, leaves or other waste materials on any
public highway or public property.
Licensees shall affix to and display in the corner of the right front windshield of all vehicles
regularly used in the course of their business the identification decal given to them by the Village
Clerk at the time the license is issued.
§ 219-9. Penalties for offenses.
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 157/441
[1]
Any person, firm or corporation committing an offense against any provision of this chapter shall be
punishable as provided in the general penalty provisions of the Code of the Village of Rockville Centre.
[1]
Editor's Note: See Ch. 1, Art. I.
Chapter 222. Licenses
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Trustees of the Village of Rockville Centre 2-22-1971 by L.L. No.
1-1971 as Ch. 78 of the 1971 Code; amended in its entirety 5-5-1986 by L.L. No. 4-1986. Amendments
noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Amusement and gaming devices — See Ch. 84.
Auctioneers — See Ch. 90.
Secondhand automobile sales — See Ch. 93.
Bowling alleys and pool halls — See Ch. 105.
Building Code — See Ch. 112.
Building drains — See Ch. 118.
Moving of buildings — See Ch. 126.
Businesses — See Ch. 138.
Coin-operated dry-cleaning machines — See Ch. 154.
Master electricians — See Ch. 160.
Entertainment — See Ch. 163.
Food and drink dispensers — See Ch. 191.
Fortune-telling, clairvoyance, phrenology — See Ch. 194.
Gasoline sale and service stations — See Ch. 204.
Junk and secondhand dealers — See Ch. 215.
Lodging and boarding houses — See Ch. 225.
Parades and processions — See Ch. 239.
Pawnbrokers — See Ch. 244.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 247.
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 250.
Special sales — See Ch. 265.
Soil and earth removal — See Ch. 280.
Solid waste — See Ch. 283.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 287.
Excavations — See Ch. 287, Art. X.
Taxicabs — See Ch. 297.
Towing — See Ch. 300.
Washing machines — See Ch. 315.
Signs and posting bills — See Ch. 335.
§ 222-1. Scope of application.
Whenever in any local law it is provided that a license be obtained before engaging upon any act or in
any specified business, trade or occupation; or providing services for payment or hire for the
convenience, comfort or entertainment of others; or for any other designated purpose, it shall be a
violation hereof for any person to engage upon or undertake any activity or enterprise thus specified
until a license has been issued to him in compliance with the provisions of this and of any other
applicable local law.
§ 222-2. Application requirements.
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 158/441
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
I.
J.
K.
L.
M.
N.
O.
Except as otherwise specifically provided, every applicant for a license shall file with the Village Clerk a
statement signed and sworn to by the applicant in person if an individual, by all partners if a
partnership, and by the president or duly authorized officer if a corporation, containing the following
information:
The name of the applicant.
His business address.
His home address, if he is a natural person.
If his age is 21 years or less, and if less, his precise age.
The precise purpose for which the license is sought.
The place within the Village where the licensee will engage in the licensed activity or enterprise.
The names and addresses of all persons interested directly or indirectly in the operation of the
business.
The names and addresses of each officer, director and stockholder of a corporate applicant, and
number of shares of the corporate stock owned by each stockholder, number of shares authorized
to be issued and number of shares actually issued. The Village shall be advised forthwith of any
change of officers, directors or stockholders or the license may be revoked.
The names and addresses of each and every person providing any part or all of capital of this
business or operation.
Every applicant must state that no persons have provided any funds for the organization or
operation of this business except as stated in the application, and if any such funds are hereafter
obtained, the Village is to be advised immediately.
Whether or not the applicant, or, in the case of a corporation, whether any officer or director
thereof, has been convicted of a crime or offense or violation of any local law of the Village, and if
so, the nature of such crime or offense, the date and court of conviction and the penalty assessed
therefor.
Satisfactory credentials from his principal, if the applicant is to act as an agent.
References or letters of recommendation by at least three reputable businessmen or property
owners in the County of Nassau, State of New York, such as will establish to the satisfaction of the
Mayor the good character and business responsibility of the applicant.
Any other data necessary to meet the requirements of any local law by provisions of which the
license sought is required.
Satisfactory certificate or other evidence from an insurance company licensed to do business in
the State of New York, indicating that a public liability policy in accord with the law of the State of
New York has been issued and is in force covering any vehicle for which a license is being sought.
§ 222-3. Bonds.
Whenever by the terms of any local law a bond is required to protect the Village or any other person
against loss because of the fault or default of a licensee, no license shall be issued until a bond in the
full amount specified and in form approved by the Village Attorney has been filed with the Village Clerk,
and the fact of its filing, the amount of its coverage and the date of its expiration have been noted on
the license.
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 159/441
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
I.
J.
K.
L.
M.
N.
O.
P.
Q.
R.
S.
T.
U.
V.
W.
X.
§ 222-4. Expiration of license.
All licenses shall expire on the following dates or times:
Soliciting contributions in public, for period of charitable drive (Chapter 250, Peddling and
Soliciting, Art. II).
Hawking and peddling, April 1 (Chapter 250, Peddling and Soliciting, Art. III).
Theaters and motion picture houses, December 1, (Chapter 163, Entertainment, Art. II).
Dancing, cabaret and other performances, March 1, (Chapter 163, Entertainment, Art. I).
Food and drink dispensers, March 1 (Chapter 191, Food and Drink Dispensers).
Junk dealers, April 1, (Chapter 215, Junk and Secondhand Dealers, Art. I).
Used and secondhand auto dealers, October 1 (Chapter 93, Automobile Sales, Secondhand).
Gasoline service stations, October 1 (Chapter 204, Gasoline Sale and Service Stations, Art. I).
Parking, commuter and nonresident, January 31 (Chapter 309, Vehicles and Traffic).
Lodging houses, boardinghouses, December 31 (Chapter 225, Lodging and Boarding Houses).
Towing cars, February 28 (Chapter 300, Towing).
Washing machines, April 30, (Chapter 315, Washing Machines).
Taxicab and drivers' licenses, September 30 (Chapter 297, Taxicabs).
Admission of children to theaters, December 31, (Chapter 163, Entertainment, Art. III).
Auctioneers, annual: September 30, daily, each scale (Chapter 90, Auctioneers).
Dealers in secondhand articles, December 31 (Chapter 215, Junk and Secondhand Dealers, Art.
II).
Privately owned parking lots, February 28 (Chapter 309, Vehicles and Traffic, Art. VII).
Special sales, 30 days from date of issuance, may be renewed for additional 30 days (Chapter
265, Sales, Special).
Transient business, one year from date of issuance (Chapter 138, Businesses, Art. I).
Pawnbrokers, May 1 (Chapter 244, Pawnbrokers).
Garbage removal, April 1, (Chapter 283, Solid Waste, Art. I).
Master electricians, April 30 (Chapter 160, Electricians, Master).
Public pool halls, bowling alleys, December 31 (Chapter 105, Bowling Alleys and Pool Halls).
Parades, processions, length of time required (Chapter 239, Parades and Processions).
§ 222-5. Issuance.
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 160/441
A.
B.
All licenses shall be issued by the Mayor or licensing officer designated by the Mayor to such persons
as he shall deem fit and proper upon an evaluation of their qualifications and upon compliance of the
applicant with the provisions of this or any other applicable local law.
§ 222-6. Refusal to grant license.
Any applicant who has been refused a license by the Mayor or licensing officer may apply for its
issuance to the Board of Trustees at a meeting thereof, and the same may be granted or refused by
the Board.
§ 222-7. Record of license.
Every license issued shall be signed by the Mayor or licensing officer and countersigned by the Village
Administrator, who shall keep a record thereof and the amount of fee to be paid therefor.
§ 222-8. Fees.
No license shall be effective until the fee therefor as established by the Board of Trustees shall have
been paid to the Treasurer, who shall endorse his receipt of the fee upon each license which is
presented to him, properly signed and countersigned and accompanied by the amount of the fee.
§ 222-9. Renewal.
Unless application for a renewal of a license is filed more than 20 days prior to the expiration date
thereof, such application shall be subject to all of the requirements of an original application. Any
person who has filed an application for a license renewal and complied with all the requirements of
filing of said application and whose license is not renewed by the Mayor or licensing officer shall have
a right to a hearing in accordance with the procedures set forth in § 222-13 of this chapter. Any of the
causes set forth in § 222-12 of this chapter shall be sufficient basis for the refusal to renew a license.
The refusal to renew shall not be effective until the hearing is held and a report and recommendation
rendered to the Board of Trustees and action is taken thereon pursuant to § 222-13 of this chapter.
§ 222-10. Availability of license.
Every person to whom a license or permit has been issued shall at all times have the same with him at
the site or place when the business or act licensed is being performed, and available for inspection by
a police officer or any other authorized person.
§ 222-11. Licensed vehicle requirements.
The name and address of the licensee shall be clearly inscribed upon the sides of each licensed
vehicle.
The Village license number shall be clearly inscribed on the sides of each licensed vehicle.
§ 222-12. Suspension, revocation or nonrenewal.
[Amended 5-1-2014 by L.L. No. 3-2014]
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 161/441
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
A.
B.
Any license issued pursuant to the provisions of this or any other local law may be suspended or
revoked by the Mayor or licensing officer, or renewal of any such license may be denied, for any of
the following causes:
Fraud or false statement in the application for the license.
Fraud or false statement in connection with operating or carrying out the business, activity or
enterprise for which the license was issued.
Any violation of a provision of this chapter or of any other local law pursuant to which the
license was issued.
Conviction of the licensee of any crime.
Operating or carrying out the licensed business, enterprise or activity in an unlawful manner
or in such a way as to breach the peace or constitute a danger to or disrupt the health, safety
or general welfare of the public.
Transfer or assignment of the license to any person or entity without the written consent of the
Mayor or licensing officer, after due written application and presentation of information
concerning the proposed transferee's qualifications, similar in nature and scope to those
furnished by or required of the original applicant.
No such suspension or revocation shall be effective until after a hearing is held and a report and
recommendation rendered to the Board of Trustees and action is taken by the Board of Trustees
pursuant to § 222-13 of this chapter, except that a suspension or revocation shall take effect
immediately, or at any specified time prior to the conclusion of such hearing, in the event the
suspending or revoking authority determines that continuation of the business or activity
authorized by such license would constitute a danger to the public health, safety or general
welfare if permitted to continue before the conclusion of such hearing.
§ 222-13. Hearing.
Any person who has had his license suspended, revoked or not renewed by the Mayor or licensing
officer pursuant to § 222-9 or § 222-12 shall have right to a hearing upon such suspension, revocation
or nonrenewal before a Hearing Officer designated by the Board of Trustees. A written request for such
hearing must be filed by the licensee with the Village Administrator within 15 days of notification to him
of the suspension, revocation or nonrenewal by the Mayor or licensing officer. Failure to timely file such
request shall be deemed a waiver of the right to a hearing. The hearing shall be held within 30 days
after the filing of the request thereof. All persons interested or affected shall have the opportunity to be
heard at the hearing. The hearing officer, upon the completion of the hearing, shall render a written
report and recommendation thereon to the Board of Trustees. The Board of Trustees after the report
and recommendation of the hearing officer is reviewed may reinstate the license, revoke the license or
continue the suspension of the license for a specified period of time.
Chapter 225. Lodging and Boarding Houses
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Trustees of the Village of Rockville Centre 2-22-1971 by L.L. No.
1-1971 as Ch. 81 of the 1971 Code. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building Code — See Ch. 112.
Dangerous and unsafe buildings — See Ch. 122.
Escalators — See Ch. 169.
Fire escapes — See Ch. 181.
Fire prevention and control — See Ch. 185.
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 162/441
[1]
A.
B.
C.
D.
[1]
E.
F.
G.
H.
Licenses — See Ch. 222.
Smoke emissions — See Ch. 276.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 309.
Zoning — See Ch. 340.
§ 225-1. License required.
[Amended 6-24-2013 by L.L. No. 3-2013]
No lodging house, rooming house or boardinghouse which furnishes lodging or rooming
accommodations for hire within the same shall exist or be maintained within the Village without a
license, which shall be issued by the Board of Trustees as hereinafter provided. Notwithstanding the
foregoing, where a lodging house, rooming house or boardinghouse lawfully existed pursuant to a valid
license issued by the Village of Rockville Centre prior to June 1, 2013, any such license may be
renewed subject to the provisions of this chapter, provided that no such lodging house, rooming house
or boardinghouse may be enlarged or expanded in any manner greater than it existed on June 1,
2013. It is the intention of this section that no new lodging house, rooming house or boardinghouse be
established on or after June 1, 2013, but that those lodging houses, rooming houses and
boardinghouses lawfully existing and licensed on June 1, 2013, may be permitted to continue, as
nonconforming licensed uses, so long as such uses continue to conform to Code requirements and
maintain all required licenses.
Editor's Note: See Ch. 222, Licenses.
§ 225-2. Requirements for maintenance and renewal of license.
[Amended 6-24-2013 by L.L. No. 3-2013]
No licenses shall be renewed hereunder, and any renewed licenses shall be subject to revocation,
unless the applicant or holder of such license fully complies with the following requirements:
The applicant shall be the individual owner of such premises and shall be of good moral character.
The maximum number of lodgers, roomers or boarders shall be four.
There shall be no more than one person occupying a room as a lodger, roomer or boarder, and
such room shall have a minimum of 100 square feet of floor space. More than one person may
occupy a single room if related by blood or marriage and provided the room shall be of such size
to provide a minimum of 75 square feet of floor area for each person.
At the time of the issuance of such license and at all times when the licensed premises are used
as a lodging house, rooming house or boardinghouse, the owner thereof shall maintain his
residence in and shall actually reside in the licensed premises.
Lodging houses, rooming houses and boardinghouses legally operating and duly licensed prior to
June 1, 2013, shall constitute nonconforming uses pursuant to the zoning regulations of the
Village,[1] and the owners thereof shall be entitled to renewal of lawfully existing licenses for the
same pursuant to this chapter and upon compliance with all of the provisions of this chapter.
Editor's Note: See Ch. 340, Zoning.
All lodging houses, rooming houses and boardinghouses shall be heated by a central heating
plant or electric panel heating.
No cooking or storage of foodstuffs shall be permitted in any room other than a kitchen.
In all parts of such building artificial lighting shall be provided by means of electric current; and
each electric circuit shall be provided with a circuit breaker or fuse which shall meet the
requirements of the New York Board of Fire Underwriters. Each new application shall be
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 163/441
I.
J.
K.
L.
M.
N.
O.
P.
[1]
accompanied by a New York Board of Fire Underwriters' certificate. This certificate shall not be
more than one year old. Thereafter on renewal applications a current New York Board of Fire
Underwriters' certificate shall be required at least once each five years. Any fees involved in
obtaining this current New York Board of Fire Underwriters' certificate shall be borne by the
applicant.
No sinks shall be installed or used in any sleeping room, but basins shall be permitted for personal
washing and shaving. Such basins, however, shall not be used for washing of clothes and dishes
or any unsanitary purposes.
Bathroom facilities shall be maintained for the owner-occupant separate and apart from bathroom
facilities for the lodgers, roomers and boarders.
All sleeping rooms shall be numbered with raised figures not less than three inches in height
placed on the outside of the door to each room, and no two rooms shall bear the same number.
Each and every floor on which rooms are occupied by roomers shall be equipped with an
approved fire extinguisher in good working condition readily accessible for use at all times.
A water meter must be installed in the premises and properly connected with the water service
line. Said meter must be obtained from the Water Department of the Village and a record of such
installation must be exhibited by the applicant before a license shall be issued hereunder.
No room shall be occupied by roomers in the third floor or attic of any dwelling unless the building
complies fully with the New York State Multiple Residence Law.
Off-street parking must be provided on or off premises for all occupants who own automobiles.
All licensed lodging houses, rooming houses and boardinghouses shall be subject to inspections
at all reasonable hours by properly authorized representatives of the Village. Failure to comply
with this provision shall constitute a ground for immediate revocation of the license.
§ 225-3. Registers.
Any person maintaining such a lodging house, rooming house or boardinghouse pursuant to the
provisions of this chapter shall keep upon such premises a register showing the names and
occupations of all persons residing or living in or upon said premises and shall exhibit the same to any
member of the Police Department or the Chief Engineer of the Village or his deputy, or the Chief
Executive of the Fire Department or his deputized agent, at any reasonable time upon demand, and
upon the failure to so exhibit the same, such license shall be revoked.
§ 225-4. Penalties for offenses.
[Amended 6-24-2013 by L.L. No. 3-2013]
Any person or persons convicted of violating any provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a violation
and shall be subject to fine and/or imprisonment as may be provided by law for violations of the Village
Code.[1]
Editor's Note: See § 1-2 of this Code.
§ 225-5. License fees.
[Amended 10-18-1971; 12-4-1972]
The fee for any license required by the provisions of this chapter shall be at the levels fixed from time
to time by resolution of the Board of Trustees of the Village of Rockville Centre.[1]
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 164/441
[1]
A.
B.
C.
D.
Editor's Note: Former § 225-6, Effect on other ordinances, which immediately followed this section, was
repealed 6-24-2013 by L.L. No. 3-2013.
Chapter 232. Noise
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Trustees of the Village of Rockville Centre 2-22-1971 by L.L. No.
1-1971 as Ch. 84 of the 1971 Code. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Aircraft — See Ch. 78.
Alarm systems — See Ch. 81.
Amusement and gaming devices — See Ch. 84.
Animals — See Ch. 87.
Bowling alleys and pool hails — See Ch. 105.
Broadcasting reception — See Ch. 109.
Businesses — See Ch. 138.
Entertainment — See Ch. 163.
Firearms and explosives — See Ch. 178.
Lodging and boarding houses — See Ch. 225.
Parades and processions — See Ch. 239.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 247.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 287.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 309.
Zoning — See Ch. 340.
§ 232-1. Loud, unnecessary or disturbing noises prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to make, continue or cause to be made or continued any loud,
unnecessary or unusual noise or any noise which annoys, disturbs or injures or endangers the comfort,
repose, health, peace or safety of others. The following restrictions are specific enactments to curb and
prevent disturbing and unnecessary noises in violation of this chapter, but said enumeration shall not
be deemed to be exclusive.
§ 232-2. Restrictions on loudspeakers.
No person shall maintain or operate or permit to be maintained or operated any loudspeaker
attachment connected with a radio or television apparatus or talking machine or other primary
source of sound in such a manner that the loudspeaker will project sound outside of any building
so that the sound is audible for a distance of more than 30 feet from the point of its origin.
Nothing herein contained shall be construed to prohibit the operation of radio or television
apparatus or talking machines in a reasonable manner within any building or structure, even
though the sound therefrom may be heard outside such building or structure up to 30 feet
therefrom, provided that such radio or television apparatus or talking machine is not connected
with a loudspeaker or amplifier or sound conveyer fastened to or connected with an outside wall or
which projects from a window or other opening.
Nothing herein contained shall preclude or prohibit the use by a church or any religious
organization of loudspeakers or other amplifying devices to broadcast the sound of bells, chimes
or carillons or replicas thereof.
Nothing herein contained shall preclude or prohibit the reasonable use of loudspeakers, amplifiers
or other broadcasting devices in any outdoor sports arena, stadium or public park during the
progress of a game, exhibition or other program conducted in a public place in compliance with
other legal regulations applicable thereto or at a railroad or bus station in connection with the
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 165/441
A.
B.
operation of a common carrier in advising the public as to the arrival and departure of public
conveyances and similar information.
§ 232-3. Use of horns, signaling devices, etc.
No person shall sound or cause to be sounded any horn or signaling device on any motorcar,
motorcycle, motorboat or other vehicle on any street, waterway or public place of the village, except as
a danger signal or traffic warning, nor shall any person create or cause to be created by the use of
such devices any unreasonably loud, harsh or prolonged sound.
§ 232-4. Sound amplification from aircraft.
No person shall operate or cause to be operated any aircraft for any purpose over the village with
sound-amplifying equipment in operation audible to persons on the ground. This prohibition
includes amplification of human voices and musical instruments and forbids the broadcasting of
the advertisements of any product, function or cause and the dissemination of messages, recitals,
reading or other material of any kind, unless the same have been duly authorized by an official
agency of government.
The prohibition herein shall not apply to broadcasting of warning signals from devices installed on
authorized aircraft or to the use of any horn or other mechanism when operated to ensure safety
in aerial navigation.
§ 232-5. Noises from motors or engines.
No person shall operate or cause to be operated any motorcar, motorboat or other mechanism
propelled by gasoline, fuel oil or other combustible substance unless the same shall be properly
equipped with a muffler so designed and in such condition as to prevent unnecessary noise in its
operation.
§ 232-6. Noises from factories, warehouses and transfer stations.
[Amended 11-6-1995 by L.L. No. 10-1995]
No person shall operate or permit the carrying on of any activities in connection with the operation of
any factory, warehouse or transfer station in which the primary activity is not totally enclosed within the
four walls of a building whenever such an establishment is located within 200 feet of a residence zone,
between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 7:30 a.m. or at any time on Sunday.
§ 232-7. Noises from construction, improvement or renovation to
interior or exterior of private property.
[Added 11-27-1995 by L.L. No. 12-1995; amended 2-8-2011 by L.L. No. 3-2011]
No contractor or construction company shall conduct or permit any construction, improvement or
renovation, or the operation of equipment in connection with any improvement, construction or
renovation, with respect to the interior or exterior of any private property, between the hours of 7:00
p.m. on any day and 8:00 a.m. on the following day, nor at any time on Sunday or on any of the
following holidays: New Year’s Day, Martin Luther King Day, Lincoln's Birthday, Presidents' Day,
Memorial Day, Independence Day, Labor Day, Columbus Day, Veterans Day, Thanksgiving Day or
Christmas Day. Assembly or delivery of personnel and/or materials or equipment or other preparation
for any such construction-related activity may commence no earlier than 7:30 a.m. on any day when
such activity is permitted to be performed. The restrictions in this section shall not apply to any such
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 166/441
activity authorized by a Village official in charge of the appropriate Village department in case of
emergency, nor to such activity when performed by or for a government agency or a utility company.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, this section shall not be construed to prohibit activities occurring solely
within the interior of a building where the sound from such activity is not audible beyond the property
line of the property where the activity is being conducted.
§ 232-8. Air-conditioning or similar units.
[Added 4-3-2012 by L.L. No. 1-2012]
No person shall operate or maintain, or cause to be operated or maintained, any air-conditioning
compressor unit or similar unit which emits sound which is audible at the nearest property line at a
sound measurement level in excess of 60 dBA.
Chapter 239. Parades and Processions
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Trustees of the Village of Rockville Centre 2-22-1971 by L.L. No.
1-1971 as Ch. 89 of the 1971 Code. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Licenses — See Ch. 222.
Noise — See Ch. 232.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 247.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 287.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 309.
§ 239-1. License required.
No parade or procession shall be held or conducted in the Village unless a license therefor shall have
been granted by the Chief of the Rockville Centre Police Department.
§ 239-2. Application requirements.
Any person wishing to use any streets or public places in the Village for a procession or parade shall
make application therefor to the Police Chief at least seven days before the proposed event is to occur.
Such application shall state the route it is proposed to follow and the nature of the event and the
number of participants therein, so that opportunity may be had by the Police Chief to determine
whether by granting a license there would be interference with traffic circulation or unreasonable
danger to public safety.
§ 239-3. Granting of license.
If it appears that there would be no unreasonable interference with traffic circulation or public safety,
the Police Chief shall issue a license for the time and along the route requested; or he may make such
modification in time and route as to provide for reasonable traffic circulation and public safety as nearly
as possible conforming to the time and route requested.
§ 239-4. Commercial parades.
The Police Chief at his discretion may refuse to grant a license for a parade for a commercial purpose.
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 167/441
A.
B.
Chapter 241. Parks
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Trustees of the Village of Rockville Centre 10-6-2015 by L.L. No.
8-2015. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Animals — See Ch. 87.
Noise — See Ch. 232.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 247.
§ 241-1. Definitions.
Unless otherwise expressly provided, as used in this chapter the following words shall have the
meaning herein indicated:
ADULT
A person 18 years of age or older.
BOARD
The Village Board of Trustees.
DIRECTOR
The Superintendent of the Village Department of Public Works.
PARK or PARKS
Includes all parks, playgrounds, athletic field and other recreation areas and facilities under the
jurisdiction of the Village.
PERSON
An individual person or an entity.
VILLAGE
The Village of Rockville Centre.
§ 241-2. Applicability.
Use of the parks in the Village shall be subject to the provisions of this chapter. All other provisions of
this Code also shall be applicable except where expressly provided otherwise in this chapter, or where
such other Code provision is inconsistent with a provision of this chapter; in the event of any
inconsistency, the provisions of this chapter shall prevail.
§ 241-3. Regulations.
The Director may issue such regulations for the use of a park or parks as the Director shall
determine to be appropriate for the protection of the public health, safety and general welfare. No
such regulation may be inconsistent with any provision of this chapter. Each such regulation shall
be deemed to be enforceable as if it were a provision of this chapter and set forth herein.
The Board of Trustees shall have authority, by resolution, to alter, amend or repeal any regulation
issued by the Director pursuant to this chapter.
§ 241-4. Advertising.
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 168/441
A.
B.
C.
Except with the written permission of the Director or pursuant to regulation issued by the Director, no
person shall post, distribute, cast or leave about any bills, placards, tickets, handbills, circulars,
advertisements in any form or any other matter for advertising purposes directly in or in the immediate
vicinity of any park.
§ 241-5. Alcoholic beverages.
Except with the written permission of the Director or pursuant to regulation issued by the Director, no
person shall bring into any park, nor consume or possess in any park with the intent to consume, any
liquor, ale, beer, wine, spirits or other alcoholic beverages in a keg, case, can, bottle or other container.
§ 241-6. (Reserved)
§ 241-7. Smoking in parks.
No person shall smoke or carry any lighted smoking substances, including but not limited to cigarettes,
cigars, pipes and the like, in or at any park within the Village, except in designated smoking areas
established by regulation of the Director.
§ 241-8. Animals.
No person shall bring or harbor any animal in any park except as authorized by regulations with
respect thereto as may be promulgated by the Director. A person owning or having custody of any
animal shall not cause or permit such animal to enter or be in any park in violation of such regulations,
nor shall such person commit any act in violation of such regulations.
§ 241-9. Bathing regulations.
No person shall bathe, wade or swim, or engage in any aquatic or recreational activities, in any waters
within any park except at such times and places, in such proper attire, and in such time, place or
manner, as authorized by regulation promulgated by the Director.
§ 241-10. Disorderly conduct in a park.
No person shall perform any act in violation of this chapter or any regulation lawfully issued
pursuant to this chapter.
No person shall disobey a lawful order of a police officer, peace officer, law enforcement officer or
any person authorized to enforce the provisions of this chapter, or any person employed in the
Village Recreation Department in a supervisory capacity.
No person shall perform any act in violation of instructions on any park sign; throw stones or other
missiles; interfere with, encumber, obstruct or render dangerous any drive, road, path, walk or
area of a park; climb upon any wall, fence, shelter, cabana or other structure not intended as
climbing apparatus; enter or leave any park area except at established entranceways or exits;
introduce, carry or fire any fireworks; engage in, instigate, aid or encourage a contention or fight,
whether or not a ring or prizefight; assault any person; spit on any walk, platform or stairway; or
urinate or defecate except in public restrooms.
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 169/441
D.
A.
B.
C.
D.
No person shall make or permit the making of excessive or unreasonable noise which would
create a nuisance and prevent park patrons or residents of the area surrounding the park from
participating in their usual activities.
§ 241-11. Fires.
No fire shall be permitted in any park except as authorized by the regulations promulgated by the
Director or with the written permission of the Director.
Except as authorized by such regulations or written permission of the Director, no person shall
kindle, build, maintain or use a fire anywhere within any park. Where a fire is authorized by such
regulation or permission, each such fire shall be continuously under the care and direction of an
adult from the time it is kindled until it is extinguished, and no fire shall be built within 10 feet of
any tree or building, or beneath the branches of any trees or in any underbrush.
(Reserved)
No person shall throw away or discard any lighted match, cigar, cigarette or other lighted object,
and all such objects shall be deposited in suitable receptacles. No shall dump, lay or place or
dispose of any hot coals, ashes or embers except in suitable receptacles.
§ 241-12. Fishing.
Fishing is prohibited in any park area except where authorized by regulation promulgated by the
Director or with the written permission of the Director.
§ 241-13. Games.
The following activities are prohibited in any park except in areas where authorized by the Director:
throwing or using any type of ball, bean bag, frisbee, knife, missile or other object; playing any ball
game; flying any model aircraft of any size; engaging in kite flying or model boating; riding bicycles,
scooters, go-carts, motor bikes, motorcycles, beach buggies or other such vehicles other than on
roads; roller skating, skate-boarding; engaging in archery; using air rifles, pistols, BB guns or any type
of firearm or other such device or instrumentality which may create a hazard to person or property or
which may cause a nuisance or discomfort to any person.
§ 241-14. Loss, damage or theft.
The Village is not responsible for loss, damage or theft of motor vehicles or other personal property
brought into any park, unless said property is received by persons authorized by the Village and at
designated facilities provided for that purpose under a written agreement with the Village, and in the
event of receipt by such authorized person in no event shall the Village's liability exceed the sum of
$150. Persons checking clothing and parking motor vehicles as authorized herein do so at their own
risk and without any liability on the part of the Village except as provided herein.
§ 241-15. Opening and closing.
The regulations promulgated by the Director may include provisions with respect to the dates and
times when any park is open to the public, and any such dates and times shall be posted at the park.
No person shall be in any park without the written permission of the Director at any time when such
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 170/441
park is closed to the public. The Director is authorized to pen or close any park at any time, in the sole
discretion of the Director, for emergency, health or safety reasons.
§ 241-16. Payment of charges.
Where a fee is applicable for the use of any park or any facility in a park, no person shall use or
attempt to use or gain admittance to such park or facility unless such person first shall have paid any
such charges or fees.
§ 241-17. Prohibition against use or landing of airborne vehicles.
Except as authorized by regulation or written permission issued by the Director, no person shall
voluntarily use or land any airborne vehicle, object or apparatus in any park.
§ 241-18. Protection of property.
No person shall injure, deface, displace, remove, fill in, raze, destroy or tamper with any park property,
drive, path or walk; take up, remove or carry away trees, shrubs, turf or other material; remove, deface
or destroy any structure, building or any appurtenances connected with the park or any other property
or equipment, real or personal owned by the Village or others under the jurisdiction and control of the
Village.
§ 241-19. Refuse and garbage.
No person shall take, carry, leave, throw, lay, drop, discard or in any manner discharge any cans,
bottles, broken glass, refuse, garbage, rubbish or waste or debris into or on any park. All such
materials shall be placed in receptacles provided for that purpose.
§ 241-20. Restrictions on taking photographs.
Except as authorized by law or regulation, or with the written permission of the Director, no person
shall take, cause to be taken, or assist to be taken any photograph or other visual or video record for
commercial purposes.
§ 241-21. Structures, platforms, picnics, outings and special
events.
Except as authorized pursuant to regulation or with the written permission of the Director, no person
shall erect any structure, stand or platform, hold any meetings, perform any ceremony, make a speech
or address, give or exhibit any performance or form any parade or procession in any park, unless
authorized by the Board or Director.
§ 241-22. through § 241-25. (Reserved)
§ 241-26. Traffic control.
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 171/441
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
A.
B.
A.
B.
In addition to any other applicable provisions of this Code, no person shall operate or park a vehicle in
any park except as authorized by regulation promulgated by the Director, or by rule or regulation
adopted by resolution of the Board of Trustees. It shall be unlawful for the operator of any to disobey
the direction of any sign or marking relating to traffic control in any Village which shall be placed in
accordance with any such provision, rule or regulation.
Except as otherwise posted, the speed limit applicable to any vehicle authorized to be operated in
any park shall be 15 miles per hour.
Driving instruction of persons operating motor vehicles, motorcycles or minibikes, either under a
New York State learner's permit or otherwise, is prohibited in all parks.
No person shall solicit for hire passengers in any park.
Hitchhiking is prohibited in any park.
Obstruction of traffic by vehicle or otherwise, except in case of emergency, is prohibited.
Exemption of emergency and municipally owned or leased vehicles and equipment. Nothing
herein contained shall be construed to prohibit the standing, parking or operation of police or fire
vehicles, ambulances and other emergency vehicles or government owned or leased vehicles and
equipment when being operated or parked or otherwise used in connection with an emergency.
§ 241-27. Miscellaneous restrictions.
Except where authorized by regulation or written permission of the Director:
No person under the age of 10 years shall be admitted to a park unless accompanied by an adult
who shall assume full responsibility for his or her safety and conduct.
No person shall use park property for business or professional purposes, including the sale or
offering for sale of any goods or the rendering of or offer to render any service for a fee or for the
purpose of soliciting alms or contributions.
§ 241-28. Unhygienic activities.
No person shall use any water fountain, drinking fountain, sprinklers, reservoir, lake or any other water
contained in a park for the purpose of washing or cleaning any person, or the clothing or personal
belongings of any person. This section shall not apply to those areas or facilities within a park which
are specifically designated for personal hygiene purposes (i.e., bathroom, shower room, wash basins,
etc.); provided, however, that no person shall wash clothes or personal belongings in such areas, nor
shall any person who has not been using a facility in a manner authorized by this chapter for park or
recreational purposes use a shower room or other facility for personal hygiene purposes.
§ 241-29. Penalties for offenses.
Any person found to violate any of the provisions set forth in this chapter, or any regulation issued
by the Director pursuant to this chapter, shall be guilty of a violation punishable by a fine as
provided herein. In addition, where such violation results in damage to the property of any person,
a person found to have committed such violation may be required to make restitution in whole or
in part to the owner of such property.
Each offense against any provision of this chapter or such regulation shall constitute a separate
violation.
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 172/441
(1)
(2)
(3)
C.
[1]
Upon conviction of an offense as provided herein, a person shall be subject to the following fine:
A first offense within any period of 90 days shall be punishable by a fine of not less than $50
nor more than $250 or by imprisonment for a period not exceeding five days for each offense,
or by both such fine and imprisonment;
A second offense within such period of 90 days shall be punishable by a fine of not less than
$100 nor more than $350 or by imprisonment for a period not exceeding 10 days for each
offense, or by both such fine and imprisonment;
Each additional offense within such period of 90 days shall be punishable by a fine of not less
than $150 nor more than $500 or by imprisonment for a period not exceeding 15 days for
each offense or by both such fine and imprisonment.
Chapter 244. Pawnbrokers
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Trustees of the Village of Rockville Centre 2-22-1971 by L.L. No.
1-1971 as Ch. 91 of the 1971 Code. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Amusement and gaming devices — See Ch. 84.
Auctioneers — See Ch. 90.
Secondhand automobile sales — See Ch.93.
Businesses — See Ch. 138.
Junk and secondhand dealers — See Ch. 215.
Licenses — See Ch. 222.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 247.
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 250.
Special sales — See Ch. 265.
§ 244-1. License required.
No person shall engage in business as a pawnbroker without first obtaining an annual license therefor.
Editor's Note: See Ch. 222, Licenses.
§ 244-2. Surety bond.
Every applicant hereunder shall file with the Village Clerk, prior to the delivery of a license, a surety
bond executed by the person so licensed, and issued by an acceptable surety company, in form
approved by the Village Counsel, in an amount of $2,500, conditioned for the faithful performance of
the duties and obligations pertaining to the business so licensed, as set forth by ordinance and by the
laws of the State of New York. Such bond shall provide that action thereon may be brought by any
person to whom a judgment has been awarded because of loss caused by such licensee's fault or
default.
§ 244-3. License fee.
[Amended 12-4-1972]
The fee for any license required by the provisions of this chapter shall be at the levels fixed from time
to time by resolution of the Board of Trustees of the Village of Rockville Centre.
§ 244-4. Records to be kept; inspection of records.
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 173/441
A.
B.
A.
B.
Every such pawnbroker shall keep a book in which shall be fairly written, at the time of such loan,
an account and description of the goods, articles or things pawned or pledged, the amount of
money loaned thereon, the time of pledging the same, the rate of interest to be paid on such loan,
and the name and residence of the person pawning or pledging the said goods, articles or things.
Such book shall at all reasonable times be open to the inspection of the Mayor, the Police Chief or
any person who shall be duly authorized in writing for that purpose by any or either of them, and
who shall exhibit such written authority to such pawnbroker.
§ 244-5. Interest rates.
No pawnbroker shall ask, demand or receive any greater rate of interest than 3% per month or any
fraction of a month for the first six months, and 2% per month for each succeeding month, upon any
loan not exceeding the sum of $100, or more than 2% for the first six months and 1% per month for
each succeeding month on any loan exceeding the sum of $100.
§ 244-6. Auction of pledges.
No pawnbroker shall sell any pawn or pledge until the same shall have remained one year in his
possession, and all such sales shall be at public auction and not otherwise and shall be conducted
by an auctioneer licensed by the Village.
The surplus money, if any, arising from any such sale, after deducting the amount of the loan, the
interest then due on the same and the expense of the advertisement and sale, shall be paid over
by the pawnbroker to the person who would be entitled to redeem the pledge in case no such sale
had taken place.
Chapter 247. Peace and Good Order
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Trustees of the Village of Rockville Centre as indicated in article
histories. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Amusement and gaming devices — See Ch. 84.
Animals — See Ch. 87.
Bicycles — See Ch. 99.
Bowling alleys and pool halls — See Ch. 105.
Broadcasting reception — See Ch. 109.
Open burning — See Ch. 135.
Businesses — See Ch. 138.
Entertainment — See Ch. 163.
Firearms and explosives — See Ch. 178.
Fire prevention and control — See Ch. 185.
Fortune-telling, clairvoyance, phrenology — See Ch. 194.
Junk and secondhand dealers — See Ch. 215.
Noise — See Ch. 232.
Parades and processions — See Ch. 239.
Pawnbrokers — See Ch. 244.
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 250.
Solid waste — See Ch. 283.
Article I. Conduct in Public Buildings
[Adopted 2-22-1971 by L.L. No. 1-1971 as Ch. 92, Art. I, of the 1971 Code]
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 174/441
A.
B.
§ 247-1. Restrictions and prohibited acts.
The use by the public of all public buildings owned or occupied by the Village of Rockville Centre shall
be limited to the conduct of business therein or the carrying on of activities therein for which said
buildings shall have been designed, constructed or otherwise designated. No person shall loiter in or
around said public buildings nor obstruct corridors, stairways or doorways in any manner so as to
prevent free access by members of the public, officers and employees of the Village of Rockville
Centre to any such building or buildings or to the offices and rooms contained therein. No person shall,
by his presence or by any other means, either alone or in consort with others, interfere with or interrupt
the conduct of the business in the offices located in any such building.
Article II. Conduct in Parks and Public Places
[Adopted 2-22-1971 by L.L. No. 1-1971 as Ch. 92, Art. II, of the 1971 Code]
§ 247-2. Loitering.
It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to loiter in any public park, alley or lane owned and
maintained by the Village of Rockville Centre, or to sleep therein, or to sit or lie on the ground therein in
such a manner as to become obnoxious or annoying or molesting to those lawfully in said park, alley or
lane, or to act in such a manner as to be offensive to others, or in such a manner as to offend public
decency, or refuse to move when so directed by a police officer.
§ 247-3. Drinking of alcoholic beverages.
The drinking of alcoholic beverages in any public park, alley or lane owned and maintained by the
Village of Rockville Centre is hereby prohibited.
§ 247-4. Eating and drinking: areas to be designated.
The eating of lunches or any other foodstuffs or the consumption of soft drinks in any public park, alley
or lane owned and maintained by the Village of Rockville Centre is hereby prohibited, except that such
lunches, foodstuffs and soft drinks may be consumed in such areas as are designated for that
purpose. The Police Department is hereby authorized to designate such areas and have such areas
properly marked.
§ 247-5. Park closing hours.
[Amended 10-21-1974 by L.L. No. 5-1974]
It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to enter in or be present in or be upon any public park
owned or maintained by the Village of Rockville Centre:
Between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 6:00 a.m.
In violation of the hours during which any such park is closed to the public, which closing hours
shall be determined by resolution passed from time to time by the Board of Trustees or which
closing hours are set by the Director of Recreation pursuant to a delegation of such power. Such
closing hours shall be conspicuously posted in any park affected.
Article III. Conduct and Morals Generally
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 175/441
A.
(1)
(2)
(3)
[1]
(4)
B.
C.
A.
B.
[Adopted 2-22-1971 by L.L. No. 1-1971 as Ch. 92, Art. III, of the 1971 Code]
§ 247-6. Public intoxication.
[Amended 12-12-1977 by L.L. No. 9-1977]
No person shall appear or be upon any street, sidewalk, highway or in any public hall, park or
other public place in the Village in a condition of intoxication.
Open containers of alcoholic beverages.
Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the terms used herein are defined as follows:
EVENT
Includes a fair, picnic, block party or other community gathering in any public place.
PUBLIC PLACE
A place to which the public or a substantial group of persons has access, including but
not limited to any highway, street, road, sidewalk, parking area, shopping area, place of
amusement, playground, park or beach located within the Village of Rockville Centre,
except that the definition of a "public place" shall not include those premises duly
licensed for the sale and consumption of alcoholic beverages on the premises or within
and on private property.
Restrictions on possession of alcoholic beverages. No person shall have in his possession
any open bottle, can or container containing liquor, beer, wine or any other alcoholic beverage
while such person is in a public place, except those premises duly licensed for sale and
consumption of alcoholic beverages on the premises, without the express prior written
permission of the Village Clerk of the Incorporated Village of Rockville Centre.
Consumption of alcoholic beverages. Except as hereinafter provided, no person shall
consume alcoholic beverages in or on any public place.
Presumption of possession. The existence of any open bottle, can or other container
containing any alcoholic beverages found in any motor vehicle, except a public omnibus, or in
the possession of any one or more persons in a group congregated in a public place shall be
deemed presumptive evidence that the same is in the possession of each and every such
person.[1]
Editor’s Note: Former Subsection B(5), Permits for special events, was repealed 1-7-2019 by
L.L. No. 1-2019.
Littering. No person shall throw or deposit upon any public highway, public street or sidewalk,
public parking area or public park, any substance likely to injure any person, animal or vehicle
upon such public highway, public street or sidewalk, public parking area or public park.
§ 247-7. Disturbing the peace.
No person shall indulge in disorderly or noisy or disturbing conduct within the Village. Any person who
commits any of the following acts will be considered in violation of this provision:
Uses or indulges in offensive, disorderly, threatening, abusive or insulting language, conduct or
behavior.
Acts in such manner as to annoy, disturb, interfere with, obstruct or be offensive to others.
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 176/441
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
I.
J.
K.
L.
A.
B.
C.
D.
Loiters or congregates with others on a public street, sidewalk, park or place for other than a
lawfully permitted purpose and refuses to move on when ordered by the police.
By his actions causes a crowd to collect, except when lawfully addressing such a crowd.
Shouts or makes any other noise either outside or inside a building during the nighttime to the
annoyance or disturbance of any considerable number of persons.
Interferes with any person in any place by jostling against such person or unnecessarily crowding
him or by placing a hand in the proximity of such person's pocket, pocketbook or handbag.
Stations himself on the public streets or follows or approaches pedestrians for the purpose of
soliciting alms or solicits alms on the public streets unlawfully.
Frequents or loiters about any public place soliciting any person for the purpose of committing a
crime against nature or other lewdness.
Causes a disturbance in any streetcar, railroad car, omnibus or other public conveyance by
running through it, climbing through windows or upon the seats or otherwise annoying passengers
or employees therein.
Damages, destroys or makes improper or unauthorized use of any municipal property, including
parks, parking fields or stadiums, or conducts himself in a manner contrary to any notices, rules or
regulations of the Village, or refuses to obey the orders of any person or persons in authority with
respect to the use of or conduct in or with respect to such property.
Destroys the peace and quiet of the Village or any lawful meeting or assembly therein.
Loiters or congregates with others on the street, sidewalks, doorways or stairways or areas
adjacent thereto, or on stairways, platforms, waiting rooms and escalator of railroad or bus stops
so as to impede traffic, or to the annoyance of passersby or others.
§ 247-8. Indecent acts, displays or signs.
[Amended 5-3-2010 by L.L. No. 6-2010]
No person shall commit or indulge in any lewd, wanton, indecent, immodest, obscene or filthy act
or gesture.
No person shall expose, display, post, exhibit, paint, print or mark upon any wall or object, or place
any placard, poster, bill, painting or sign, either as an advertisement or otherwise, upon any
building, billboard, wall, fence, tree or other surface, so as to be visible from any street or public
place, which shall be of a lewd, indecent, immodest, immoral or vulgar character such as may be
calculated to shock the sense of decency or propriety.
No person shall place, or cause or allow to be placed, any urine, feces, or other human waste of
any kind upon or into any street or public place.
No person shall urinate or defecate on private property without the permission of the owner
thereof or in view of any person located off such property, nor at any time in or upon any public
street or place.
§ 247-9. Permissible Sunday sports.
It shall be lawful hereafter to engage in sports, games or recreational activities in the Village in any
permissible place, but not before 2:00 p.m. of the first day of the week if an admission fee is charged.
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 177/441
(1)
(2)
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
I.
§ 247-10. Trespassing; defacing or damaging public or private
property.
[Amended 10-15-1973 by L.L. No. 2-1973; 6-15-1992 by L.L No. 3-1992]
Legislative declaration.
The Board of Trustees finds that, for the health, safety and welfare of the residents of the
Village, the laws designed to deter the defacement of public and private property through the
use of aerosol spray-paint cans, broad-tipped indelible markers and other marking devices
should be strengthened; that such defacement of property is most often committed by
persons under 18 years of age using aerosol spray-paint cans and broad-tipped indelible
markers; that such aerosol cans and markers are frequently stolen from retail stores by such
persons; that such persons rarely have a legitimate need for such aerosol cans or markers;
that, where such a need exists, said aerosol cans or markers may be furnished by a parent or
guardian; and, therefore, that, within the Village, the sale of such aerosol cans and markers to
such persons should be prohibited and persons engaged in the retail sale of such aerosol
cans and markers should be required to take reasonable steps to prevent the theft of such
cans and markers.
It is the further finding of the Board of Trustees that such defacement, if allowed to remain
without reasonably prompt restoration, encourages and results in further defacement of the
same property and of other property, both publicly owned and privately owned, and should be
removed within 10 days.
It shall be unlawful for any person to enter without authority or to trespass upon or to damage or
deface any private property or property owned by or under the control of the Incorporated Village
of Rockville Centre.
It shall be unlawful for any person to place or inscribe or suffer to be placed or inscribed on any
building or structure located in any public place or in any place open to view by the public any
writings, drawings or markings, however done, containing rude, immoral, lewd, obscene or
indecent matter or containing any other matter which would serve to mar, deface, blemish or
disfigure such building or other structure.
If any such writings, drawings or markings shall appear upon the exterior of any of the places set
forth in Subsection C hereof, they shall be promptly removed by the owner within 10 days after
receipt of written notice to remove shall have been given by the Village.
No person shall carry an aerosol spray-paint can or broad-tipped indelible marker into any public
building or other public facility with intent to violate the provisions of this section.
No person shall sell or offer to sell an aerosol spray-paint can or broad-tipped indelible marker to
any person under 18 years of age.
All persons who sell or offer for sale aerosol spray-paint cans or broad-tipped indelible markers
shall not place such cans or markers on display and may display only facsimiles of such cans or
markers containing no paint or ink.
For the purpose of this section, the term "broad-tipped indelible marker" shall mean any felt-tip
marker or similar implement containing a fluid that is not water soluble and which has a flat or
angled writing surface 1/2 inch or greater.
Any person who violates the provisions of Subsection B, C or E of this section shall be guilty of a
violation. Any person who violates the provisions of Subsection D, F or G of this section shall be
subject to a civil penalty of not more than $1,000.
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 178/441
J.
K.
A.
B.
If any clause, sentence, paragraph, section or part of this section shall be adjudged by any court
of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such judgment shall not affect, impair or invalidate the
remainder thereof but shall be confined in its operation to the clause, sentence, paragraph, section
or part thereof directly involved in the controversy and in which such judgment shall have been
rendered.
This section shall take effect 60 days after its adoption by the Board of Trustees.
Article IV. Preservation of Public Safety
[Adopted 2-22-1971 by L.L. No. 1-1971 as Ch. 92, Art. IV, of the 1971 Code]
§ 247-11. Dangerous missiles.
[Amended 5-7-2018 by L.L. No. 4-2018]
No person shall propel, throw or shoot any missiles or solid objects, such as stones, snowballs, sticks,
metal, bullets or similar materials, upon or across or toward any street, sidewalk, highway or other
public places in the Village where such act would cause, threaten or create injury, or a substantial or
unreasonable risk of injury, to any person or property.
§ 247-12. Interfering with fire alarm system.
No person shall willfully give any false alarm of fire or tamper, meddle or interfere with any station
or signal box of the fire alarm system or willfully break, injure, destroy or disturb any wires, poles
or other supports or appliances connected with or forming part of the fire alarm telegraph system
or any auxiliary fire appliance.
Penalties. Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this section or failing to comply
therewith or violating or failing to comply with any order or regulation made thereunder shall be
punishable by a fine not exceeding $250 or by imprisonment not exceeding 15 days, or both, for
each and every violation. A violation of this section or failure to comply therewith or failure to
comply with any order or regulation made thereunder shall constitute and is hereby declared to be
disorderly conduct, and the person violating the same shall be and is hereby declared a disorderly
person.
§ 247-13. Obstructing fire hydrants.
No person shall obstruct or injure any fire hydrant or throw or pile snow, ice or other substances or
materials in close proximity thereto or otherwise obstruct the full vision and use thereof.
§ 247-14. Aisles in places of assembly.
No person conducting, directing or permitting persons to attend services or meetings in a religious
edifice or to attend any performance or other function in a theater, music hall, motion-picture house or
any other place of assembly for any purpose whatever shall allow or permit any seats, chairs or other
articles to be placed in any of the aisles therein nor permit any person to stand or be seated or remain
in any of the aisles.
§ 247-15. Barriers and danger signals.
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 179/441
A.
B.
Entry prohibited. No person shall walk upon, enter or drive any animal or vehicle upon any
roadway or sidewalk which is guarded by any barrier, sign or signal lawfully so placed for the
purpose of preventing or warning persons from entering into or upon the same.
Interference with barriers. No person shall remove, displace or in any manner interfere with any
barrier, guardrail, sign, lantern or other object or form of warning which shall have been placed
along or across any street or sidewalk or about any public place as a warning or safeguard or to
prevent interference with or damage to work completed or being done in such place.
Article V. Block Parties and Special Events
[Adopted 1-7-2019 by L.L. No. 1-2019]
§ 247-16. Purpose.
The Board of Trustees of the Village of Rockville Centre finds that it is necessary to establish
standards for the issuance of a permit for holding a neighborhood block party, celebration, or special
event on any street, highway or road located within the Village.
§ 247-17. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
BLOCK PARTY
A gathering on a residential street requiring the closure of a street or a portion thereof to vehicular
traffic and the use of the street for festivity or entertainment, including barbecues, picnics, music
and games.
SPECIAL EVENT
A pre-planned single entertainment event, including but not limited to carnivals, craft shows,
festivals, and street fairs, on any Village street or other Village property, which may obstruct, delay,
or interfere with the normal flow of pedestrian or vehicular traffic or use of the street or Village
property. A "special event" shall not include any event conducted or sponsored by the Village of
Rockville Centre.
§ 247-18. Permit required.
No person or groups of persons shall operate or conduct a block party or special event in the Village
without first having obtained and paid for valid special event permit from the Village Clerk. Such
permits may be issued only to one or more Village residents. No permit shall be issued by the Village
Clerk unless the owners of not less than 3/4 of the residential buildings abutting the said block shall
have consented in writing to the application. Not more than one block party shall be issued for the
same block in any one calendar year, unless a waiver is granted by the Mayor or Village Administrator.
As a condition of any special event permit issued, the organizer(s) shall be deemed to have agreed to
comply with emergency requests for ingress and egress for residents on the block and for emergency
services.
§ 247-19. Permit application.
Not less than 30 days prior to the date requested for the event, the applicant for a block party or
special event permit must submit a completed application form to the Village Clerk containing the
following information:
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 180/441
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
A.
B.
C.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
D.
Name, address, and contact information of the applicant(s);
Date, description, duration, street location, times of event, and rain date;
Number of persons expected to attend the event;
Affidavit from applicant containing addresses of all affected residences and the names of the last
record owner for each residence as contained on the latest assessment roll;
Names, addresses and written consents of not less than 3/4 of the owners of residential properties
on or abutting the block or property where the event is proposed to be held;
Certification that the applicant has confirmed with the Village Clerk that there are no other special
event applications pending or approved for the same date within three blocks of the proposed
event;
Name of persons to be responsible for removal of garbage, litter and debris from the block which
shall be no later than 24 hours after the closing time of the event; and
Any additional information as may reasonably be required by the Village Clerk.
§ 247-20. Fee.
A block party or special event application shall be accompanied by a fee established from time to time
by resolution of the Board of Trustees.
§ 247-21. Approval process.
The Village Police Commissioner and Commissioner of the Department of Public Works will
review all block party and special event applications and shall forward their recommendations to
the Village Clerk who, upon receipt, shall make his or her determination within a reasonable time.
The Village Clerk may require the applicant to mail notice of the application to all block residents
and businesses, and to all property owners within 200 feet of the block to be used, and afford
each such business or resident reasonable time, not to exceed 10 days, in which to comment on
the application. Proof of such mailing shall be provided to the Village Clerk by affidavit of mailing
or other documentation acceptable to the Village Clerk.
The Village Clerk may grant, modify, or grant a permit with conditions as necessary or appropriate
to protect the public health, safety and welfare and to ensure traffic and pedestrian safety.
The Village Clerk shall deny a permit if the Village Clerk, the Police Commissioner or the
Commissioner of the Department of Public Works finds any of the following:
Blocking the street will unduly interfere with the safe and orderly flow of vehicular and
pedestrian traffic on or near the proposed block;
Any information contained in the application is false;
The application is incomplete or untimely submitted;
Another block party or special event permit application has been received prior in time, or
already approved, to hold another event a) at the same time and place, or b) within three
blocks of the location requested by the applicant;
The Village Police are unable to meet the need for police services for the event;
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 181/441
(6)
(7)
(8)
E.
A.
B.
C.
(1)
(2)
(3)
D.
E.
F.
The concentration of persons, animals, and vehicles at the event, or assembly and
disbanding areas around the event, will prevent proper police, fire or rescue services to areas
contiguous to the event;
The location of the event will substantially interfere with active or scheduled construction or
maintenance work upon or along the requested block;
The proposed block party or special event would create, or be expected to create,
unreasonable conflicts with other scheduled event(s) or holidays being observed in the
Village.
The applicant shall be notified in writing of the reasons for denial of the application.
§ 247-22. Event guidelines.
Each applicant for an event permit shall comply with all terms and conditions of the block party or
special event permit, and shall ensure that the person in charge of the event carries the permit on
his/her person during the duration of the event.
Daily time restriction. The hours of operation for any block party or special event taking place on
the streets of the Village shall be between 9:00 a.m. and 12:00 midnight on any day of the week,
unless otherwise limited by the permit.
Site maintenance. All areas used must be left in a clean condition.
Services available from the Village. The Village will provide certain equipment and materials to
facilitate comfort and control over the event, subject to availability and the Village's prior need for
such equipment and materials.
Temporary parking signs. All temporary signs for restricting parking must be posted 24 hours
in advance and maintained by the sponsor. Requests for the necessary materials should be
directed to the Police Department, which shall have responsibility for the initial posting of the
temporary signs either through physical placement or directive as to locations. Any usage of
temporary signs without the authorization of the Police Commissioner, or his designee, will be
neither recognized nor enforced. Upon the events completion, all signs must be taken down
by the sponsor and returned to the Police Department.
Barricades. Moveable barricades shall be delivered to the site where the sponsor or its
designated representative shall sign for their receipt. The cost of the replacing lost or
damaged barricades lies with the sponsor.
Fees. A fee for providing police officers above the number normally scheduled may be
charged. The fee is to be determined by the Police Commissioner and shall not be in excess
of the actual cost.
A street or portion thereof blocked off for a block party or special event shall not be obstructed by
obstacles which cannot be readily moved to allow emergency and hazard vehicles to enter it in
response to an emergency. Emergency vehicle access shall be provided for the entire length of
any block being used for the event. Private vehicles may not be used to block off any street or
portion thereof, unless the operator of the vehicle is present in the vehicle and capable of moving
the vehicle upon request.
At all times during the event, at least one person identified by the event sponsor as an emergency
contact person shall be present at the event, and the contact information for each such person
shall be provided to the Police Department prior to the commencement of the event.
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 182/441
A.
B.
§ 247-23. Termination of permit.
The block party or special event permit authorizes the applicant to conduct only such event as is
described in the permit and in accordance with the terms and conditions of the permit. It is
unlawful for the applicant to willfully violate the terms and conditions of the permit, or for any event
participate with the knowledge thereof to willfully violate the terms and conditions of the permit.
The Village Police Department, for reasons of just cause, shall have the authority to revoke or
suspend any block party or special event permit and to cause participants to be dispersed.
§ 247-24. Penalties.
Any person who or which shall violate any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be subject to
a penalty of not more than $500, or imprisonment for a term not to exceed 15 days, or both. Each
day's continued violation shall constitute a separate offense.
Chapter 250. Peddling and Soliciting
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Trustees of the Village of Rockville Centre as indicated in article
histories. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Auctioneers — See Ch. 90.
Secondhand automobile sales — See Ch. 93.
Businesses — See Ch. 138.
Fortune-telling, clairvoyance, phrenology — See Ch. 194.
Junk and secondhand dealers — See Ch. 215.
Licenses — See Ch. 222.
Pawnbrokers — See Ch. 244.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 247.
Special sales — See Ch. 265.
Merchandise displays on sidewalks — See Ch. 287, Art. V.
Signs and posting bills — See Ch. 335.
Article I. Soliciting on Private Residential Property
[Adopted 2-22-1971 by L.L. No. 1-1971 as Ch. 72, Art. I, of the 1971 Code]
§ 250-1. Entering upon private property.
No person shall enter upon any private residential property in the Incorporated Village of Rockville
Centre, Nassau County, New York, for the purpose of vending, peddling or soliciting an order for any
merchandise, device, book, periodical or printed matter whatsoever; nor for the purpose of soliciting
alms or a subscription or a contribution to any church, charitable or public institution; nor for the
purpose of distributing any handbill, pamphlet, tract, notice or advertising matter; nor for the purpose of
selling or distributing any ticket or chance whatsoever, without the consent of the occupant of said
premises previously given.
§ 250-2. Exception.
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 183/441
A.
B.
C.
D.
(1)
(2)
(3)
E.
F.
A.
This article is not to be construed to apply to any person who has been a bona fide resident of the
Village of Rockville Centre for a period of at least six consecutive months last past, nor to any person
who has maintained a place of business in the Village of Rockville Centre for a period of at least six
consecutive months prior thereto, or his duly authorized representative.
Article II. Soliciting Contributions in Public
[Adopted 2-22-1971 by L.L. No. 1-1971 as Ch. 72, Art. II, of the 1971 Code]
§ 250-3. License and identification required.
It shall be unlawful for any person, organization, society, association or corporation or their agents or
representatives to solicit donations of money or property or financial assistance of any kind upon the
streets, in office or business buildings, by house-to-house canvass or in public places in the Village
except upon a license issued by the Mayor and an identification card issued by the chairman or district
chairman of any charitable drive and any such regulations as hereinafter provided.
§ 250-4. Application for license.
[Amended 1-22-1996 by L.L. No. 1-1996]
The application to solicit funds for any cause whatever, as provided for in this article, shall be
addressed to the Mayor, and such application shall contain the following information:
The name and purpose of the cause for which permission is sought.
The names and addresses of the officers and directors of the organization.
The time for which permission is sought and the localities and places of solicitation.
Whether or not any commissions, fees, wages or emoluments are to be expended in connection
which such commission.
A signed statement:
That the applicant has been provided with a list of residents who decline to allow soliciting at
their residences for any purpose.
That the applicant has agreed to refrain from soliciting at any residence included on this list
provided to the applicant at the time the license is received.
That the applicant is on notice that soliciting at a residence that has declined solicitation will
result in the revocation of the license.
Such other information as the Mayor may require.
§ 250-5. Additional regulations.
[Amended 1-22-1996 by L.L. No. 1-1996]
Sworn statement. It shall be the duty of the Mayor, before granting permission to solicit funds or
donations as provided for in this article, to compel the applicant to file with him a sworn statement
of all moneys collected in the calendar year or the fiscal year of such organization, society,
association or corporation previous to the application, the expenditures connected therewith,
together with the names and addresses of all persons receiving wages, commissions or
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 184/441
B.
(1)
(2)
(3)
C.
A.
B.
(1)
(2)
C.
emoluments and the amount so expended. The Mayor may establish such regulations as he may
deem necessary in effectuating the purposes and objects of this article.
Labelling. Licensees operating under this article shall be compelled to label all collection boxes or
containers used in the solicitation of funds either by appeal in person or the placing of receptacles
for the receipt of such public contribution in stores, factories, shops, offices, theaters, hotels,
restaurants, railway stations or other public places with the name of the organization for which the
permit is issued and in such conspicuous manner as the Mayor may direct.
Limitations on soliciting.
No person, organization, society, association or corporation or their agents or representatives
shall solicit donations of money or property by house-to-house canvass except during the
hours of 9:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m.
No person, organization, society, association or corporation or their agents or representatives
shall solicit donations of money or property by house-to-house canvass in excess of one time
per year.
No person, organization, society, association or corporation or their agents or representatives
shall solicit donations of money or property by house-to-house canvass by disturbing the
residents through repeated ringing of door bells or knocking on doors.
§ 250-6. Exceptions.
The provisions of this article shall not apply to any corporation organized under the Religious
Corporations Law; nor to solicitation at the regular exercises or services of any lodge, benevolent order
or fraternity, or any branch thereof, whenever such solicitation is made at the regularly appointed
meetings and regular places of worship or exercises of such lodge, order or fraternity.
Article III. Hawkers and Peddlers
[Adopted 2-22-1971 by L.L. No. 1-1971 as Ch. 72, Art. III, of the 1971 Code]
§ 250-7. License required; limitation.
[Amended 12-16-1974 by L.L. No. 7-1974]
No person shall engage in the business of hawking or peddling in the Village without first obtaining
an annual license therefor.
No license shall be issued pursuant to this article to any automotive vehicle vending merchandise
unless such vehicle shall be equipped with emergency flashing lights in good operating condition.
Any license issued pursuant to Subsection B hereof shall contain the following conditions:
Such vehicle will not stop to vend merchandise unless the emergency flashing lights have first
been turned on and are working.
Such vehicle will not stop to vend merchandise at any place on any public street within 1,000
feet of any school within the Village between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. during that
part of the year when school is in session. A violation of the conditions herein set forth shall
be grounds for revocation of the license.
§ 250-8. Definitions.
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 185/441
A.
B.
C.
For the purpose of this article, the terms used herein are defined as follows:
HAWKER or PEDDLER
Any person traveling by foot, wagon, automotive vehicle or other conveyance from street to street,
from house to house or from place to place, carrying or transporting goods, wares, merchandise,
and offering the same for sale; except one engaged in the peddling of meats, fish, fruit and farm
produce by farmers and persons who produce such commodities.
§ 250-9. Exceptions.
Nothing herein contained shall prohibit hawking or peddling by an honorably discharged soldier, sailor
or marine who is crippled as a result of injuries while in the naval or military service of the United
States, or the holder of a license granted pursuant to Section 32 of the General Business Law.
§ 250-10. Fees.
[Amended 12-4-1972]
A separate license will be required for each individual acting as a hawker or peddler and for each
motor vehicle or conveyance used by the licensee hereunder.
Prior to the issuance of any license, such licensee shall furnish proof of the existence and the
continued maintenance during the term of the license of liability insurance covering personal injury
and property damage in such amounts as may be required from time to time by resolution of the
Board of Trustees of the Village of Rockville Centre.
The fee for the license required by the provisions of this article shall be at the levels fixed from
time to time by resolution of the Board of Trustees of the Village of Rockville Centre.
Article IV. Solicitation by Police Department
Adopted 3-5-1979 by L.L. No. 2-1979
§ 250-11. Definitions.
The following words and phrases as used in this article shall have the following meanings, unless a
different meaning is required by context:
BENEVOLENT ASSOCIATION
The Police Benevolent Association which represents, for collective bargaining purposes, the
employees of the Police Department of the Village and shall include the officers of such
association.
CHARITABLE PURPOSES
Any benevolent, philanthropic, civic, patriotic or eleemosynary purpose.
COMMERCIAL COVENTURER
Any person who, whether or not for profit or other commercial consideration, shall conduct,
promote, underwrite, arrange or sponsor a sale, performance or event of any kind which is
advertised as benefiting, to any extent, the charitable purpose of any organization representing the
employees of the Police Department of the Village.
CONTRIBUTION
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 186/441
A.
B.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
A.
The promise or grant of any moneys or property of any kind or value, except payments by
members of any organization for membership fees, fines or assessments or for services rendered
to individual members if membership in such organization confers a bona fide right, privilege,
standing, honor or direct benefit, other than the right to vote, elect officers or hold offices.
PERSON
Any individual, organization, group, association, partnership, corporation or any combination of
them.
PROFESSIONAL FUND RAISER
Any person who, whether for or not for compensation or other consideration, plans, conducts,
manages or carries on any drive or campaign in this Village for the purpose of soliciting
contributions from persons residing in or from persons, firms or corporations owning real property
or conducting business within the Village for or on behalf of any charitable purposes of a
benevolent association, whether or not such person engages in the business of or holds himself
out to persons as regularly or independently engaged in the business of soliciting contributions for
such purposes.
PROFESSIONAL SOLICITOR
Any person who is employed or retained, whether for or not for compensation, to solicit
contributions for charitable purposes from persons residing in or from persons, firms or
corporations owning real property or conducting business within the Village.
§ 250-12. Prohibited acts.
No member of the Police Department of the Village and no benevolent association shall:
Seek or solicit or authorize or permit any person or entity on its behalf to seek or solicit
contributions of any kind from any resident of or from the owner of any real property located within
the Village or from any person, firm or corporation conducting business within the Village by any
means under any circumstances, including collection for charitable purposes; provided, however,
that if any such solicitation is for charitable purposes, then any such solicitation may be authorized
by resolution of the Board of Trustees, subject to the terms and conditions of this article.
Utilize or permit the utilization of any moneys or contributions stemming from solicitation for
charitable purposes to be used for any other purpose; provided, however, that use of any part of
the funds collected to reimburse the benevolent association for the actual costs of such solicitation
shall not be deemed to be a violation of this section.
§ 250-13. Registration.
A benevolent association which intends to solicit contributions from any resident of or from the
owner of any real property located within the Village or from any person, firm or corporation
conducting business within the Village by any means whatsoever shall, prior to any such
solicitation, file with the Village Clerk, on forms prescribed by it, the following information:
The name of the organization and the name or names under which it intends to solicit
contributions.
The names and addresses of the officers, directors and executive personnel of the
organization.
The address of the organization or, if it does not maintain an office, the name and address of
the person or persons having custody of its financial records.
The tax exempt status of the organization.
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 187/441
(5)
(6)
(7)
B.
C.
D.
E.
A.
B.
C.
D.
The purpose or purposes for which the contributions to be solicited will be used.
The date upon which the fiscal year of the organization ends.
The names and addresses of any professional fund raiser or commercial coventurer who is
acting or has agreed to act on behalf of the organization and the terms and consideration
upon which such professional fund raiser and commercial coventurer have been retained.
The registration form shall be signed by the president or other officer and the chief fiscal officer of
the organization.
Such registration shall remain in effect until it is canceled as provided herein or withdrawn by the
organization.
Every registered organization shall notify the Village Clerk, within 10 days, of any change in the
information required to be furnished by such organization under Subsection A(1) through (7)
above.
In no event shall a registration of any such organization continue or be continued in effect after the
date such organization should have filed but failed to file an annual report in accordance with
§ 250-14 of this article, and such organization shall not be eligible to file a new registration until it
has filed the required annual report with the Village Clerk.
§ 250-14. Proof of registration; books and records.
Registration and bond. Any person who has registered pursuant to the provisions of Article 7-A of
the Executive Law shall file proof of such registration with the Village Clerk 10 days prior to the
commencement of any solicitation within the Village.
Books and records. Any books and records required to be kept by Article 7-A of the Executive Law
shall be made available to the Village Clerk within 15 days following his request therefor.
Books and records of benevolent associations. A benevolent association receiving funds for
charitable purposes as a result of any such solicitation shall maintain books and records showing
the amount of such funds received and the disposition of such funds and shall file with the Village
Clerk, on or before the 15th day of March of each year, a certified report showing the amounts
received and the disposition of funds.
Any failure to comply with the requirements of this section will be grounds for the revocation by the
Village Clerk of permission to solicit funds pursuant to the provisions of this article.
§ 250-15. Penalties for offenses.
If there is a violation of this article by any member of the Police Department or by a benevolent
association, then charges in connection therewith shall be heard and determined by the Board of
Trustees in the manner provided by the rules and regulations of the Police Department and by § 8-804
of the Village Law, and punishment consistent with the provisions thereof may be imposed by the
Board of Trustees.
Chapter 253. Pesticides
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Trustees of the Village of Rockville Centre 2-22-1971 by L.L. No.
1-1971 as Ch. 95 of the 1971 Code. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 188/441
Landscapers and gardeners — See Ch. 219.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 261.
Smoke emission — See Ch. 276.
Trees, shrubs and hedges — See Ch. 303.
Signs and posting bills — See Ch. 335.
§ 253-1. Finding and purpose.
While the value of pesticides in controlling undesirable insects, fungi and rodents has been well
established, the widespread and sometimes indiscriminate use of pesticides, especially those
pesticides which do not degrade rapidly after use, has resulted in serious problems by disrupting the
ecological balance, by causing permanent injury or death to fish and wildlife, and by posing potential
threats to the health and welfare of the people. It is necessary, therefore, in order to protect the health,
safety and welfare of the residents of the Village of Rockville Centre, to find a solution to such
problems. It is the purpose of this chapter to control the buildup of pesticide residues in the
environment, in fish and wildlife and in man, and to foster and stimulate use of those pesticides that will
break down most rapidly in the air, soil and water.
§ 253-2. Prohibition.
No person, firm or corporation shall spray with, or apply to, or put on the ground within the Village of
Rockville Centre any of the following chemicals: dieldrin, aldrin and dichlorodiphenyltrichloethane
(DDT), or any combination of chemicals which includes any of the above-listed chemicals; provided,
however, that such prohibition shall not be applicable to the use of any such chemicals within a
structure or building under such conditions as to prevent the escape thereof from the confines of the
structure or building, and for the control of termites if such chemicals are injected into the ground at a
distance not more than one foot from the permanent exterior foundation of the structure or building and
to a depth of not less than one foot nor more than four feet from the surface of the ground at the point
of injection.
§ 253-3. Posting of signs.
No person, firm or corporation operating a wholesale or retail establishment within the confines of the
Incorporated Village of Rockville Centre shall sell, or permit the sale of, the chemicals listed in § 253-2
hereof unless it shall prominently display, at a place near the point where such sale is consummated, a
sign not less than one feet by three feet in size, containing lettering not less than 3/4 of an inch,
stating: "The application or spraying of dieldrin, aldrin and dichlorodiphenyltrichloetbane (DDT), or any
combination of chemicals which includes any of the above-listed chemicals, within the Incorporated
Village of Rockville Centre is prohibited by Chapter 253, Pesticides, of the Code of the Village of
Rockville Centre."
§ 253-4. Penalties for offenses.
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be punishable by a fine not to
exceed $250 and, in addition thereto, such violation shall constitute and is hereby declared to be
disorderly conduct, and any person violating the same shall be and is hereby declared to be a
disorderly person.
§ 253-5. Effective date.
This chapter shall take effect December 1, 1970.
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 189/441
A.
B.
Chapter 256. Plumbing
[For State Plumbing Standards of the State Building Construction Code adopted 9-12-1962, see Ch.
112, Building Code.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Dangerous and unsafe buildings — See Ch. 122.
Fire prevention and control — See Ch. 185.
Gasoline sale and service stations — See Ch. 204.
Lodging and boarding houses — 225.
Swimming pools — See Ch. 291.
Electric and water utilities — See Ch. 306.
Washing machines — See Ch. 315.
Unlawful use of water — See Ch. 318, Art. I.
Zoning — See Ch. 340.
Chapter 261. Property Maintenance
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Trustees of the Village of Rockville Centre 10-23-1978 by L.L. No.
8-1978. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Awnings — See Ch. 96.
Building Code — See Ch. 112.
Emergency lighting in residential structures — See Ch. 115, Art. II.
Dangerous and unsafe buildings — See Ch. 122.
Numbering of buildings — See Ch. 129.
Rehabilitation of buildings — See Ch. 132.
Fire escapes — See Ch. 181.
Fire prevention and control — See Ch. 185.
Junk and secondhand dealers — See Ch. 215.
Pesticides — See Ch. 261.
Solid waste — See Ch. 283.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 287.
Trees, shrubs and hedges — See Ch. 303.
Signs and posting bills — See Ch. 335.
§ 261-1. Legislative intent.
The unsheltered storage of old, unused, stripped, abandoned, junked, discarded and other
automobiles not in good, safe operating condition and of any other vehicle whether or not the
same may be licensed or subject to licensing, hereinafter called "vehicle" or "vehicles," and of
other items of personal property, such as machines, implements and/or equipment, and other
items having little or no value, such as lumber, junk, trash, debris, or abandoned, discarded or
unused objects or equipment, such as furniture, stoves, refrigerators, freezers, cans or containers
hereinafter called "personal property," and the scattering or keeping of or the storage of the same
over and on premises within the Village of Rockville Centre is detrimental to the health, safety,
general welfare and property values of the community and constitutes a detriment to the clean,
wholesome, safe and attractive environment that is important to the community. Further, the
growth of brush, grass, rubbish or weeds, including the growth of poisonous shrubs or weeds, on
land is also detrimental to the health, safety, general welfare and property values of the community
and constitutes a detriment to the clean, wholesome, safe and attractive environment that is
important to the community.
The outdoor or unsheltered storage of such vehicles or personal property or the permitting of such
vehicles or personal property to remain on unsheltered portions of premises or of building
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 190/441
A.
B.
C.
(1)
(2)
(3)
A.
exteriors or the permitting of the growth of brush, grass, rubbish or weeds, including the growth of
poisonous shrubs or weeds, on premises within the Village of Rockville Centre in such a manner
as to be readily visible from any public place or from any surrounding private property is
dangerous to the public safety and contrary to the public health, safety and welfare of the
community and is hereby declared to be a nuisance.
§ 261-2. Maintenance of private property.
No person owning, leasing, occupying or having charge of any premises shall maintain or keep any
nuisance thereon, nor shall any such person keep or maintain such premises in a manner causing
substantial diminution in the value of the other property in the neighborhood in which such premises
are located.
§ 261-3. Continuation of nuisances prohibited.
No person in charge of or in control of premises, whether as owner, lessee, tenant, occupant or
otherwise, shall allow any vehicle or vehicles or items of personal property to remain on such property
for a period longer than five days, nor shall such person permit the continued growth of brush, grass,
rubbish or weeds, including the growth of poisonous shrubs or weeds, for a period longer than 10 days
following the giving of notice to cut, trim or remove the same from the land by a public servant
authorized to give notice pursuant to the provisions of the Code of the Village of Rockville Centre.
§ 261-4. Abatement of nuisances.
Any person in charge or control of premises, whether as owner, tenant, lessee, occupant or
otherwise, shall abate such nuisance by the prompt removal of said vehicle or vehicles or items of
personal property into completely enclosed buildings authorized to be used for such storage
purposes if within the corporate limits of the Village or otherwise to remove it to a location outside
the limits of the Village.
Any person in charge or control of premises, whether as owner, tenant, lessee, occupant or
otherwise, who has been given notice pursuant to the provisions of § 261-3 hereof to cut, trim or
remove from the premises brush, grass, rubbish or weeds, including the growth of poisonous
shrubs or weeds, shall do so within the ten-day time limit specified in such notice and by the
provisions of § 261-3 hereof.
If the premises are vacant, the provisions of this chapter shall be applicable to the owner, or, if
they are occupied by any person, firm or corporation other than the owner, the provisions of this
chapter shall be applicable to both the owner and to the person, firm or corporation in charge of or
in control of the premises.
§ 261-5. Nonapplicability of provisions.
The provisions of this chapter shall not be applicable to:
Premises licensed for the storage of such vehicle or vehicles or items of personal property.
The storage of such vehicle or vehicles or items of personal property within completely
enclosed buildings on the premises, provided that the vehicle or vehicles or items of personal
property are owned by the owner, tenant, lessee or other occupant of the premises.
The premises of a business enterprise operated in a lawful place, other than a residential
district, and operated in a lawful manner, when the keeping or maintenance of such vehicle or
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 191/441
B.
A.
B.
A.
B.
personal property is necessary to the operation of such business enterprise.
The provisions of this section shall not be applicable in any instance in which a notice has been
given to cut, trim or remove brush, grass, rubbish or weeds, including the growth of poisonous
shrubs or weeds.
§ 261-6. Penalties for offenses.
If such owner, tenant, lessee or occupant of premises allows such nuisance to exist for a period in
excess of five days or, in any instance in which a notice has been given to cut, trim or remove brush,
grass, rubbish or weeds, including the growth of poisonous shrubs or weeds, within the applicable time
limits, fails to abate such nuisance upon expiration of such time, they and each of them, upon
conviction thereof, shall be fined not less than $25 nor more than $50 for each offense, and a separate
offense shall be deemed commenced for each day on which such nuisance is permitted to exist
beyond the periods set forth in § 261-3 hereof.
§ 261-7. Failure of owner to remove nuisance; abatement by
Village.
Whenever the owner, tenant, lessee or other occupant of the premises fails to abate the nuisance,
the Village may serve written notice upon such owner, tenant, lessee or other occupant of the
premises ordering that said nuisance be abated by removing such vehicle or vehicles or items of
personal property within five days of the date of such service of notice, and upon the expiration of
such five-day period, the Village shall remove or cause to be removed such vehicle or vehicles or
items of personal property to a location of its selection, and the expense therefor shall be billed to
the owner of the premises as well as to the tenant, lessee or other occupant thereof.
The imposition of the penalty provided for in § 261-6 hereof shall not preclude the Village from
abating the nuisance as provided for herein; provided, however, that the provisions of Subsection
A shall not be deemed to require the giving of additional notice to any person in charge of or in
control of premises who has been given notice pursuant to the provisions of § 261-3 hereof to cut,
trim or remove brush, grass, rubbish or weeds, including the growth of poisonous shrubs or
weeds.
§ 261-8. Contents and service of notice.
The notice provided for in §§ 261-3 and 261-7 hereof shall contain the name of the owner of the
premises and of the tenant, lessee or other occupant of the premises if the same is known; a
description of the premises, either by street address or section, block and lot number as shown on
the Tax Map of the Village; and a statement, as the case may be, of the general location of the
vehicle or vehicles and/or items of personal property and/or the continued growth of brush, grass,
rubbish or weeds, including the growth of poisonous shrubs or weeds, and that the failure to cut,
trim or remove the same within the period specified in said notice is a violation of this chapter, the
number of which shall be specified in said notice.
Service, either personally or by registered mail, return receipt requested, upon the person, firm or
corporation shown to be the owner of the premises on the tax rolls regularly maintained by the
Village shall be deemed to be service on the owner. If service is made upon the tenant, lessee or
other occupant of the premises and the name of such tenant, lessee or occupant is not known,
then the notice may be addressed "Tenant, Lessee or Occupant" and mailed to the premises, and
a copy of such notice shall be posted conspicuously on the premises.
§ 261-9. Hearing.
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 192/441
A.
B.
If a notice, as provided in § 261-3 or 261-7 hereof, shall be given to the owner, tenant, lessee or
other occupant of the premises, then such owner, tenant, lessee or other occupant shall have the
right to demand a hearing in the Village Court to determine whether or not the allegations in said
notice are factual and are, in fact, a nuisance within the meaning of this chapter, and such hearing
shall be had within 10 days following the filing of such demand; provided, however, that if there
had been a prior conviction and penalties imposed under the provisions of § 261-6 hereof, such
prior conviction shall be a conclusive determination that the nuisance does exist. If a demand for
hearing is made, such demand must be filed with the Court Clerk of the Village Court no later than
five days following the service of the notice referred to in §§ 261-7 and 261-8 hereof, and the time
within which such hearing must be held will commence to begin upon the filing of such demand.
If, pursuant to § 261-7A of this chapter, the Village shall have removed the vehicle or vehicles or
the other items of personal property or shall have cut, trimmed or removed the brush, grass,
rubbish or weeds, including the growth of poisonous shrubs or weeds, from the premises and a bill
therefor is sent to the owner, tenant, lessee or other occupant thereof, the recipient or recipients of
such bill shall have the right to a hearing before the Board of Trustees of the Village to determine
the reasonableness of such bill. Following such hearing, the reasonable expenses of the removal
of such vehicle, vehicles or items of personal property shall be recoverable either by a suit at law if
so ordered by the Board of Trustees or by assessment against the real property, and such
assessment shall constitute a lien and charge upon the real property by inclusion on the next
ensuing tax bill rendered to the owner of the property and recovered in the same manner as taxes
are recovered if so ordered by the Board of Trustees.
§ 261-10. Effective date.
This chapter shall take effect on December 1, 1978.
Chapter 262. Public Assembly Places, Licensing of
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Trustees of the Village of Rockville Centre 6-17-2008 by L.L. No.
7-2008. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Amusement and gaming devices — See Ch. 84.
Bowling alleys and pool halls — See Ch. 105.
Entertainment — See Ch. 163.
Fire escapes — See Ch. 181.
Fire prevention and control — See Ch. 185.
Food and drink dispensers — See Ch. 191.
Licenses — See Ch. 222.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 247.
§ 262-1. Construction of provisions.
This chapter is to be used to supplement existing laws, and nothing herein shall be construed as
rendering existing laws invalid or inapplicable. Wherever a conflict exists between a provision herein
and any other law, this chapter shall prevail, except that if the other law contains or imposes a more
stringent requirement the other law shall prevail.
§ 262-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter and unless the context clearly indicates otherwise, the following terms shall
have the meanings indicated:
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 193/441
A.
B.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
A.
B.
OCCUPANCY LOAD
The maximum number of people, as calculated in accordance with the New York State Fire
Prevention and Building Code, that can occupy a building or structure or portion thereof or any
space of enclosure, whether indoor or outdoor.
PLACE OF PUBLIC ASSEMBLY
A building or other structure or portion thereof or any space or enclosure, whether indoor or
outdoor, used primarily for gathering together an occupant load of 50 or more persons for
amusement, dining, dancing, drinking, entertainment, exhibition, performance, recreational, social
or similar purposes, the entire fire area of which it is a part, and the means of egress therefrom.
§ 262-3. License required; nontransferability.
It shall be unlawful for any one or more persons or entities to:
Own or operate a place of public assembly without a license as a place of public assembly or at
any time such license is not in good standing. Every license issued pursuant to this chapter shall
be specific to the premises and to the owner, and, if any, to the tenant managing or operating the
business located on the premises, and such licenses shall not be transferable or assignable; or
Make alterations to the layout of any place of public assembly without first filing a revised set of
floor plans and obtaining a new license.
§ 262-4. Application.
An application for a license for a place of public assembly, in order to be considered complete, shall
include all of the documentation listed below:
An application on such forms as shall be prescribed by the Superintendent of Buildings, which
forms shall require, at a minimum, the following information:
The name and address of the applicant for the license.
The name and address (business and residence) of the owner of the premises, and the name
and address (business and residence) of at least one individual within Nassau County who is
authorized to accept service on behalf of the owner.
If the premises is leased, the names and addresses (business and residence) of all lessees,
sublessees, assignees and tenants, and the name and address (business and residence) of
at least one individual within the Village of Nassau County who is authorized to accept service
on behalf of the lessee, sublessee, assignee or tenant.
The name and address (business and residence) of at least one individual who manages or is
generally in charge of the premises during the hours that the premises is open for business or
otherwise functioning as a place of public assembly.
A statement as to the primary use of the premises, i.e., bar, restaurant, theater.
A set of floor plans, drawn to scale, of the furniture, equipment and interior partitions on the
premises, including any outdoor areas of use. The plans shall be retained on file with the
Village Superintendent of Buildings.
A valid certificate of occupancy for all buildings, structures and uses on the property.
Such other information as the Superintendent of Buildings may reasonably require to assist in
making any determination pursuant to this chapter.
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 194/441
A.
B.
C.
(1)
(2)
D.
E.
F.
A.
B.
C.
§ 262-5. Application procedure; issuance of license.
All applications for a license for a place of public assembly shall be submitted in duplicate to the
Superintendent of Buildings and shall be accompanied by payment of the required fee as
established by resolution of the Board of Trustees.
The Superintendent of Buildings shall determine if the application is complete. If it is complete, the
Superintendent of Buildings shall make a determination of the applicable occupancy rating after an
on-site inspection to confirm the accuracy of the floor plan.
If the application is incomplete, the Superintendent of Buildings shall notify the applicant as to the
specific information or documentation required to complete the application and that the applicant
has 30 days from the date of the notice to submit the additional information.
The Superintendent of Buildings shall deny the application and notify the applicant, in writing, of
the reason for the denial if:
The applicant fails to submit the additional information requested within 30 days of the
issuance of a notice of incomplete application;
The Superintendent of Buildings determines that the intended or actual use of the premises is
inconsistent with the uses permitted under the certificate of occupancy.
The Mayor shall issue a license upon a determination by the Superintendent of Buildings that the
application is complete and that the intended or actual use of the premises is consistent with the
uses permitted pursuant to the certificate of occupancy issued for the premises and the
occupancy. The Mayor may delegate such authority to the Superintendent of Buildings.
In granting any license pursuant to this chapter, the issuing authority may impose reasonable
conditions to protect the public health, safety and general welfare.
§ 262-6. Term of license.
All licenses for a place of public assembly shall expire on December 31 in the year for which they are
issued.
§ 262-7. Remedies.
In any instance where the applicant alleges that the Superintendent of Buildings erroneously
denied an application on the basis that the application was incomplete, the applicant may appeal
that denial to the Board of Trustees in writing within 15 days after such denial.
In any instance where the applicant alleges that the Superintendent of Buildings erroneously
denied an application on the basis that the proposed use of the premises was inconsistent with the
uses permitted under the certificate of occupancy issued therefor, the applicant may appeal that
denial to the Board of Appeals in accordance with customary procedures for appeals to that
Board.
In any instance when a licensee alleges that conditions were improperly imposed in the granting of
a license pursuant to this chapter, the licensee may appeal the imposition of such conditions to the
Board of Trustees in writing within 30 days after the imposition of such conditions.
§ 262-8. Posting of license.
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 195/441
A.
B.
A.
B.
Each license issued hereunder shall be kept conspicuously posted at the main entrance of every place
licensed hereunder. It shall be unlawful to remove, deface or alter such license.
§ 262-9. Suspension or revocation.
In addition to the penalties provided in this Code, a license for a place of public assembly may be
suspended or revoked before the expiration of its term upon a written report and recommendation
by the Superintendent of Buildings and a determination by the Board of Trustees, after a hearing
for which the licensee has had has received at least 10 days' written notice and at which the
licensee has had an opportunity to be heard, that the provisions of this chapter have been violated
or that a material false statement was made in the application for a license.
Where the Superintendent of Buildings determines that the continued operation of a place of
public assembly in violation of the provisions of this chapter would be detrimental to public safety,
the Superintendent of Buildings may suspend such license pending the outcome of the
suspension or revocation hearing provided in this section, provided that the Superintendent of
Buildings has given written notice of such proposed action to the licensee or the licensee's
authorized agent, and the licensee has had a reasonable opportunity to be heard before the
Superintendent of Buildings.
Chapter 263. Public Nuisances
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Trustees of the Village of Rockville Centre 10-16-2007 by L.L. No.
7-2007. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building code administration — See Ch. 115.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 247.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 261.
§ 263-1. Purpose and intent.
The Board of Trustees of the Village of Rockville Centre hereby finds and concludes that it is
necessary and appropriate for the Village to enact legislation which would facilitate and encourage the
discontinuance of public nuisances. Existing provisions of law are found to be inadequate for this
purpose, and this chapter is intended to provide the Village with necessary law enforcement tools to
accomplish the goal of abating and eliminating the public nuisances described in this legislation.
§ 263-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise, the following terms shall have
the meanings indicated:
PUBLIC NUISANCE
Includes, but shall not be limited to:
Any building, structure or real property used for the purpose of illegal use, possession or
distribution of a controlled substance or marihuana (marijuana) as defined by the New York
State Penal Law;
Any building, structure or real property used for the purposes of prostitution as defined by the
New York State Penal Law;
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 196/441
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
I.
J.
Any building, structure or real property used for purposes of indecency, obscene
performances and/or promotion of obscene material as defined by the New York State Penal
Law and/or this Code;
Any building, structure or real property used for purposes of illegal gambling activity as
defined in the New York State Penal Law;
Any building, structure or real property used for the purpose of the commission of illegal
possession, use or sale of firearms or weapons as defined by the New York State Penal Law;
Any building, structure or real property used for the purpose of illegal sale, manufacture or
consumption of alcohol beverages as defined by the New York State Alcohol Beverage
Control Law;
Any building, structure or real property wherein there exists or has occurred a criminal
nuisance as defined by the New York State Penal Law;
Any building, structure or real property used for purposes of loitering as defined by the New
York State Penal Law;
Any building, structure or real property wherein there exists or has occurred, within a period of
six months, three or more violations of this Code or the New York State Uniform Fire
Prevention and Building Code, or the Property Maintenance Code of New York State, and any
subsequent amendments or superseding provisions thereto, and which violations have not
been cured within 30 days after notice thereof; or
Any building, structure or real property wherein an owner, occupant, guest or business invitee
commits criminal activities involving assault, gang assault, harassment or disorderly conduct,
as said criminal activities are defined by the New York State Penal Law.
§ 263-3. Public nuisances prohibited.
No owner, operator, manager, tenant, lessee or other occupier or user of a building, structure or real
property shall knowingly conduct, maintain, permit or allow the existence of a public nuisance at the
building, structure or real property.
§ 263-4. Presumption of knowledge.
Written notice given by first-class mail or by personal delivery to the property owner, operator,
manager, tenant, lessee or to any other occupier of a building, structure or real property, or any portion
thereof, giving notice of activities entailing a public nuisance at such building, structure or property or
portion thereof, shall be prima facie evidence of knowledge of the public nuisance.
§ 263-5. Criminal convictions as presumption of public nuisance.
The existence of two or more criminal convictions for any of the activities set forth in the definition of a
public nuisance in this chapter at any building, structure or real property within a two-year period prior
to the commencement of a civil action and/or an administrative hearing pursuant to this chapter shall
be prima facie evidence of the existence of a public nuisance. For the purposes of this section, a
"criminal conviction" shall be defined as the entry of a plea of guilty to and/or a verdict of guilty with
respect to one or more counts set forth in an accusatory instrument.
§ 263-6. Prohibited conduct as presumption of public nuisance.
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 197/441
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
The occurrence of two or more separate incidents of one or more of the following activities at any
building, structure or real property within a one-year period prior to the commencement of a civil action
and/or an administrative hearing also shall be prima facie evidence of the existence of a public
nuisance at such building, structure or real property:
Conviction for any of the activities set forth in the definition of a public nuisance in this chapter
occurring on or within 100 feet of the property;
Arrest for any of the activities set forth in the definition of a public nuisance in this chapter
occurring on or within 100 feet of the property;
Issuance or service of an accusatory instrument charging any of the activities set forth in the
definition of a public nuisance in this chapter occurring on or within 100 feet of the property. For
the purposes of this subsection, an "accusatory instrument" shall include, but not be limited to, any
criminal information, misdemeanor and/or felony complaint filed in a court of competent
jurisdiction, and/or, with regard to unfit, unsafe and/or fire-damaged structures on or near the
property, a notice of violation or order to abate issued by the Village Building Department, Police
Department, or Fire Department and/or other authorized entity with jurisdiction in the Village;
Issuance or service of a search warrant for a building, structure or real property where controlled
substances, marihuana (marijuana), and/or weapons are seized;
Finding of illegal controlled substances or illegal firearms or weapons at the building, structure or
real property; or
Purchases of illegal controlled substances at the building, structure or real property by law
enforcement agencies or their agents.
§ 263-7. Summons and complaint for civil action.
The Mayor may authorize the Village Attorney to bring and maintain a civil action in the name of
the Village to abate a public nuisance.
The summons and complaint in such action may name as defendants the building, structure or
real property by describing it by Tax Map number and/or street address, and also shall name as
defendants at least one of the record owners of some portion of or some interest in the property
where the public nuisance is alleged to have occurred.
The summons and complaint in such action also may name as defendants any owner, operator,
manager, tenant, lessee or other occupier of the building, structure or real property.
The complaint in such action shall allege the facts constituting the public nuisance.
The complaint in such action shall be accompanied by affidavits for purposes of showing that the
owner or the owner's agent had notice of the nuisance and had an opportunity to abate the
nuisance.
In rem jurisdiction over the building, structure or real property may be obtained and completed by
affixing a copy of the summons to the building, structure or real property, and by mailing a copy of
the summons and complaint by certified or registered mail, return receipt requested, to the record
owner(s) of the real property and to each person or entity listed in the Village records as the
person or entity to whom or which tax bills should be sent.
Defendants other than the building, structure or real property shall be served with the summons
and complaint in the manner required by state law.
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 198/441
H.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
A.
B.
C.
With respect to any action commenced or to be commenced pursuant to this chapter, the Village
Attorney may file a notice of pendency as authorized pursuant to state law.
§ 263-8. Civil penalty.
If, upon the trial of an action for a public nuisance or upon a motion for summary judgment, a finding is
made that one or more defendants have conducted, maintained, permitted or allowed a public
nuisance, a penalty may be assessed against such defendant in an amount not to exceed $1,000 for
each day it is found that such defendant conducted, maintained, permitted or allowed the public
nuisance after notice to abate had been given. Upon recovery, such penalty shall be paid into the
Village general fund.
§ 263-9. Permanent injunction.
If, upon the trial of an action for a public nuisance or upon a motion for summary judgment, a
finding is made that one or more defendants have conducted, maintained, permitted or allowed a
public nuisance, a permanent injunction may be granted against such defendants.
Any such permanent injunction may prohibit such defendants from conducting, maintaining,
permitting or allowing the public nuisance, or may include such other relief as the issuing court
may deem appropriate under the circumstances.
Any such permanent injunction also may authorize agents of the Village to remove and correct
any conditions in violation of this Code, and direct that the costs of removing and correcting the
violations, plus an additional charge not to exceed 50% as compensation to the Village for
administering, supervising and handling such work, shall be charged against such property and
defendants and awarded to the Village. The amount so awarded shall constitute a lien against the
real property and shall be collected in the same manner provided by law for the collection of real
property taxes with respect to real property within the Village.
A judgment ordering a permanent injunction also may direct the closing of the building, structure
or real property by the Village Police Department, to the extent necessary to abate the nuisance.
A judgment awarding a permanent injunction also may provide for all costs and disbursements
allowed by state law, and for the actual costs, expenses and disbursements of the Village in
investigating, bringing and maintaining the action.
§ 263-10. Closing of building, structure or real property.
If the judgment in any such action directs the closing of the building, structure or real property,
notice of entry of the judgment shall be given to defendants in the manner required by state law,
and a copy of such judgment shall be posted at one or more of the entrances to the building,
structure or real property or in another conspicuous place on the building, structure or real
property.
In addition, a printed notice shall be affixed to one or more of the doors at entrances of the
building, structure or real property or in another conspicuous place on the building, structure or
real property, stating "CLOSED BY COURT ORDER" in block lettering of sufficient size to be
observed by anyone intending to enter the premises.
Mutilation or removal of such posted judgment or notice while it remains in force will be considered
a separate violation of this Code and shall be punishable pursuant to § 1-2 of the Village Code.
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 199/441
D.
E.
F.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
On or after the posting of such judgment and/or notice, the Village Police Department may
command any and all persons present in the building, structure or real property, or any portion
thereof, which has been determined to be a public nuisance to vacate such property or portion
thereof forthwith and may secure the said premises after it is vacated.
The closing of a building, structure or property, or portion thereof, as directed by the judgment
shall be for such period as the court may direct, but in no event shall the closing be for a period of
more than one year from the posting of the judgment.
A closing of a building, structure or premises, or any part thereof, pursuant to any such judgment
shall not constitute an act of possession, ownership or control by the Village.
§ 263-11. Preliminary injunction.
A preliminary injunction enjoining the public nuisance may be granted in such action pursuant to state
law.
§ 263-12. Temporary restraining order.
A temporary restraining order may be granted in such action, without notice to defendants, pursuant to
state law.
§ 263-13. Administrative hearing.
Whenever there is prima facie evidence of a public nuisance at any building, structure or real property
within the Village, the Village Attorney may initiate an administrative hearing pursuant to this section.
Notice of such hearing shall be served on all record owners of the building, structure or real
property, and may also be served on any known tenants or lessees or other occupiers of the
building, in any manner authorized for the service of a summons in a civil action.
The notice of hearing shall allege facts constituting a public nuisance and shall identify the time
and place when and where a hearing will be held before a hearing panel appointed pursuant to
this section.
The hearing panel shall consist of one member appointed by the Superintendent of the Building
Department, one member appointed by the Police Commissioner and one member appointed by
the Village Administrator. No person appointed as a member of the hearing panel may be an
elected official of the Village.
The hearing shall commence at the time and place designated in the notice. The Village Attorney
or his/her designee shall present relevant evidence and/or witnesses demonstrating the existence
of a public nuisance at the building, structure or real property and as to appropriate remedies. The
owners of the building, structure or real property, or their representatives, shall have the right to
examine such evidence and cross-examine any witnesses presented by the Village Attorney or
his/her designee. The owners of the building, structure or real property, or their representatives,
may present any relevant evidence and/or witnesses in their defense, and the Village Attorney, or
his/her designee, shall have the right to examine such evidence and cross-examine any witnesses
presented by the owners of the building, structure or real property, or their representatives.
Within five business days after the conclusion of the hearing, the hearing panel shall provide
findings of fact to the Board of Trustees. The findings of fact shall state whether there is a prima
facie evidence of the existence of a public nuisance at the building, structure or real property. In
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 200/441
(1)
(2)
(3)
A.
B.
C.
(1)
A.
the event there is a finding of such prima facie evidence, the hearing panel also shall provide a
written recommendation of remedies to abate the public nuisance.
§ 263-14. Administrative remedies.
Upon receipt of a finding from the hearing panel concluding that there is prima facie evidence that
a public nuisance exists, and a recommendation of remedies, the Board of Trustees shall consider
the same at a public meeting, at which the owners of the building, structure or real property, or
their representatives shall have the right to be heard, but not to present additional evidence. Upon
the conclusion of such consideration, the Board of Trustees may:
Issue a decision and order suspending or revoking the certificate of occupancy for a building,
structure or property, or portion thereof, for a period of time not to exceed one year;
Issue a decision and order directing the closing of the building, structure or real property to
the extent necessary to abate the nuisance, pursuant to the procedures set forth in this
chapter; and/or
Issue a decision and order that various measures be taken by the owner, tenant and/or lessee
of the property to the extent necessary to both abate the existing nuisance and ensure the
prevention of future nuisance actions from occurring at or near the property, which shall
include, but not be limited to: requiring the owner to modify and improve the usage and
features of the premises to deter further and future public nuisance activity; mandating
compliance with all applicable building, housing and property maintenance codes and
regulations pursuant to this Code and/or state law; and/or directing subsequent purchasers to
comply with the provisions of any issued order of revocation or suspension for the certificate
of occupancy unless or until the subsequent purchaser appears before the Board of Trustees
to provide an appropriate plan for the panel to review and make recommendations, wherein
said plan will set forth measures to avoid further incidents of public nuisance.
The decision and order shall be served upon the owner, tenant and/or lessee of the property in
any manner permitted for service of a summons in a civil action, or by certified mail, return receipt
requested, or by posting in a conspicuous place on the property which is the subject of the
decision and order.
Nothing in this chapter shall limit the authority of the Board of Trustees to take such other or
further actions which it may deem necessary to abate any existing public nuisance to the extent
necessary to ensure the protection of the heath, safety and welfare of the general public.
Chapter 264. Rental Dwelling Registration
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Trustees of the Village of Rockville Centre 3-2-2010 by L.L. No. 3-
2010. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building code — See Ch. 112.
Zoning — See Ch. 340.
§ 264-1. Applicability; terms defined; registration and permit
required.
This chapter shall be applicable to each dwelling unit in the Village, except:
A one-, two- or three-family home where the home or a portion thereof is occupied by the
owner of such home or a member of the family of such owner;
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 201/441
(2)
(3)
[1]
B.
C.
D.
E.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
A.
An individual dwelling unit located in a building or structure containing four or more dwelling
units if such individual dwelling unit is occupied by the owner of the building or structure or a
member of the family of such owner; or
A dwelling unit which is registered with the Village pursuant to the provisions of the New York
State Multiple Dwelling Law or the New York State Multiple Residence Law or registered with
the Village pursuant to any law, rule or regulation in a manner which the Superintendent of the
Building Department deems to be the equivalent of this chapter.
For the purposes of this chapter, the term "family" shall be defined as set forth in the zoning
regulations of the Village,[1] and a condominium unit occupied for residential purposes shall be
deemed to be an individual dwelling unit.
Editor's Note: See Ch. 340, Zoning.
It shall be unlawful for any person or entity who is the owner or who has apparent authority over
any building containing one or more residential dwelling units to which this chapter is applicable to
allow, permit, suffer or cause the occupancy of any such dwelling unit to be occupied as a
residence, with or without payment of rent, by any person other than the owner of such unit or a
member of the family of such owner, without having first registered the dwelling unit and obtained
a rental permit pursuant to this chapter.
It shall be unlawful for any person or entity to occupy as a residence any residential dwelling unit
to which this chapter is applicable, with or without the payment of rent, unless such dwelling unit
has been registered and a rental permit has been issued for such dwelling unit, as required by this
chapter.
It shall be unlawful for any person or entity, acting as broker or agent or other representative, to
list, show or otherwise offer for lease, rent or occupancy any residential dwelling unit to which this
chapter is applicable and for which a current registration has not been made, or a current rental
permit has not been issued, pursuant to this chapter. Each person or entity acting as broker, agent
or other representative for such purpose shall have the duty to verify that the dwelling unit has
been registered, and a permit obtained, as required by this chapter.
§ 264-2. Application for registration and permit.
An application for registration and the permit required by this chapter shall be made, in writing, to
the Superintendent of the Building Department, on a form provided therefor by the Village, shall
contain at least the following information and shall be accompanied by payment of a fee in an
amount determined from time to time by resolution of the Board of Trustees:
The name and address of the applicant and, if different, the name and address of the owner
of the premises where the dwelling unit is located;
The number of dwelling units at the premises and the number of such units proposed to be
occupied by one or more persons or entities other than the owner thereof or a member of the
family of the owner thereof;
Documentation that a valid certificate of occupancy exists with respect to each such dwelling
unit or that no certificate of occupancy is required to permit such dwelling unit to be used for
residential purposes;
The name, address and telephone number of a contact person to be contacted in the event of
an emergency at the premises;
Whether there are any open building permits for the premises where such dwelling unit is
located other than permits for active construction;
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 202/441
(6)
(7)
A.
B.
C.
A.
Such other information as may reasonably be required by the Superintendent of Buildings to
determine whether the dwelling unit(s) may be registered, and a permit issued, pursuant to
this chapter; and
The signature of the owner of the premises and, if the owner is not the applicant, the
signature of the applicant, attesting to the accuracy of the information contained in the
application.
§ 264-3. Duration of registration and permit; duty to keep
information current; renewals.
Rental registrations and permits issued pursuant to this chapter shall be valid for a period of two
years from the date of issuance. In the event any information contained in the registration
application changes during the term of any registration, the registration shall expire unless the
owner files an amendment to the registration application within 30 days of the event which caused
the change of information. A mere change in tenants, without any change in the information
contained in the registration application, shall not cause the expiration of a registration and permit
nor require an amendment to the registration and permit.
An owner or representative of an owner of a rental dwelling unit may apply for renewal of a
registration and permit at any time on or after 60 days prior to the expiration of the registration and
permit. Such renewal application shall be made by completing the same application as required
for an initial registration and shall be accompanied by a renewal fee in an amount established from
time to time by resolution of the Board of Trustees.
The Superintendent of the Building Department shall grant each registration and permit
application, or renewal thereof, which complies with the provisions of this chapter. Notwithstanding
the foregoing, the Superintendent may deny such registration and permit, or renewal thereof,
where there is an existing violation of any provision of the Village Code at such property which is
reasonably related to the safe use and occupancy of the property for residential purposes.
§ 264-4. Late charge for registration, permit or renewal.
In the event any registration and permit, or renewal thereof, is not obtained on or before the
commencement of occupancy of a rental dwelling unit, or such earlier act by any person or entity which
would require registration and a permit for such dwelling unit, a late charge for such registration and
permit, or renewal, shall be paid, in addition to the required registration and permit fee, in an amount
equal to two times the fee, prorated for the length of time of the overdue period.
§ 264-5. Penalties for offenses.
Any person or entity who is convicted of a first violation of any provision of this chapter within a
period of 18 months shall be guilty of an offense and shall be punished by a fine of not more than
$500 or imprisonment for a period not to exceed 15 days, or both such fine and imprisonment. Any
person or entity who is convicted of a second violation of any provision of this chapter within a
period of 18 months shall be guilty of an offense and shall be punished by a fine of not more than
$1,000 or imprisonment for a period not to exceed 15 days, or both such fine and imprisonment.
Any person or entity who is convicted of a third or subsequent violation of any provision of this
chapter within a period of 18 months shall be guilty of an offense and shall be punished by a fine
of not more than $2,500 or imprisonment for a period not to exceed 15 days, or both such fine and
imprisonment.
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 203/441
B.
C.
D.
(1)
(2)
(3)
A.
The failure to register and obtain a permit for each dwelling unit at a premises shall constitute a
separate offense.
Each week in which a violation of this chapter occurs or continues shall constitute a separate
offense.
The Village Attorney is authorized to institute civil litigation to obtain and enforce any available
remedy, including injunctive relief, in the event of any violation of this chapter. In any such
litigation, the court may award the Village its reasonable attorneys' fees and expenses of such
litigation.
§ 264-6. Preservation of existing remedies.
Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to abolish, impair, supersede or replace existing remedies of
the Village, or any other governmental authority, nor any provision of any other law, rule or regulation.
In the case of a conflict between this chapter and any other law, rule or regulation, that which sets the
more stringent requirement shall prevail.
§ 264-7. Application for search warrant.
The Superintendent of the Building Department, or such Superintendent's designated representative,
is authorized to make application to the Village Court or any other court with appropriate jurisdiction for
the issuance of a search warrant in order to conduct an inspection of any premises which is subject to
this chapter, where the owner or occupant of such premises refuses or fails to permit an inspection of
such premises and where there is reasonable cause to believe that a violation of this chapter has
occurred. Such application for a search warrant shall in all respects be made in conformance with, and
shall comply with, the applicable laws of the State of New York and the United States.
§ 264-8. Warrantless inspections and searches prohibited.
Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to authorize the Superintendent of the Building Department, or
the authorized representative of such Superintendent, to conduct an inspection or search of any
premises pursuant to this chapter without the consent of the owner or occupant of the premises or
without a warrant duly issued by an appropriate court, except where such inspection or search may be
permitted by law. Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to limit the authority of the Superintendent of
the Building Department or the authorized representative of such Superintendent, to conduct a search
without a warrant where such search is authorized by law.
§ 264-9. Rented dwelling unit presumptions; exemptions.
The presence or existence of any of the following factors shall create a rebuttable presumption
that a residential dwelling unit is rented:
The unit is occupied by someone other than the owner or a member of the owner's family, and
the owner of the property represents, in writing or otherwise, to any person or entity that such
owner resides at an address other than the rental property;
One or more persons residing in the dwelling unit represents that such person, or one or more
other persons, pay rent to the owner of the premises;
Utilities, cable television, phone or other services are in place or requested to be installed or
used at the premises in the name of someone other than the record owner;
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 204/441
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
(11)
[1]
B.
C.
A sworn statement or testimony by a person having knowledge of the facts that it is common
knowledge in the community that a person other than the record owner or a member of the
family of the record owner resides in the unit;
There is more than one mailbox at the premises;
There is more than one electric, water or gas meter at the premises;
There are separate entrances for distinctly separate portions of the building at the premises;
There are internal partitions or internal doors which may serve to bar access between
separate portions of the dwelling used for residential purposes, including but not limited to
bedrooms;
There exists a written or oral lease or rental arrangement, payment or other agreement for
occupancy of portions of the dwelling among its owner(s) and/or occupants and/or persons in
possession thereof;
One or more occupant of the premises does not have unimpeded and/or lawful access to all
parts of the premises;
There are two or more kitchens at the premises, each containing one or more of the following:
a range, oven, hotplate, microwave or other similar device customarily used for cooking or
preparation of food and/or a refrigerator.
A dwelling unit occupied by an owner of the property, or by one or more persons all of whom are
members of the family of such owner, as the term "family" is defined by the zoning regulations of
the Village,[1] shall be exempt from the provisions of this chapter. However, a dwelling unit
occupied by one or more persons who is not the owner of the premises, nor a member of the
family of such owner as such term is so defined, shall not be exempt from the provisions of this
chapter and shall be presumed to be subject to the registration and permit requirements of this
chapter.
Editor's Note: See Ch. 340, Zoning.
A rental dwelling unit owned or operated by a governmental agency or authority, or a rental
dwelling unit, the use and occupancy of which is licensed or regulated by an agency of the State
of New York, is exempt from the registration and permit requirements of this chapter.
§ 264-10. Severability.
In the event that any provision of this chapter shall be determined by a court of appropriate jurisdiction
to be illegal or otherwise unenforceable, then only that particular provision shall not be enforced, and
all other provisions of this chapter shall remain in full force and effect.
Chapter 265. Sales, Special
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Trustees of the Village of Rockville Centre 2-22-1971 by L.L. No.
1-1971 as Ch. 102 of the 1971 Code]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Auctioneers — See Ch. 90.
Secondhand automobile sales — See Ch. 93.
Businesses — See Ch. 138.
Garage sales — See Ch. 201.
Gasoline sale and service stations — See Ch. 204.
Junk and secondhand dealers — See Ch. 215.
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 205/441
A.
B.
Licenses — See Ch. 222.
Pawnbrokers — See Ch. 244.
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 250.
Merchandise displays on sidewalks — See Ch. 287, Art. V.
Impounding and sale of personal property left on streets — See Ch. 287, Art. XI.
§ 265-1. License required.
No person shall hereafter publish or conduct any sale of the type herein defined without a license
therefor.
§ 265-2. Definition and construction of terms.
The following words and terms, as used in this chapter, shall be deemed to mean and are construed as
follows:
LICENSE
A license issued pursuant to this chapter.
LICENSEE
A person to whom a license has been issued pursuant to this chapter.
PUBLISH, PUBLISHING, ADVERTISEMENT and/or ADVERTISING
Includes any and all means of conveying to the public notice of sale or notice of intention to
conduct a sale, either by word of mouth, by newspaper advertising, by magazine advertising, by
handbills, by written notice, by printed notice and any and all means, including oral, written or
printed.
SALE
The sale of or an offer to sell to the public, goods, wares, and merchandise of any and all kinds
and descriptions, on hand and in stock, in connection with a declared purpose as set forth by
advertisement on part of the seller that such sale is anticipatory to the determinations, closing
liquidation, windup, discontinuance, conclusion or abandonment of the business in connection with
such sale.
It shall also mean sale advertised to be "retirement sale," "forced out of business sale,"
"removal sale," "loss of lease sale" and any and all sales advertised such manner as to
reasonably convey to the public that upon the disposal of the stock of goods on hand, the
business will cease and be discontinued.
The term "sale" shall also include the sale of or offer to sell to the public, goods, wares and
merchandise of any and all kinds and descriptions which are described or referred to by
advertisement on the part of the seller as smoke, fire, water or similarly damaged goods,
wares or merchandise, and which sale is by representation or advertisement intended to lead
the public to believe that the person, firm or corporation conducting such sale is selling such
goods, wares or merchandise for less than the current or retail price thereof. All of the
provisions, requirements and conditions of this chapter relating to sales occasioned by the
intention of discontinuing business shall be equally applicable to any such sale advertised or
conducted as a sale of smoke, fire, water or similarly damaged goods which may be
conducted apart from any intention to discontinue business.
§ 265-3. Application for license; police supervision.
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 206/441
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
A.
B.
A.
B.
The Chief of Police is hereby authorized and empowered to supervise and regulate sales or
special sales defined in § 265-2 of this chapter, and the application therefor shall be made to the
Village Clerk upon forms to be supplied said applicant for that purpose, and shall contain a
statement subscribed to under oath or affirmation by the person, member of the firm, officer of the
corporation applying for such license, which statement shall contain:
A description of the place where such sale is to be held.
The nature of the occupancy, whether by lease or sublease, and the effective date of
termination of such occupancy.
The means to be employed in publishing such sale, together with the proposed language
content in any advertisement.
An itemized list of the goods, wares and merchandise to be offered for sale, the place where
such stock was purchased or acquired, and if not purchased, the manner of such acquisition.
Such application shall contain any additional information as the Village Clerk may require.
§ 265-4. Granting of license; term; renewal.
Upon receipt of such application and payment of the fee hereinafter prescribed, the Chief of Police
shall cause the same to be examined and investigated. If after such investigation the Village Clerk is
satisfied as to the truth of the statement contained in such application as to the form and content in
connection with such sale, he may then issue a license permitting the publication and conduct of such
sale. Such license shall be for a period not exceeding 30 days, excepting that upon satisfactory proof
by the licensee that the stock itemized in the original application has not been disposed of, the Village
Clerk may renew such license for an additional thirty-day period upon payment of the prescribed
renewal fee.
§ 265-5. Suspension or revocation.
The Village Clerk shall have power to suspend or revoke at any time any license granted in
accordance with this chapter.
§ 265-6. Application fee.
[Amended 10-18-1971; 12-4-1972]
The fee for the license and for the original application or a renewal of the application for the
license required by the provisions of this chapter shall be at the levels fixed from time to time by
resolution of the Board of Trustees of the Village of Rockville Centre.
Prior to the issuance of such license, the applicant shall deposit with the Village Clerk a sum equal
to the amount of all billed but unpaid charges for electric services, plus an estimated amount to
secure the payment of charges for electric service during the period of the sale, such deposit to be
returned upon presentation of receipted bills showing the payment of such bills.
§ 265-7. Display of license; inspection of merchandise and
records.
Upon commencement of any sale as hereinbefore defined, the license issued shall be prominently
displayed near the entrance to the premises. Duplicate original of the application and stock list,
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 207/441
A.
B.
C.
A.
pursuant to which such license was issued, shall at all times be available to the Chief of Police or his
representative, and the licensee shall permit an inspection of all merchandise in the premises. Suitable
books and records shall be kept by the licensee and shall at all times be available for inspection. In the
course of business each day, the stock list attached to the application shall be revised and those
disposed of during such day shall be so removed therein and no goods added to said list.
§ 265-8. Exceptions.
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to or affect the following persons:
Persons acting pursuant to an order or process of a court of competent jurisdiction.
Persons acting in accordance with powers and duties as public officers, such as sheriffs and
constables.
Persons conducting bankruptcy sales.
§ 265-9. Penalties for offenses.
Any person violating any provisions of this chapter shall be liable for and pay a penalty or fine not
exceeding $25 for the first offense and not more than $100 for any subsequent offense, and in addition
thereto each of said violators shall constitute and is hereby declared to be disorderly conduct, and any
person violating the same shall be and is hereby declared a disorderly person.
Chapter 268. Security Gates Within Business Districts
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Trustees of the Village of Rockville Centre 2-28-1983 by L.L. No.
4-1983. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alarm systems — See Ch. 81.
Fire escapes — See Ch. 181.
Fire prevention and control — See Ch. 185.
Zoning — See Ch. 340.
§ 268-1. Legislative intent.
[Amended 4-24-1995 by L.L. No. 3-1995]
The Board of Trustees of the Village of Rockville Centre declares and finds it to be in the public interest
to provide for the regulation of the installation and maintenance of security gates within the Village of
Rockville Centre in accordance with the aesthetic character of the area and to preserve safety and
property values throughout the business district of the Village.
§ 268-2. Definitions.
[Amended 4-24-1995 by L.L. No. 4-1995]
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
BUSINESS DISTRICTS
Areas located wholly or partly within the following use districts, as defined in Chapter 340, Zoning,
of this Code:
Business AAA.
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 208/441
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
A.
B.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
A.
Business AA.
Business A.
Business B.
Urban Renewal Commercial or Light Manufacturing A.
Urban Renewal Recreational and Limited Commercial.
SECURITY GATE
A barrier, screen or cover located behind a door, window or other opening used for purposes of
securing premises by preventing access or blocking passage to the interior of the premises but
which enables the viewing of the interior of the premises from outside the premises.
§ 268-3. Applicability; compliance.
[Amended 4-24-1995 by L.L. No. 5-1995]
The provisions of this chapter shall apply only to security gates located behind doors, windows or
other openings facing or fronting on a public road or highway located within a business district.
All security gates which have been installed in accordance with the permit process provided for in
§ 268-5 and which are in existence prior to the date of the adoption of this chapter and which do
not comply with the provisions of said chapter shall be made to comply with the provisions of this
chapter within five years of the date of adoption of this chapter or shall be removed.
§ 268-4. Restrictions.
No solid metal barrier, screen or cover shall be erected or maintained in front of or behind doors,
windows or other openings facing or fronting on a public road or highway located within a business
district. All metal barriers, screens or covers shall be installed only behind doors, windows or other
openings facing or fronting on a public road or highway located within a business district.
[Amended 4-24-1995 by L.L. No. 6-1995]
All security gates shall be of such a type as will not prevent the viewing of the interior of the
premises from outside the premises.
When a security gate is not in use, it shall be removed or stored in such a manner so as not to be
visible from the exterior of the premises.
No security gate shall be placed in such a manner that it blocks any active emergency exit at any
time in which the business is open to the public or to any employees.
[Added 4-24-1995 by L.L. No. 6-1995]
All installations of any security gate must be in accordance with the standards set forth by the New
York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code, as interpreted by the Superintendent,
Department of Buildings.
[Added 4-24-1995 by L.L. No. 6-1995]
§ 268-5. Permit required.
It shall be unlawful for any person to commence work on the erection or alteration of or to erect,
alter or maintain any security gate until a permit has been duly issued upon application therefor.
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 209/441
B.
C.
D.
The Building Department shall require that the application for a permit shall be accompanied by a
set of plans indicating the proposed location and dimensions of said security gate and a
description of the type of said security gate.
No permit shall be issued until the Superintendent, Department of Buildings, examined and
approved, in writing, the proposed security gate as complying with all the provisions of this
chapter.
[Amended 4-24-1995 by L.L. No. 7-1995]
Permits shall expire three months following the date of issuance if no substantial work is begun
and may be renewed upon written application to the Superintendent, Department of Buildings.
[Amended 4-24-1995 by L.L. No. 7-1995]
§ 268-6. Fee.
The fee for a permit for the erection, alteration or maintenance of a security gate shall be at the level
fixed from time to time by resolution of the Board of Trustees. Said fee shall be submitted at the time
the application is presented to the Building Department.
§ 268-7. Penalties for offenses.
For each and every violation of the provisions of this chapter, the owner, general agent or contractor of
a building or premises where such violation has been committed or shall exist, and the lessee or tenant
of an entire building or entire premises where such violation has been committed or shall exist, and the
owner, general agent, contractor, lessee or tenant of any part of a building or premises in which part
such violation has been committed or shall exist, and the general agent, architect, builder, contractor or
any person who knowingly commits, takes part in, allows or assists in any violation or who maintains
any building or premises in which any such violation shall exist shall be guilty of a violation against this
chapter, which violation shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed $250 or imprisonment for a period
not to exceed 15 days, or both. Each day's continued violation shall constitute a separate and distinct
additional violation.
§ 268-8. Enforcement.
[Amended 4-24-1995 by L.L. No. 8-1995]
It shall be the duty of the Superintendent, Department of Buildings, and he is hereby given the power
and authority, to enforce the provisions of this chapter.
Chapter 271. Sewers
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Trustees of the Village of Rockville Centre 2-22-1971 by L.L. No.
1-1971 as Ch. 103 of the 1971 Code. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building code — See Ch. 112.
Building drains — See Ch. 118.
Licenses — See Ch. 222.
Plumbing — See Ch. 256.
Excavations — See Ch. 287, Art. X.
Water — See Ch. 318.
Planning Board; site plan review; subdivision of land — See Ch. 330.
§ 271-1. Board of Sewer Commissioners; term of control limited.
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 210/441
A.
B.
The construction, maintenance, operation and extension of the sewerage system of the Village of
Rockville Centre, Nassau County, New York, up to the point of connection therewith at the house or
building line of any premises, is subject to control and regulation of the Board of Sewer
Commissioners; said Board of Sewer Commissioners shall continue in existence until the expiration of
one year from the date of the completion of the construction work and acceptance of the sewer system
now in process of construction and completion within the Village of Rockville Centre; that on the date
of the expiration of one year from the completion of construction and acceptance of the said sewer
system now in process of construction for the said Village of Rockville Centre, all of the powers herein
granted by this chapter or by law to the Board of Sewer Commissioners shall cease and terminate, and
the said Board on said date shall be abolished, and from said date all of the powers herein granted to
the said Board of Sewer Commissioners or otherwise imposed upon them by law shall be exercised by
the Board of Trustees of the Village of Rockville Centre; that within any house or building line the
system of plumbing existing or proposed is also subject to the control of the Board of Sewer
Commissioners of said Village until the expiration of one year from the date of completion of the
construction of the existing sewer and the acceptance thereof as hereinbefore specified, and thereafter
shall be subject to the control of the Board of Trustees of the Village of Rockville Centre. The
construction, use and maintenance of any private system of sewage disposal existing or proposed is
prohibited. All connections between any building and the public sewer system of the Village of
Rockville Centre shall be made in strict accordance with these rules and regulations.
§ 271-2. Connection to sewers mandatory.
After publication by the Board of Sewer Commissioners or the Board of Trustees of the Village of
Rockville Centre in the official paper of said Village, that any section of the public sewerage system of
the Village of Rockville Centre, or of any extension thereof, has been completed and is ready for
operation, the main drain of every new building, except as hereinafter provided, abutting on any
highway, public ground or private way in which such public sewer is laid, shall be connected therewith
in the manner hereinafter provided; and all slops, filthy water, liquid waste and spent water supplies of
every description, except it be of such nature as hereinafter specifically prohibited, shall be discharged
into a properly laid pipe emptying directly into said public sewer.
§ 271-3. Time limit for connection.
Within a period of 30 days from the date of the publication in the official paper of the Village of
Rockville Centre of a notice by either of the aforementioned Boards, that any section of the public
sewerage system of the Village of Rockville Centre, or of any extension thereof, has been completed
and is ready for operation, the owner of any existing building or buildings located in the Village upon
premises abutting on any highway, public ground or private way in which a public sewer is laid, shall
cause the sewerage system of such building or buildings to be connected with said public sewer, and
the use of any cesspool or privy vault on the premises to be discontinued and such cesspool or privy
vault to be placed in a sanitary condition to the satisfaction of the Superintendent of Sewers.
§ 271-4. Prohibitions regarding damage, discharge, types of
effluents.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation:
To cause, allow or permit the discharge of sewage from any house or building in the Village of
Rockville Centre into or upon any highway, public ground, private way, stream, watercourse, ditch,
surface or subsurface, groundwater drain or stormwater drain.
To uncover any portion of the public sewers or drains or the connection branches thereof, or to
open any manhole or flush tanks except under a permit signed by the Clerk of the Village of
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 211/441
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
I.
Rockville Centre.
To open any highways or public ground for the purpose of making any sewer connection; or to
make or cause to be made any connection with a house connection branch of a public sewer,
except under a permit signed by the Clerk of the Village of Rockville Centre, and under the
supervision of the Superintendent of Sewers.
To break or to cut or to remove any pipe of the public sewers, or to make or cause to be made any
connection with said sewers except through the connection branches provided for that purpose.
The location of said connection branches will be designated by the Superintendent of Sewers.
To discharge or cause to be discharged into any public sewer, directly or indirectly, any
groundwater, surfacewater or rainwater, cellar drains, roof-leader connections or drains from wash
stands of public or private garages into said sewers are prohibited.
To discharge or cause to be discharged into any public sewer, directly or indirectly, any overflow or
drainage from manure pits, cesspools or other receptacles storing or constructed to store organic
waste.
To connect or cause to be connected with any public sewer, directly or indirectly, any steamexhausts,
boiler blowoffs, sediment drips, or any pipes carrying or constructed to carry hot water,
acids, germicides, grease, brewery wash, gasoline, naphtha, benzine, oil or any other industrial or
trade waste or any other substance detrimental to or deemed by the Superintendent of Sewers
detrimental to the sewers or to the operation of the sewerage system or sewage disposal works.
To throw or to deposit, or to cause or allow to be thrown or deposited, in any fixture, vessel,
receptacle, inlet or opening connected directly or indirectly with any public sewer, any garbage,
vegetable parings, ashes, cinders, rags or any other matter or anything whatever, except feces,
urine, necessary toilet paper and liquid house slops. This provision shall not be deemed to prohibit
the depositing or injecting in a public sewer, garbage and/or vegetable parings which shall have
been previously ground by a method accepted and approved by the Superintendent of Sewers
To allow any house sewer connected with the public sewer to be also connected with any privy
vault or cesspool or underground drain, or with any channel conveying water or filth, except such
soil pipes and other plumbing works as shall have been duly inspected and approved by the
Superintendent of Sewers.
§ 271-5. Powers of governing body to prevent violations.
The Board of Sewer Commissioners, or after its abolition the Board of Trustees, may at any time in its
discretion, stop and prevent the discharge into the sewers of any substance deemed by them liable to
injure the sewers, or to interfere with their normal operation, or to obstruct the flow, or to hinder any
process of sewage purification; and they may, at any time in their discretion, without notice and without
recourse, sever the connection and cause the removal of any tributary sewer or drain through which
such detrimental substances are discharged.
§ 271-6. Separate connections required; exceptions.
Each building in the area served by a public sewer must be connected separately and independently
with the sewer through the house-connection branch directly opposite the building or nearest in the
downstream direction. Grouping of buildings on one house sewer will not be permitted, save by special
act by the Board of Sewer Commissioners, or after its abolition, by the Board of Trustees of said
Village, and for good sanitary reasons.
§ 271-7. Size of house connection limited.
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 212/441
No house connection hereafter laid from the sewer to the wall of the house shall be of any diameter
less than five inches. Any house connection larger than five inches must be approved by the
Superintendent of Sewers.
§ 271-8. Specifications for materials.
Every house sewer hereafter laid connecting with the public sewer, from a point two feet outside the
foundation walls of the building must be of one of the materials as herein listed and such materials and
methods of joining shall be in conformance with the specifications as herein listed:
Pipe Description Specification
Cast-iron soil pipe and fittings ASTM — No. A74
Bituminized fibre sewer pipe Commercial Standard No. 116
Asbestos cement sewer pipe Federal No. SS-P-351
§ 271-9. Pipes, joints.
Cast-iron pipes shall be joined with first quality lead. The entire joint shall be filled in one pouring and
thoroughly caulked. The ditch must in all cases be kept dry during the pipe laying. The greatest care
must be taken to prevent the entrance of sand or dirt into the house sewer or the public sewer.
§ 271-10. Inspections.
No trench shall be filled or any part of pipe or fittings covered until notice has been given to the
Superintendent of Sewers that the work is ready for inspection, and such inspection is made. Every
such inspection shall be made as soon as practicable after the receipt of notice by the Superintendent
of Sewers, and such Superintendent shall have the power to apply any proper tests to the pipe or
fittings, and the owner or contractor doing the work shall furnish all necessary tools and labor for such
test and shall remove any defective material or repair any work improperly done as the Superintendent
of Sewers shall direct.
§ 271-11. Grade required.
No house sewer connection with the public sewer shall be laid with a grade of less than one inch fall in
four feet, without a written permit signed by the Superintendent of Sewers, specifying the minimum
grade that will be permitted.
§ 271-12. Superintendent of Sewers to supervise.
No sewer connection branch shall be opened, no pipe laid and any joints made except under the
inspection of the Superintendent of Sewers.
§ 271-13. Old house sewers.
Old house sewers may be used for new buildings, provided they are in good condition and conform to
the requirements of these regulations.
§ 271-14. Clerk to be notified before work begins.
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 213/441
[1]
The Clerk of the Village of Rockville Centre shall be notified at least 24 hours before the beginning of
any work upon house sewers or connections.
§ 271-15. Traps or obstructions prohibited.
No trap or any manner of obstructions to the free flow of air through the whole course of the drain and
soil pipe will be allowed: and any person who shall directly or indirectly place, make, cause or allow to
be placed or made any trap, contraption or other obstacle anywhere in the course of such drain or soil
pipe, shall be liable to the penalties hereinafter provided, and if he be a licensed plumber or a licensed
drain layer, shall, in addition to the penalty herein prescribed, forfeit his license and shall be ineligible
to relicense for one year.
§ 271-16. Licensed plumber or drain layer only to do work.
No persons, firm or corporation, except a plumber licensed to do work in the Village of Rockville
Centre, or a licensed drain layer shall carry on the business of drain laying in the Village of Rockville
Centre.
§ 271-17. Plans to be submitted; permit to be obtained.
Before any sewerage work or drainage be done or commenced in or on any property, when the same
is to be connected with the public sewer, or before any alterations or additions are made to old
sewerage or drainage work, plans and descriptions of the proposed work, signed by a licensed
plumber or a licensed drain layer, shall be filed in triplicate in the office of the Clerk of the Village of
Rockville Centre, accompanied by an application for approval of the said plan and the issuance of a
permit to do the said work. Plans, description and application shall be upon a blank form obtained from
the Clerk of the Village of Rockville Centre, and signed by the owner of the premises or his properly
accredited agent. These plans, descriptions and specifications must conform to all the provisions of
this chapter and to all the rules and regulations which are or may hereafter be made concerning such
work, and no work may be begun until the plans have been filed and a permit issued by the Clerk of
the Village of Rockville Centre. For each permit issued covering the installation of a new house drain, a
fee of $10 shall be paid to the Clerk of the Village of Rockville Centre to be used to defray the cost of
inspection and tests.
§ 271-18. Permit required for street excavations.
No permit granted by the Village Clerk shall be construed to permit any interference or disturbance of
any Village pavement of the Village of Rockville Centre or any excavation in any road, street or public
place unless the permit shall expressly so provide, and no permit shall be granted for such interference
or disturbance of said Village pavement or for the excavating for sewer purposes in any public street or
public place unless the applicant shall have first obtained from the Village of Rockville Centre a permit
therefor as now required or which may be hereafter required by any ordinance of the Village of
Rockville Centre. No permit shall be deemed to authorize anything not stated in the application.
Editor's Note: For additional provisions regarding excavations see also Ch. 287, Art. X.
§ 271-19. Permit to be available for inspection.
The permit shall at all times be kept at the site of the work and shown to any authorized agent of the
Village of Rockville Centre.
§ 271-20. Permit required for other than Village-owned roads.
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 214/441
Where any connection makes necessary any excavation on any county road or other road in the
Village of Rockville Centre not wholly under the jurisdiction of said Village, permits for the opening
thereof must be secured by the applicant from the proper authorities and at the expense of the said
applicant.
§ 271-21. When license is subject to revocation for violations.
Whenever in the opinion of the Superintendent of Sewers any plumber or drain layer violates any of
the provisions of this chapter, said Superintendent shall report the same in writing to the Board of
Trustees of the Village of Rockville Centre, and if the Board of Trustees shall find that the charges are
sustained they may revoke the license of such plumber or drain layer.
§ 271-22. Standards for reinstatement.
No person, firm or corporation once having been licensed to carry on the business of plumbing or drain
laying in the Village of Rockville Centre, who shall have violated any of the provisions of this chapter
and shall have refused or neglected to make good, to the satisfaction of the Board of Trustees of the
Village of Rockville Centre, any defective, imperfect work, or shall have refused or neglected to pay
any fees, fines or penalties imposed under the provisions of this chapter, shall be eligible to receive
any renewal of such license until such default on his, their or its part has been removed.
§ 271-23. Obstructions to be reported by plumbers; penalty for
violation.
Plumbers and drain layers must report to the Clerk of the Village of Rockville Centre in writing with full
description within 12 hours, the finding by them of all obstructions in house drains or the presence
therein, if found, of any substance prohibited by these regulations. Failure to so report will render the
person, firm or corporation so offending liable to the penalty of a revocation or suspension of his or
their license and to the payment of a fine of not more than $10 for each failure to so report. The finding
of the presence of substances prohibited by these regulations in the house drain of any house shall be
prima facie evidence of any offense committed against these regulations by both the owner and
occupant of the premises, or either of them.
§ 271-24. Report to be made after completion of work.
Plumbers and drain layers must report to the Clerk of the Village of Rockville Centre, in writing, within
24 hours after the completion of any work by them, every connection or disconnection made between
any building to the sewer system aforesaid, or between any house connection and said sewer system.
Failure to so report will render the plumber or drain layer so offending liable to the penalty of revocation
or suspension of his license and to the payment of a fine of not more than $10 for each failure to so
report.
§ 271-25. Permit required to construct drain or sewer.
No person shall construct any drain or sewer upon or from any premises in said Village of Rockville
Centre or use or permit any sewer or drain to be so used without a permit from the Clerk of the Village
of Rockville Centre.
§ 271-26. Penalties for violation.
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 215/441
A.
Any person, firm, association or corporation who shall violate any provision of this chapter or fail to
comply therewith, or shall violate or fail to comply with any regulation thereunder shall, for each and
every violation and for each and every day that such violation continues, be subject to a fine of not
more than $50 per day, and in addition thereto, any violation of the provisions of this chapter or any
part thereof, shall be and is hereby declared to be disorderly conduct and any person violating any of
the provisions of this chapter or of any part thereof, shall be and is hereby declared a disorderly
person. Every 24 hours' continuation of such violation shall constitute a separate offense.
Chapter 276. Smoke Emission
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Trustees of the Village of Rockville Centre 2-22-1971 by L.L. No.
1-1971 as Ch. 107 of the 1971 Code. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building code — See Ch. 112.
Open burning — See Ch. 135.
Firearms and explosives — See Ch. 178.
Fire prevention and control — See Ch. 185.
Gasoline sale and service stations — See Ch 204.
Solid waste — See Ch. 283.
§ 276-1. Emission of dense smoke prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to permit the emission of any dense smoke from
any source whatever longer than two minutes and greater in density than described as No. 1 on the
Ringelmann Chart, published by the United States Bureau of Mines.
§ 276-2. Escape of soot, cinders, noxious acids, fumes and
gases.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to permit the escape of such quantities of soot,
cinders, noxious acids, fumes and gases in such places or manner as to be detrimental to any person
or to the public or to endanger the health, comfort or safety of any such person or of the public or in
such a manner as to cause or have a tendency to cause injury or damage to property or business.
§ 276-3. Fuel-consuming devices.
No new fuel-burning plant nor reconstruction, repair, addition or alteration to any existing fuel-burning
plant for producing power or heat or either of them, or refuse-burning equipment nor any stack or
furnace connected with such refuse-burning equipment, shall be installed, erected, reconstructed,
repaired, added to or altered until plans and specifications of the same have been filed by the owner or
contractor with the office of the building official of the Village of Rockville Centre and a permit issued by
such office.
§ 276-4. Operation of privately owned incinerators.
Privately owned incinerators shall be operated and maintained in accordance with the following
regulations:
Incinerators shall be operated only between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m.
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 216/441
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
I.
J.
K.
Before lighting, enough material must be removed to clear the flue; also, all smoke-producing
material such as linoleum, paint cans, oily rags, plastic and leather goods must be removed.
All incinerators must be lighted from the top of the pile.
If the incinerator has a gas burner, it must be burning when the incinerator is in use.
All doors must be closed and air slide adjusted to avoid too much draft up the stack. Fire must be
kept hot, but not roaring or noisy.
The contents of the firebox must not be disturbed while a hot fire is burning.
Materials must not be dropped in the incinerator while there is an active fire.
Incinerator chimney must be inspected by the operator while incinerator is burning. If smoke odors
or fly ash are being emitted, proper adjustments must be made.
All incinerator fire must be extinguished before 5:00 p.m. and ashes removed from the firebox.
The secondary combustion and the settling chamber must be cleaned at least twice a week and
when the incinerator is cold.
Overloading of refuse within the firebox shall be prohibited.
§ 276-5. Penalties for offenses.
For any and every violation of the provisions of this chapter, the owner, general agent or contractor of a
building or premises where such violations have been committed or shall exist, and the lessee or
tenant of an entire building or entire premises where such violation has been committed or shall exist,
and the owner, general agent, contractor, lessee or tenant of any part of the building or premises in
which part such violation has been committed or shall exist, and the general agent, architect, builder,
contractor or any other person who knowingly commits, takes part or assists in any such violation or
who maintains any building or premises in which any such violation exists, shall be subject to the
penalties specified in § 1-2 of the Code of the Village of Rockville Centre.
Chapter 278. Social Host Responsibility
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Trustees of the Village of Rockville Centre 10-16-2007 by L.L. No.
8-2007. Amendments noted where applicable.]
§ 278-1. Purpose and intent.
[Amended 5-25-2010 by L.L. No. 7-2010]
The Board of Trustees of the Village of Rockville Centre finds that underage drinking is a significant
societal problem that has general widespread concern in the Village of Rockville Centre. Although the
New York State legislature has acted to proscribe the unlawful giving, selling and possessing of alcohol
in relation to minors, it has not regulated situations in which a person over the age of 16 knowingly
permits the consumption of alcohol by a minor in his or her home. The consumption of alcohol by
underage persons, whether at a party or a smaller gathering, poses an immediate threat to the public
health, safety and welfare of the residents of Rockville Centre, often leading to alcohol abuse by
minors, physical altercations, accidental injuries, neighborhood vandalism, excessive noise
disturbances requiring the intervention of local law enforcement and the commission of violent crimes
including sexual offenses and serious assaults. This local law is intended to deter the consumption of
alcoholic beverages by minors by holding those over the age of 16 responsible when they permit the
consumption of alcoholic beverages by minors in violation of the provisions of this law.
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 217/441
(1)
(2)
A.
(1)
(2)
B.
§ 278-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise, the following words shall have
the following meanings:
ALCOHOL
Ethyl alcohol, hydrated oxide of ethyl or spirits of wine, from whatever source or by whatever
means produced.
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE
Any liquor, wine, beer, spirits, cider or other liquid or solid, patented or not, composed of, or
containing, alcohol or spirits, whether or not brewed, fermented or distilled, and capable of being
consumed by a person, except that confectionary containing alcohol as provided by Subdivision
12 of § 200 of the New York State Agriculture and Markets Law shall not be regarded as an
alcoholic beverage within the meaning of this section.
KNOWINGLY
Aware of, or having reason to be aware of, the consumption of alcohol by a minor.
MINOR
Any person under the age of 21.
RESIDENCE
Any home, apartment, condominium, cooperative unit or other dwelling unit of any kind, including
yards and open areas adjacent thereto.
§ 278-3. Consumption of alcohol by minors on private premises.
It shall be unlawful for any person over the age of 16 who owns, rents or otherwise is in control of
a private residence to knowingly allow the consumption of alcohol or alcoholic beverages by any
minor on such premises or to fail to take reasonable corrective action upon learning of the
consumption of alcohol or alcoholic beverages by any minor on such premises. Reasonable
corrective action pursuant to this paragraph shall include, but not be limited to:
[Amended 5-25-2010 by L.L. No. 7-2010]
Making a prompt demand that such minor either forfeit and refrain from further consumption
of the alcoholic beverages or depart from the premises; and
If such minor does not comply with such request, either promptly reporting such underage
consumption of alcohol to the local law enforcement agency or to any other person having a
greater degree of authority over the conduct of such minor.
The provisions of Subsection A of this section shall not apply to:
The consumption of alcohol or alcoholic beverages by a minor whose parent or guardian is
present and has expressly permitted such consumption; or
The use and consumption of alcohol or alcoholic beverages by a minor for religious purposes.
§ 278-4. Penalties for offenses.
A violation of this chapter shall constitute an offense. Each first offense, and each subsequent offense,
shall be punished as follows:
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 218/441
A.
B.
C.
[1]
First offense. Any person who violates this chapter shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $250,
where such violation constitutes the person's first offense in violation of this chapter within a period
of 12 months.
Second offense. Any person who violates this chapter shall be punished by a fine not less than
$500 and not more than $750, where such violation constitutes the person's second offense in
violation of this chapter within a period of 12 months.
Third and subsequent offenses. Any person who violates this chapter shall be punished by either
a fine of at least $750 and not more than $1,000, a term of imprisonment not to exceed 15 days,
or both such fine and imprisonment, where such violation constitutes the person's third or
subsequent violation of this chapter within a period of 12 months.
Chapter 280. Soil and Earth Removal
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Trustees of the Village of Rockville Centre 2-22-1971 by L.L. No.
1-1971 as Ch. 109 of the 1971 Code. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building code — See Ch. 112.
Building drains — See Ch. 118.
Moving of buildings — See Ch. 126.
Dumps and dumping — See Ch. 157.
Environmental quality review — See Ch. 166.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 188.
Freshwater wetlands — See Ch. 197.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 287.
Excavations — See Ch. 287, Art. X.
Electric and water utilities — See Ch. 306.
Planning Board; site plan review; subdivision of land — See Ch. 330.
Zoning — See Ch. 340.
§ 280-1. Permit required for removal from public property.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, association or corporation to dig, remove, carry away, or cause
to be dug, removed or carried away, any stone, earth, sand or gravel from any public street, highway,
sidewalk or public place in the Village of Rockville Centre, without a written permit from the Department
of Public Works.
§ 280-2. Permit required for removal from private property.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, association or corporation to dig, remove, carry away, or cause
to be dug, removed or carried away, any stone, earth, sand or gravel from any location in the Village,
including private property, without a written permit from the Department of Public Works, except where
the digging, removing and carrying away is in connection with an excavation made under a valid
building permit[1] for construction of a building by the Department of Public Works.
Editor's Note: See Ch. 112, Building Code.
§ 280-3. Penalties for offenses.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be liable for and pay a penalty not
exceeding $25 for each offense. Any violation of this chapter or any part thereof shall constitute
disorderly conduct, and the person so violating shall be and is hereby declared a disorderly person.
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 219/441
A.
B.
C.
Chapter 283. Solid Waste
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Trustees of the Village of Rockville Centre as indicated in article
histories. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Dangerous and unsafe buildings — See Ch. 122.
Open burning — See Ch. 135.
Dumps and dumping — See Ch. 157.
Fire prevention and control — See Ch. 185.
Junk and secondhand dealers — See Ch. 215.
Licenses — See Ch. 222.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 261.
Soil and earth removal — See Ch. 280.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 287.
Trees, shrubs and hedges — See Ch. 303.
Article I. Removal
[Adopted 2-22-1971 by L.L. No. 1-1971 as Ch. 68, Art. I, of the 1971 Code]
§ 283-1. License required.
No persons other than those employed for such purpose by the Village shall engage in the business of
removing garbage, ashes or refuse from any premises or other places within the Village without first
obtaining an annual license therefor.
§ 283-2. Application information required.
In addition to the information required under the provisions of § 222-2 of Chapter 222, Licenses, each
applicant hereunder shall set forth in a sworn statement the following details:
The place where the applicant will dump the collections he makes, or otherwise dispose thereof.
The place where his vehicle will be stored or garaged while not in use.
The number, model, year of manufacture and license number of such vehicles.
§ 283-3. Fees.
[Amended 12-4-1972]
The fee for any license required by the provisions of this article shall be at the levels fixed from time to
time by resolution of the Board of Trustees of the Village of Rockville Centre.
§ 283-4. Refusal and revocation of license.
In addition to the grounds for such action as provided in Chapter 222, Licenses, the Mayor may refuse
to grant a license, or he may cause the revocation of a license that has been issued, whenever it shall
appear to him that the place selected or used for the storage of junk or vehicles or the equipment
designed for use, or used, to collect junk or the method of collection or disposal will be detrimental to
the welfare of the Village or its residents.
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 220/441
[1]
A.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
B.
[1]
Article II. Depositing Materials on Highway
[Adopted 2-22-1971 by L.L. No. 1-1971 as Ch. 68, Art. II, of the 1971 Code]
Editor’s Note: See also Art. II, § 283-18.1, Liability for expenses, regarding Arts. II, III and IV.
§ 283-5. Permit required.
Obstruction forbidden. No person shall deposit any material designed for use in building
construction or for other purposes upon any street or sidewalk in the Village or in any other
manner obstruct or impede free travel upon such street or sidewalk, unless a permit has been
issued therefor.
Prerequisites for permit. As a prerequisite to securing a permit, each applicant must file with the
Village Clerk a statement containing:
The name of the applicant.
The nature of the materials and amount thereof he wishes to place in the streets.
The precise place of such deposit.
The length of time the encumbrance will continue.
Editor’s Note: For current maximum fine, please see § 1-2, Penalties for offenses.
§ 283-6. Bonds.
Each application hereunder shall be accompanied by a certificate of insurance in form approved by the
Village Counsel and issued by an insurance company authorized to do business in this state, running
to the Village, guaranteeing that the applicant has provided public liability coverage of not less than
$10,000/$20,000 and property damage insurance in the amount of not less than $5,000/$10,000 to
save the Village harmless from all claims, actions and proceedings brought by any person for injury to
person or property resulting from or occasioned by any fault or default by the person to whom the
permit is issued or anyone acting thereunder on his behalf.
§ 283-7. Fees.
[Amended 12-4-1972]
The fee for any license required by the provisions of this article shall be at the levels fixed from time to
time by resolution of the Board of Trustees of the Village of Rockville Centre.
§ 283-8. Where materials may be placed.
No materials may be placed upon any street, in any gutter, curb or sidewalk despite such permit except
in the place and manner designated by the Superintendent of Public Works.
§ 283-9. Adequate warning devices.
Every person who places or deposits any materials upon a street, gutter, curb or sidewalk shall mark
the location thereof by a barrier or fence bearing warning signs and distinguished by lighted red
lanterns or flares after dark, adequately to apprise the public of the presence of the hazard.
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 221/441
§ 283-10. Temporary sidewalks.
Where a sidewalk is obstructed pursuant to such a permit, a temporary rigidly constructed wooden
sidewalk with guardrails shall be constructed at a location and in such manner as determined by the
Superintendent of Public Works, so as to adequately provide safe pedestrian passage.
Article III. Littering
[Adopted 2-22-1971 by L.L. No. 1-1971 as Ch. 68, Art. III, of the 1971 Code]
§ 283-11. Depositing ashes, garbage, refuse.
No person shall litter, sweep, throw or cast, or direct, suffer or permit any servant, agent, employee or
other person under his control to litter, sweep, throw or cast, any ashes, garbage, paper, dust or other
rubbish and refuse of any kind whatsoever in or upon any street or public place, vacant lot, air shaft,
areaway, back yard, court or alley.
§ 283-12. Snow accumulation.
No person shall sweep, throw, push or place, or direct, suffer or permit any servant, agent, employee
or other person to sweep, throw, push or place, any snow which has accumulated upon private
property, in or upon any street or public place.
§ 283-13. Duty to keep premises free from nuisances and
obstructions.
Every owner, lessee, tenant, occupant or person in charge of any building or premises shall keep and
cause to be kept the sidewalk, flagging and curbstone abutting said building or premises free from
obstructions and nuisances of every kind, and shall keep said sidewalks, air shaft, areaways, back
yards, courts and alleys free from garbage, refuse, rubbish, litter and other offensive material.
§ 283-14. Adequate storage and protection required.
No lime, ashes, coal, dry sand, hair, wastepaper, feathers or other substance that is in a similar
manner liable to be blown by the wind shall be sieved, agitated or exposed, nor shall any mat, carpet
or cloth be shaken or beaten, nor shall any cloth, yarn, garment, material or substance be scoured or
cleaned, nor shall any rags, damaged merchandise, barrels, boxes or broken bales of merchandise or
goods be placed, kept or exposed, in any place where they or particles therefrom will pass into any
street or public place or into any occupied premises, nor shall any usual or any reasonable precautions
be omitted by any person to prevent fragments or any substances from falling to the detriment or peril
of life or health, or dust or light material flying into any street, place or building, from any building or
erection, while the same is being altered, repaired or demolished or otherwise. In demolishing any
building or part thereof, the material to be removed shall be properly wet in order to lay dust incident to
its removal.
§ 283-15. Vehicles and receptacles.
No one being the owner or in charge or in control of any vehicle or of any receptacle shall litter, drop or
spill, or permit to be littered, dropped or spilled, any dirt, sand, gravel, clay, loam, stone or building
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 222/441
A.
B.
A.
B.
rubbish, hay, straw, oats, sawdust, shavings or other light materials of any sort, or manufacturing, trade
or household waste, refuse, rubbish of any sort, or ashes, manure, garbage or other organic refuse or
other offensive matter, in or upon any street or public place.
§ 283-16. Handbills and advertising matter.
No person shall throw, cast or distribute, or cause or permit to be thrown, cast or distributed, any
handbill, circular, card, booklet, placard or other advertising matter whatsoever, in or upon any street or
public place, or in a front yard or courtyard, or on any stoop, or in the vestibule of any hall in any
building, or in a letter box therein; provided that nothing herein contained shall be deemed to prohibit or
otherwise regulate the delivery of any such matter by the United States postal service, or prohibit the
distribution of sample copies of newspapers regularly sold by the copy or by annual subscription. This
section is not intended to prevent the lawful distribution of anything other than commercial and
business advertising matter.
§ 283-17. Depositing of swill, brine or noxious liquids on streets.
No swill, brine, offensive animal matter, noxious liquid or other filthy matter of any kind shall be allowed
by any person to fall upon or run into any street or public place, or be taken to or put therein.
§ 283-18. Authorized removal; interference with Village
employees.
[Amended 1-25-2011 by L.L. No. 2-2011]
No person shall prevent or interfere with any Village employee in the sweeping or cleaning of any
street or in the removal of sweepings, ashes, garbage, rubbish, snow, ice or other refuse material.
No person other than an authorized Village employee or agent shall disturb or remove any ashes,
garbage or light refuse or rubbish placed by householders or their tenants or by occupants or their
servants, within the stoop or area line or in front of houses or lots, for removal, unless requested
by residents of such houses.
§ 283-18.1. Liability for expenses.
[Added 1-25-2011 by L.L. No. 2-2011]
Any person or entity causing or permitting the deposit upon property of the Village of any material,
including, without limitation, ashes, garbage or light refuse or rubbish, snow, solid waste, litter, or other
solid or liquid, in violation of any provision of Articles II, III or IV of this chapter, shall be liable to pay the
expenses incurred by the Village in removing said material.
In the event any such person or entity fails to pay such amount within 30 days after written
demand therefor, the Village may institute such action as may be required to recover such
amount, and in any such action shall be entitled in addition to recover its costs of expenses,
including reasonable attorneys' fees.
Where any such material is deposited upon Village property from adjoining property, and the
owner(s) of such adjoining property fail or refuse to pay the expenses of removal from the Village
property as provided in this section, said unpaid expenses shall be assessed against the adjoining
property in the same manner as provided for unpaid Village property taxes.
Article IV. Depositing and Collection
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 223/441
[1]
A.
B.
A.
B.
C.
D.
[Adopted 2-22-1971 by L.L. No. 1-1971 as Ch. 68, Art. IV, of the 1971 Code]
Editor’s Note: See also Art. II, § 283-18.1, Liability for expenses, regarding Arts. II, III and IV.
§ 283-19. Definitions.
As used in this article the following words are intended to include, for the purposes thereof, or to be
defined, as follows:
COMBUSTIBLE WASTE MATERIALS
Any article or substance of wood, paper, dry vegetable matter or garbage or other waste materials
which are readily consumed by incineration.
INCOMBUSTIBLE WASTE MATERIALS
Any articles or substance other than those included in the definition of "combustible waste
materials."
PERSON
Includes a partnership or a corporation.
§ 283-20. Accumulation and dumping.
The owner, lessee, tenant or any other person having the management or control of or occupying
any lot or plot of land in the Village shall keep such land at all times free and clear of any
accumulation of ashes, rubbish, refuse, grass cuttings, tree cuttings, leaves, garbage, offal or any
offensive substances except such as are deposited in containers or are otherwise secured as
provided for in this article for collection and disposal by the Sanitation Department of the Village.
No person shall deposit any ashes, rubbish, refuse, grass cuttings, tree cuttings, leaves, garbage,
offal or any offensive substances on any lot or plot of land in the Village except in containers or
otherwise secured as provided for in this article.
§ 283-21. Manner of handling waste.
It shall be the duty of every person having the management or control of or occupying any land or
building to provide, for the exclusive use of such land or building or part thereof, sufficient
receptacles to hold the combustible waste materials and separate receptacles to hold the
incombustible waste material ordinarily accumulated by the occupants of such land or building
during 72 consecutive hours. Every such person shall keep separated the combustible from the
incombustible waste materials and each kind of waste materials in its appropriate receptacle;
except that any waste material, other than garbage, which cannot readily be deposited in any
receptacle, may be compactly and securely bundled, tied or packed so as to be easily handled,
but not weighing more than 50 pounds and not likely to be scattered, and when so packed and
secured, may be piled alongside such a receptacle.
Each of such receptacles provided for in Subsection A of this section shall be watertight, kept
covered with a cover and maintained in a sanitary condition by periodic cleansing. When filled, any
such receptacle shall weigh not more than 50 pounds and shall contain no more than three cubic
feet of materials.
Each such receptacle containing combustible materials shall be free from water or wetted
materials.
In residential districts, no person shall place any receptacles containing garbage and waste
materials nearer the street than the front building line of the dwelling of the premises, earlier than
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 224/441
E.
F.
G.
A.
B.
C.
one hour before sunset on the day prior to the regularly scheduled collection.
In residential districts, all persons shall remove or cause to be removed the empty containers from
the area in front of the building line as soon as practical, but in no event later than 6:00 p.m. on the
day of collection.
In business districts, no receptacles containing garbage and waste materials shall be placed
between the curb and the front line of the building where collections are made from the street,
earlier than 5:00 p.m. on the day of collection. Where collections are made from parking fields, no
such receptacles containing garbage and waste materials shall be placed within the designated
pickup area earlier than 5:00 p.m. on the day of collection.
In business districts, all emptied receptacles shall be removed not later than 9:00 a.m. on the day
following the collection.
§ 283-22. Collections.
The Sanitation Department shall make regular collection of all waste materials as often and during
such specified hours as shall be prescribed by the Board of Trustees by resolution, but at not longer
intervals than 72 consecutive hours; collection shall be made from such receptacles when placed on
any premises in such accessible locations as shall be designated by the manager of the Sanitation
Department. The manager of the Sanitation Department shall have the right to omit collections from
any premises where a vicious dog is permitted to run at large or where the employees of the Village
are subjected to any unnecessary danger or hazard.
§ 283-23. Excessive accumulation of waste.
Any accumulations of waste materials resulting from failure of any person to comply with any provision
of this article or from the failure of such person to take advantage of the regular collection service
maintained by the Village, and any waste building materials in excess of ordinary household waste of
such materials, shall be removed by such person at his or her expense.
The Sanitation Department will collect normal amounts of all classes of refuse from the premises,
but where abnormal amounts are placed for collection, the Department reserves the right to refuse
the materials, to defer the collection, to collect the material in part or to make a special collection
thereof at charges herein provided, as may be desirable in the public interest.
Trees, tree branches and trimmings, large bushes, logs, etc., shall be securely tied in bundles not
heavier than 75 pounds nor more than five feet in length and 18 inches in diameter; trees, tree
branches and trimmings, large bushes, logs, etc., not reduced to size nor bundled as provided in
this section will be collected by special collection at charges herein provided, and then only when
the material can be readily loaded on collection vehicles by two men.
The Superintendent of Public Works is authorized to establish charges for special collections,
based on the personnel and equipment required therefor plus a reasonable overhead.
§ 283-24. Collector's restrictions.
No employee of the Village, in the course of his duties, shall be required to enter a building or structure
to gather or collect any waste materials; no employee shall accept or receive any tip or gratuity for the
performance of his duties or solicit money for any purpose in connection therewith.
§ 283-25. Penalties for offenses.
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 225/441
[Amended 3-5-1979 by L.L. No. 3-1979]
Any person or corporation or any officer of any corporation which shall violate any of the provisions of
this article or fails to comply therewith or with any of the requirements thereof shall be liable to a fine of
not more than $250, and each day such violation shall be permitted to exist shall constitute a separate
offense. The owner or owners of any building or premises or part thereof where anything in violation of
this article shall be placed or shall exist, and any architect, builder, contractor, agent, person or
corporation employed in connection therewith or who may have assisted in the commission of any
such violation shall be guilty of a separate offense and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined as
herein provided.
Article V. Interference With Rubbish
[Adopted 2-22-1971 by L.L. No. 1-1971 as Ch. 68, Art. V, of the 1971 Code]
§ 283-26. Removing or disturbing.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, association or corporation, unless licensed by the Village, to
take, remove or collect tin cans, metal, rags, bones, paper, rubbish, garbage or refuse of any kind from
any box, barrel or other container placed upon any street, road, avenue, highway or sidewalk in the
Village for removal therefrom by any of the Village's departments or to disturb or interfere in any way
with any tin cans, metal, rags, paper, bones, rubbish, garbage or refuse of any kind.
§ 283-27. Penalties for offenses.
[Amended 3-5-1979 by L.L. No. 4-1979]
Any person, firm, association or corporation violating any of the provisions of this article shall be liable
for and pay a penalty not exceeding $250 for each violation thereof. Any violation of this article shall
constitute disorderly conduct, and any person violating it shall be and is hereby declared a disorderly
person.
Article VI. Public Litter Baskets
[Adopted 2-4-1991 by L.L. No. 1-1991]
§ 283-28. Legislative intent.
The Board of Trustees of the Incorporated Village of Rockville Centre declares and finds it to be in the
public interest and to promote the public health and for the public good, to preserve the property
values, create a more attractive economic and business climate, to reduce the risk of disease, vermin
and other unhealthy consequences associated with garbage, trash or waste and for other aesthetic
considerations to provide for the regulation of the depositing of materials in the Village litter baskets.
The Board also finds the misuse of litter baskets has been increasing particularly in the Business
District, and such increased misuse is detrimental to the quality of life in this Village.
§ 283-29. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following words and phrases shall have the following meanings:
CASUAL TRASH
Includes single newspapers, food, gum, candy wrappers, ice cream pop bags and sticks,
individual sheets of paper, empty paper or plastic bags or like items that a passerby might carry
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 226/441
A.
and discard, such as tissues or food containers from which the discarding person consumed the
food. "Casual trash" does not include commercial, business or household trash or waste.
LITTER BASKETS
Waste receptacles placed by the Village of Rockville Centre in the downtown Business District for
the convenient disposal of casual trash.
§ 283-30. Unacceptable waste deposits.
No person shall deposit any material other than casual trash in a Village-owned litter basket in the
Business District, and such material shall not exceed 1/2 cubic foot of volume or two pounds it weight
within any twenty-four-hour period.
§ 283-31. Allowance of unacceptable waste deposits.
No person shall direct or suffer or allow his employee, agent or contractor to deposit any material other
than casual waste in a Village-owned litter basket in the Business District, and such material shall not
exceed 1/2 cubic foot of volume or two pounds in weight within any twenty-four-hour period.
§ 283-32. Presumptive evidence.
If nonpermitted material is found in a litter basket and the owner or custodian of such material is
identifiable from such material, a rebuttal presumption of such person's intent to violate this article shall
arise.
§ 283-33. Enforcement.
Enforcement shall be the duty of the Superintendent of Public Works, Building Officer and
Commissioner of Police, and each is hereby given the power and authority to enforce the provisions of
this article personally and by their delegatees.
§ 283-34. Penalties for offenses.
For each and every failure to comply with the provisions of this article, the owner or custodian of the
material which was wrongly placed in the litter basket and the person who placed or assisted in such
placement shall be guilty of a violation against this article, which violation shall be punishable by a fine
not to exceed $250, imprisonment not to exceed 15 days, or both. Each separate piece of material,
whether packaged or not, shall constitute a separate and distinct additional violation.
Article VII. Private Garbage Carters
[Adopted 5-20-1991 by L.L. No. 2-1991]
§ 283-35. Legislative intent.
The Board of Trustees of the Incorporated Village of Rockville Centre has found that the use of
private (nonmunicipal) garbage, ash and waste carters or removers by premises within the Village
has greatly increased.
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 227/441
B.
A.
B.
(1)
(2)
(3)
C.
Therefore, the Board declares and finds it to be in the public interest and for the public good and
safety to preserve property values, promote the health, peace and safety of the residents and
merchants and for other aesthetic considerations to provide for the regulation of the private
garbage carters which provide services within the boundaries of the Incorporated Village of
Rockville Centre.
§ 283-36. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following words and phrases shall have the following meanings:
CARTER
A person or entity engaged in the business of removing garbage, ashes or refuse from premises
or places.
PRIVATE CARTER
A carter which is not owned or employed by the Incorporated Village of Rockville Centre.
VILLAGE
The Incorporated Village of Rockville Centre.
§ 283-37. Licenses and insurance.
All private carters which perform work or provide services to any premises or place within the
Village shall first obtain a license as is provided for in Article I above before commencing operation
within the Village boundaries.
Private carters shall have and demonstrate that they have workers compensation insurance
coverage for all its employees who work or provide services within the Village.
Private carters.
[Amended 10-19-1992 by L.L. No. 7-1992]
All private carters performing work or providing services to any premises or place within the
Village must demonstrate, in written format, compliance and that they have an active
recycling program, prior to issuance of an operating Village license.
The recycling program must address and provide for the recycling of all recyclable material as
identified by the Superintendent of Public Works. The Superintendent of Public Works is
empowered to amend the list of recyclables, upon written notification to all private carters.
Following proper notification, private carters must implement all changes within a thirtycalendar-
day period. Failure to implement required changes to the recycling effort shall be
sufficient reason to suspend the private carter's operating license within the Village.
All licensed private carters operating within the Village must submit a monthly recycling
report, in written format, to the Superintendent of Public Works. Said report is due on the fifth
calendar day of the following month. The recycling report must identify all recyclables and
their respective weights and the total monthly weight associated with all solid waste collected
and removed by the private carter from within the Village. Failure to submit the monthly
report, as cited, shall be sufficient reason to suspend the private carter's operating license
with the Village.
§ 283-38. Hours of collection.
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 228/441
(1)
(2)
(3)
A.
B.
A.
B.
A.
B.
Persons or entities engaged in the business of removing garbage, ashes or refuse from premises
located within the Village shall perform such services only:
Weekdays between the hours of 7:30 a.m. and 11:00 p.m.;
Saturdays between the hours of 3:00 p.m. and 11:00 p.m.; or
At other such hours as the Board of Trustees, by resolution, may direct.
In no case, however, shall the permitted hours of collection for private carters be less than the
hours that the Rockville Centre Sanitation Department utilizes for garbage, ash and refuse
collection.
§ 283-39. Penalties for offenses.
Any person or entity or any officer or official of any entity which fails to comply with the provisions
of this article or any requirements thereof shall be guilty of a violation against this article, which
violation shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed $250 or imprisonment for a period not to
exceed 15 days, or both. Any violation of this article shall constitute disorderly conduct, and any
person violating this article or any part thereof shall be and is hereby declared to be a disorderly
person.
Each violation of this article shall constitute a separate and distinct additional violation.
§ 283-40. Enforcement.
In addition to the members of the Rockville Centre Police Department, the Building Official and the
Superintendent of Public Works, and each of their delegates, are hereby given the power and authority
to enforce the provisions of this article.
Article VIII. Recycling Program
[Adopted 10-19-1992 by L.L. No. 7-1992]
§ 283-41. Findings; purpose.
Whereas the conservation of recyclable materials is now a necessity in order to conserve natural
resources, and the cost of solid waste disposal is increasing, and available residue disposal
landfill facilities are rapidly decreasing, it is the intention of the Village of Rockville Centre to
establish a program for the mandatory separation of recyclables from solid waste within the
Village. Such a program will reduce both the amount of solid waste to be disposed of and the
ultimate cost of disposal.
This article of the Code of the Village of Rockville Centre shall regulate the separation of
recyclables by the residents of the Village in accordance with the New York State Solid Waste
Management Plan.
§ 283-42. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
RECYCLABLES
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 229/441
(a)
(b)
(c)
(1)
(2)
A.
B.
C.
(1)
(2)
D.
A.
B.
C.
Discarded material which may be reclaimed, comprising solid waste in the form of paper, glass,
metal and plastic, and which may be further defined as follows:
PAPER:
Clean and unsoiled paper, including:
Newsprint, all newspapers and newspaper advertisements (nonglossy), supplements
(nonglossy), comics and enclosures (nonglossy).
Corrugated boxes, cardboard, cardboard cartons, pasteboard and similar corrugated
and kraft paper materials, provided that they are free of foreign matter and refuse.
Computer and white paper material.
"Paper" recyclables do not include miscellaneous stationery products such as windowed
envelopes or any paper products other than those listed.
GLASS
Clear (flint), amber, brown and green glass food or beverage containers rinsed clean of food
or beverage residue. "Glass" which is excluded from the recycling program consists of the
following: mirrors, china and ceramic material.
METAL
Ferrous and bimetal cans with one end removed; or aluminum cans, including beverage cans
and cans used to contain food stuff rinsed clean of food residue. "Metals" which are excluded
from recyclables consist of lawn chairs, screen frames, air conditioners, dryers, refrigerators,
hot-water tanks, stoves and other white goods which are collected as bulk on the designated
day.
PLASTIC:
Plastic containers used to hold food, beverage and other household commodities;
specifically, polyethylene terephthalate (No. 1) and high-density polyethylene (No. 2).
"Plastic" which is excluded are plastic utensils, plates, toys and other items not used to
contain food or beverage.
§ 283-43. Curbside program established; collection schedule;
source separation required.
There is hereby established within the Village a program ("curbside program") for the separate
collection of paper, glass, metal and plastic from all non-physically-disabled residents of the
municipality located within said area and from all other persons, including commercial or
institutional establishments within said area, whose solid waste is collected by or on behalf of the
Village of Rockville Centre. Said curbside program may or may not apply to any apartment
complex or condominium complex. The Superintendent of Public Works shall determine, based on
facility size, if curbside collection is feasible for an individual apartment complex or condominium
complex.
Collections of recyclable materials pursuant to this article shall be upon the days established by
the Superintendent of Public Works.
All residents of the Village of Rockville Centre within the area serviced by the curbside program
established pursuant to this article shall source-separate all designated recyclables and place
them at the side of the road fronting their residence in the manner designated and on the date
specified for collection on the schedule published by the Village.
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 230/441
A.
B.
C.
(1)
(2)
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
I.
J.
§ 283-44. Preparation of materials for collection; recyclables to
be property of Village; promulgation of additional regulations.
It shall be the responsibility of each homeowner or occupant of the Village to ensure that all
recyclable materials are properly separated from other discarded materials and are cleaned or
otherwise prepared for collection in accordance with this article. All recyclable materials shall be
placed in the designated recyclable container provided for that purpose by the Village. In the event
that the amount or size of the recyclable materials exceeds the capacity of the designated
containers, then the excess recyclable materials shall be placed in a separate container and
placed alongside the designated container when placed at the curb for collection.
Paper recyclables may be tied in bundles not to exceed 35 pounds in weight nor exceeding one
foot in thickness prior to collection, removal or disposal of same. Bundles of newspaper shall be
placed at the curb for collection on the designated collection day. Papers are not to be secured
with wire or plastic bindings or placed in plastic trash bags. Corrugated boxes, cardboard,
cardboard cartons, pasteboard and similar paper materials are to be broken down and tied
securely in bundles not to exceed 35 pounds. The material shall be placed at the curb for
collection on the designated paper collection day.
Glass shall be placed in the recycling containers for collection. The glass bottles and jars must be
rinsed clean of food or liquid residue and placed in the container without any caps.
Metal:
Ferrous and bimetal cans must have one end removed, and they must be rinsed clean of food
residue and placed in the recycling container.
Aluminum cans, including beverage cans and cans used to contain food stuff, must be rinsed
clean of food residue and placed in the recycling container.
Plastic. Plastic bottles and containers used to hold beverage and other household goods must be
rinsed clean to remove residues, and caps must be removed. Plastics shall be handled as directed
by the Superintendent of Public Works.
It shall be unlawful for any person to collect, remove or dispose of solid waste which consists of
recyclables combined with other forms of solid waste after the date set by the Village Board for
mandatory recycling.
From the time recyclables are placed at the curb by any resident, ownership of such materials set
out for collection shall thereupon vest in the Village of Rockville Centre. It shall be unlawful for a
person to collect, remove or dispose of recyclables which are the property of the Village. Each
such collection in violation hereof from one or more residences shall constitute a separate and
distinct offense.
The Superintendent of Public Works is empowered to designate the date of the week on which
recyclables shall be collected or removed and the manner of disposal from a particular area.
No person having custody or control of residential premises within the Village of Rockville Centre
shall permit or cause any garbage, rubbish or other refuse, including recyclables, within their
control, to become a hazard or potential hazard to public travel, health or safety or to become a
nuisance of any sort.
The Village Board of Trustees or its duly authorized representative shall be permitted to
promulgate such other rules and regulations as may be deemed necessary to effectuate the intent
of this article.
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 231/441
A.
B.
C.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
A.
§ 283-45. Recycling containers.
Containers for the purpose of separating and placing recyclable materials for collection will be
provided by the Village to residents. Such containers will remain the property of the Village and
must be kept in good and clean condition by such residents. Recycling containers are not to be
used for any purpose other than as described in this section. In the event that such containers are
lost, damaged or stolen, additional containers shall be available from the Department of Public
Works.
Each homeowner or occupant may obtain an additional recycling container at no charge from the
Village upon a showing of need. Additional requests may be granted at the discretion of the
Superintendent of Public Works. Advance arrangements must be made for all additional recycling
containers.
In the event that the Village Board of Trustees or the Superintendent of Public Works finds that
additional measures are necessary in order for such recyclable materials to be marketable, he
shall have the power to require that homeowners or occupants within the Village undertake such
measures, provided that reasonable advance notice is given to such homeowners or occupants.
§ 283-46. Authority of Superintendent of Public Works.
The Superintendent of Public Works is hereby authorized to establish collection schedules, dropoff
schedules and routes for the collection of recyclable materials and to cause reasonable notice of
requirements thereof to be given to the residents of the recycling areas.
§ 283-47. Motor oil.
Notwithstanding any other provisions of this article, used motor oil shall only be disposed of by delivery
to a service station which is required under state law to accept such material or through other facilities
authorized by law to accept such material.
§ 283-48. Unlawful activities; nuisances.
It shall be unlawful for:
Any person, other than those persons lawfully authorized, to collect any designated
recyclables or scavenge or remove any articles from any recyclable container which has been
placed at the roadside for collection or at a dropoff point.
Any person to violate or to cause to assist in the published violation of any provision of this
article or any rules and regulations promulgated by the Village of Rockville Centre pursuant to
this article.
Any person to place or to cause to be placed any material other than designated recyclables
in or near a recycling dropoff point.
Any person to hinder, to obstruct, to prevent or to interfere with the Village of Rockville Centre
or any other authorized persons in the performance of any duty under this article or in the
enforcement of this article.
Recyclables to be placed at the roadside more than one hour before sunset on the day prior
to the regularly scheduled collection or to have empty recycling containers remain at the
roadside later than 6:00 p.m. on the day of collection.
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 232/441
B.
A.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
B.
All unlawful conduct set forth in Subsection A shall constitute a violation.
§ 283-49. Penalties for offenses.
In the event that an owner or occupant of a dwelling within the Village fails to separate and
prepare recyclable materials for collection in accordance with the provisions of this article after
being given reasonable notice of these requirements, collection of all solid waste from such
dwelling will be suspended until such time as the owner or occupant can demonstrate compliance
with the provisions of this article. Such compliance can be demonstrated by placing properly
separated and prepared recyclable materials for collection on the next scheduled collection date
for such recyclable materials.
In addition to the provisions of Subsection A above, any person violating this article or any
provision or section thereof shall be guilty of a violation. Each day that such violation exists shall
constitute a separate offense. Such an offense shall be punishable by a fine and/or imprisonment
in accordance with the following schedule:
For a first conviction, by a fine not to exceed $100.
For a second conviction within one year, by a fine not to exceed $250.
For a third conviction within one year, by a fine not to exceed $500.
For a fourth conviction within one year, by a fine of not less than $1,000 nor more than
$2,500.
§ 283-50. Enforcement.
It shall be the duty of the Superintendent of Public Works, the Department of Public Works Sanitation
General Supervisor, the Code Enforcement Officers, police officers and other authorized officials to
administer the provisions of this article.
§ 283-51. Additional provisions.
The Board of Trustees, by resolution, may exclude from time to time the separation and recycling of
any materials set forth in this article. The Board of Trustees, by resolution, may exclude various
classes of property from participation in and compliance with this article. The Board of Trustees, by
resolution, may delay the requirement of segregating various materials. The Board of Trustees, by
resolution, may expand the list of recyclable materials as required to comply with the Town of
Hempstead and state requirements.
Article IX. Assessment for Unpaid Charges
[Adopted 12-14-1992 by L.L. No. 9-1992]
§ 283-52. Unpaid fees to be added to tax levy.
All unpaid fees or charges for municipal or municipally contracted solid waste collection and/or
disposal services imposed on or after January 1, 1993, including penalties or interest, not paid by May
20 of each year shall be added to the Village tax levy.
§ 283-53. Annual statement.
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 233/441
A.
B.
C.
The Board of Trustees shall annually cause a statement to be prepared setting forth each amount of
solid waste disposal and/or collection fees in arrears as of April 20 of each year, a brief description of
the property for which or in connection with which such solid waste services were provided and the
name and address of the person or corporation liable to pay such amount. Such statement shall be
presented to the Board of Trustees, which shall levy such amounts remaining unpaid on the date taxes
are levied against the real property for which or in connection with which such solid waste services
were provided.
§ 283-54. Fees for sanitation removal.
The fees or charges for sanitation removal shall be set by the Superintendent of Public Works from
time to time and adjusted as the need arises.
§ 283-55. Effective date.
This article shall take effect on January 1, 1993.
Chapter 285. Storage Containers, Temporary
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Trustees of the Village of Rockville Centre 12-4-2006 by L.L. No.
13-2006. Amendments noted where applicable.]
§ 285-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the indicated meanings except where the
context clearly demonstrates otherwise:
STORAGE CONTAINER
Any container located outdoors on a residential property, and which is used or intended to be used
for the purpose of storing or keeping household goods and other personal property. The term
“storage container” as used in this chapter shall not include a shed or garage.
§ 285-2. Prohibition.
No person or entity shall locate, or permit to be located, any storage container on any property in the
Village without a permit as authorized by this chapter.
§ 285-3. Permit required; regulations.
Upon proper written application pursuant to this chapter, the Building Inspector may issue a permit for
a storage container, subject to the conditions set forth in this chapter.
The form of such application shall be established by the Building Department.
Such application shall be accompanied by payment of a fee in an amount determined from time to
time by resolution of the Board of Trustees.
No more than one storage container shall be permitted on the property at one time, and such
storage container shall not occupy a ground area in excess of 120 square feet, nor be more than
eight feet in height.
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 234/441
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
I.
A.
B.
Any authorized storage container shall be set back not less than five feet from the side and rear
property lines and from any structures on the property. A storage container located in the front
yard shall be set back not less than 10 feet from the front property line.
In determining whether to grant a permit for a storage container, the Building Inspector shall
consider the rights and interests of owners and occupants of adjoining properties, to the end that
such adjoining properties not be deprived or unduly limited in light, air or reasonable use during
the period of time that the storage container is on any property.
The duration of any permit for a storage container shall not exceed 60 days, except that upon
written application and payment of any additional fee as may be from time to time established by
the Board of Trustees, the Building Inspector may extend the duration of such permit for an
additional period of time, not to exceed 30 days. Further extensions of time shall be in the
discretion of the Building Inspector upon good cause shown.
Storage containers shall be removed from the property no later than the date of permit expiration.
In granting or extending any permit pursuant to this chapter, the Building Inspector may impose
reasonable conditions where such conditions are determined to be necessary to protect the public
health, safety or general welfare.
Any permit issued pursuant to this chapter may be revoked by the Building Inspector if, after due
investigation, it is determined that the permit holder has violated any condition of this chapter or of
such permit, that the container is being maintained in an unsafe condition, or that the container is
a nuisance. Written notice of such revocation shall be given either by personal delivery to the
permit holder or the owner of the property on which the container is located, or by mailing such
notice to such person or entity in a sealed postage paid envelope addressed to the permit holder
or the property owner at the address indicated for such person or entity in the records of the
Building Department.
Chapter 286. Stormwater Management and Erosion and
Sediment Control
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Trustees of the Village of Rockville Centre 12-17-2007 by L.L. No.
10-2007. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 188.
Freshwater wetlands — See Ch. 197.
Soil and earth removal — See Ch. 280.
Planning Board; site plan review; subdivision of land — See Ch. 330.
Zoning — See Ch. 340.
ATTACHMENTS
286a Schedule A
§ 286-1. Findings of fact.
The Board of Trustees of the Village of Rockville Centre hereby finds and determines as follows:
Land development activities and associated increases in site impervious cover often alter the
hydrologic response of local watersheds and increase stormwater runoff rates and volumes,
flooding, stream channel erosion, or sediment transport and deposition;
This stormwater runoff contributes to increased quantities of waterborne pollutants, including
siltation of aquatic habitat for fish and other desirable species;
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 235/441
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
I.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
Clearing and grading during construction tends to increase soil erosion and add to the loss of
native vegetation necessary for terrestrial and aquatic habitat;
Improper design and construction of stormwater management practices can increase the velocity
of stormwater runoff, thereby increasing stream bank erosion and sedimentation;
Impervious surfaces allow less water to percolate into the soil, thereby decreasing groundwater
recharge and stream baseflow;
Substantial economic losses can result from these adverse impacts on the waters of the
municipality;
Stormwater runoff, soil erosion and nonpoint source pollution can be controlled and minimized
through the regulation of stormwater runoff from land development activities;
The regulation of stormwater runoff discharges from land development activities in order to control
and minimize increases in stormwater runoff rates and volumes, soil erosion, stream channel
erosion, and nonpoint source pollution associated with stormwater runoff is in the public interest
and will minimize threats to public health and safety;
Regulation of land development activities by means of performance standards governing
stormwater management and site design will produce development compatible with the natural
functions of a particular site or an entire watershed and thereby mitigate the adverse effects of
erosion and sedimentation from development.
§ 286-2. Purpose.
The Village of Rockville Centre has developed a stormwater management program for coverage under
the New York State Pollution Discharge Elimination System (SPDES) requirements. The purpose of
this chapter is to establish minimum stormwater management requirements and controls to protect and
safeguard the general health, safety, and welfare of the public residing with in this jurisdiction and to
address the findings of fact in this chapter. This chapter seeks to meet those purposes by achieving
the following objectives:
Meet the requirements of minimum measures 4 and 5 of the SPDES General Permit for
Stormwater Discharges from Municipal Separate Stormwater Sewer Systems (MS4s), Permit No.
GP-02-02, or as amended or revised;
Require land development activities to conform to the substantive requirements of the NYS
Department of Environmental Conservation State Pollutant Discharge Elimination System
(SPDES) General Permit for Construction Activities GP-02-01, or as amended or revised;
Minimize increases in stormwater runoff from land development activities in order to reduce
flooding, siltation, increases in creek and channel temperature, and bank erosion, and maintain
the integrity of creeks and channels;
Minimize increases in pollution caused by stormwater runoff from land development activities
which would otherwise degrade local water quality;
Minimize the total annual volume of stormwater runoff which flows from any specific site during
and following development to the maximum extent practicable; and
Reduce stormwater runoff rates and volumes, soil erosion and nonpoint source pollution,
wherever possible, through stormwater management practices and to ensure that these
management practices are properly maintained and eliminate threats to public safety.
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 236/441
A.
B.
C.
A.
B.
C.
§ 286-3. Statutory authority.
In accordance with the Municipal Home Rule Law and Village Law of the State of New York, the Board
of Trustees ("Board") of the Village of Rockville Centre ("Village") has the authority to enact local laws
and amend local laws and for the purpose of promoting the health, safety or general welfare of the
Village and for the protection and enhancement of its physical environment. The Board may include in
any such local law provisions for the appointment of any municipal officer, employees, or independent
contractor to effectuate, administer and enforce such local law.
§ 286-4. Applicability.
This chapter shall be applicable to all land development activities as defined in this chapter.
§ 286-5. Stormwater Management Officer duties and authority.
The Stormwater Management Officer shall accept and review all stormwater pollution prevention plans
and forward such plans to the applicable municipal board. The Stormwater Management Officer may:
Review the plans;
Upon approval by the Board, engage the services of a registered professional engineer to review
the plans, specifications and related documents at a cost not to exceed the fee schedule
established by said governing board; or
Accept the certification of a licensed professional that the plans conform to the requirements of
this chapter.
§ 286-6. Land development activities subject to review.
All land development activities subject to review and approval by the Planning Board or the Board of
Appeals under subdivision, site plan and/or special permit regulations of the Village Code shall be
reviewed subject to the standards contained in this chapter.
§ 286-7. Land development activities not subject to review.
All land development activities not subject to review as stated in section § 286-6 shall be required to
submit a stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPPP) to the Stormwater Management Officer who
shall approve the SWPPP if it complies with the requirements of this chapter.
§ 286-8. Exemptions.
The following activities shall be exempt from review under this chapter:
Routine maintenance activities that disturb less than five acres and are performed to maintain the
original line and grade, hydraulic capacity or original purpose of a facility;
Repairs to any stormwater management practice or facility deemed necessary by the Stormwater
Management Officer;
Any part of a subdivision if a plat for the subdivision has received final approval on or before the
effective date of this chapter;
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 237/441
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
I.
Land development activities for which a building permit has been approved and issued on or
before the effective date of this chapter.
Installation of fence, sign, telephone, and electric poles and other kinds of posts or poles;
Emergency protective measures immediately or imminently necessary to protect life, property or
natural resources;
Activities of an individual engaging in home gardening by growing flowers, vegetable and other
plants primarily for use by that individual and the family members of such individual;
Landscaping and horticultural activities in connection with an existing structure or use;
Fire-fighting activities that produce runoff waters to enter the MS4 or U.S. waters.
§ 286-9. Definitions.
The following terms used in this chapter shall have the meaning set forth in this section:
APPLICANT
A property owner or agent of a property owner who has filed an application for a land development
activity.
BUILDING
Any structure, either temporary or permanent, having walls and a roof, designed for the shelter of
any person, animal, or property, and occupying more than 100 square feet of area.
CHANNEL
A natural or artificial watercourse with a definite bed and banks that conducts continuously or
periodically flowing water.
CLEARING
Any activity that removes the vegetative surface cover.
DEDICATION
The deliberate appropriation of property by its owner for general public use.
DEPARTMENT OR DEC
The New York State Department of Environmental Conservation.
DESIGN MANUAL
The New York State Stormwater Management Design Manual, most recent version, including
applicable updates, that serves as the official guide for stormwater management principles,
methods and practices.
DEVELOPER
A person who undertakes land development activities.
EPA
The Environmental Protection Agency.
EROSION CONTROL MANUAL
The most recent version of the New York Standards and Specifications for Erosion and Sediment
Control manual, commonly known as the "Blue Book."
GRADING
Excavation or fill of material, including the resulting conditions thereof.
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 238/441
IMPERVIOUS COVER
Those surfaces, improvements and structures that cannot effectively infiltrate rainfall, snowmelt
and water (e.g., building rooftops, pavement, sidewalks, driveways, etc.).
INDUSTRIAL STORMWATER PERMIT
A State Pollutant Discharge Elimination System permit issued to a commercial industry or group of
industries which regulates the pollutant levels associated with industrial stormwater discharges or
specifies on-site pollution control strategies.
INFILTRATION
The process of percolating stormwater into the subsoil.
JURISDICTIONAL WETLAND
An area that is inundated or saturated by surface water or groundwater at a frequency and
duration sufficient to support a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil
conditions, commonly known as "hydrophytic vegetation."
LAND DEVELOPMENT/REDEVELOPMENT ACTIVITY
Construction activity including clearing, grading, excavating, soil disturbance or placement of fill
that results in land disturbance of equal to or greater than one acre, or activities disturbing less
than one acre of total land area that is part of a larger common plan of development or sale, even
though multiple separate and distinct land development activities may take place at different times
on different schedules.
LANDOWNER
The legal or beneficial owner of land, including those holding the right to purchase or lease the
land, or any other person holding proprietary rights in the land.
LICENSED/CERTIFIED PROFESSIONAL
A person currently licensed to practice engineering in New York State or a Certified Professional in
Erosion and Sediment Control (CPESC).
MAINTENANCE AGREEMENT
A legally recorded document that acts as a property deed restriction, and which provides for longterm
maintenance of stormwater management practices.
NONPOINT SOURCE POLLUTION
Pollution from any source other than from any discernible, confined, and discrete conveyances,
and shall include, but not be limited to, pollutants from agricultural, silvicultural, mining,
construction, subsurface disposal and urban runoff sources.
NYSDEC
New York State Department of Environmental Conservation.
PHASING
Clearing a parcel of land in distinct pieces or parts, with the stabilization of each piece completed
before the clearing of the next.
PLANNING BOARD
The Village Planning Board.
POLLUTANT OF CONCERN
Sediment or a water quality measurement that addresses sediment (such as total suspended
solids, turbidity or siltation) and any other pollutant that has been identified as a cause of
impairment of any water body that will receive a discharge from the land development activity.
PROJECT
Land development activity.
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 239/441
RECHARGE
The replenishment of underground water reserves.
SEDIMENT CONTROL
Measures that prevent eroded sediment from leaving the site.
SENSITIVE AREAS
Cold water fisheries, shellfish beds, swimming beaches, groundwater recharge areas, water
supply reservoirs, habitats for threatened, endangered or special concern species.
SPDES GENERAL PERMIT FOR CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITIES GP-02-01
A permit under the New York State Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (SPDES) issued to
developers of construction activities to regulate disturbance of one or more acres of land.
SPDES GENERAL PERMIT FOR STORMWATER DISCHARGES FROM MUNICIPAL SEPARATE
STORMWATER SEWER SYSTEMS GP-02-02
A permit under the New York State Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (SPDES) issued to
municipalities to regulate discharges from municipal separate storm sewers for compliance with
EPA established water quality standards and/or to specify stormwater control standards.
STABILIZATION
The use of practices that prevent exposed soil from eroding.
STOP-WORK ORDER
An order issued which requires that all construction activity on a site be stopped.
STORMWATER
Rainwater, surface runoff, snowmelt and drainage.
STORMWATER HOTSPOT
A land use or activity that generates higher concentrations of hydrocarbons, trace metals or
toxicants than are found in typical stormwater runoff, based on monitoring studies.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
The use of structural or nonstructural practices that are designed to reduce stormwater runoff and
mitigate its adverse impacts on property, natural resources and the environment. This shall include
the practices listed on Schedule A included in this chapter.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT FACILITY
One or a series of stormwater management practices installed, stabilized and operating for the
purpose of controlling stormwater runoff.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT OFFICER (SMO)
The Village Superintendent of Public Works (or the person serving in the capacity of the
Superintendent) or the authorized deputies, agents or representatives of the Superintendent,
including employees of Village departments, as appropriate, or other persons designated by the
Mayor, with the approval of the Board of Trustees. The SMO is authorized to accept and review
stormwater pollution prevention plans, forward the plans to the applicable municipal board, inspect
stormwater management practices, and exercise the powers and duties specified for such official
in this chapter.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (SMPS)
Measures, either structural or nonstructural, that are determined to be the most effective, practical
means of preventing flood damage and preventing or reducing point source or nonpoint source
pollution inputs to stormwater runoff and water bodies.
STORMWATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PLAN (SWPPP)
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 240/441
[1]
(1)
A.
A plan for controlling stormwater runoff and pollutants from a site during and after construction
activities.
STORMWATER RUNOFF
Flow on the surface of the ground resulting from precipitation.
STREAM CHANNEL
A natural or artificial watercourse with a definite bed and banks that conducts continuously or
periodically flowing water (see also "watercourse" and "waterway").
SUPERINTENDENT
The Village Superintendent of Public Works.
SURFACE WATERS OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK
Lakes, bays, sounds, ponds, impounding reservoirs, springs, wells, rivers, streams, creeks,
estuaries, marshes, inlets, canals, the Atlantic Ocean within the territorial seas of the State of New
York and all other bodies of surface water, natural or artificial, inland or coastal, fresh or salt,
public or private (except those private waters that do not combine or effect a junction with natural
surface or underground waters), which are wholly or partially within or bordering the state or within
its jurisdiction. Storm sewers and waste treatment systems, including treatment ponds or lagoons
which also meet the criteria of this definition, are not waters of the state. This exclusion applies
only to man-made bodies of water which neither were originally created in waters of the state
(such as a disposal area in wetlands) nor resulted from impoundment of waters of the state.
VILLAGE
The Village of Rockville Centre.
WATERCOURSE
A permanent or intermittent stream or other body of water, either natural or man-made, which
gathers or carries surface water.
WATERWAY
A channel that directs surface runoff to a watercourse or to the public storm drain.
ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS, OR BOARD OF APPEALS
The Village Zoning Board of Appeals.
§ 286-10. Schedule A: Stormwater Management Practices
Acceptable For Water Quality.
Editor's Note: Schedule A is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 286-11. Stormwater pollution prevention plans.
No application for approval of a land development activity shall be reviewed until the appropriate board
has received a stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPPP) prepared in accordance with the
specifications in this chapter.
Contents of stormwater pollution prevention plans. All SWPPPs shall provide the following
background information and erosion and sediment controls:
Background information about the scope of the project, including location, type and size of
project.
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 241/441
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
(11)
(12)
(13)
(14)
(15)
(16)
B.
Site map/construction drawing(s) for the project, including a general location map. At a
minimum, the site map should show the total site area; all improvements; areas of
disturbance; areas that will not be disturbed; existing vegetation; on-site and adjacent off-site
surface water(s); wetlands and drainage patterns that could be affected by the construction
activity; existing and final slopes; locations of off-site material, waste, borrow or equipment
storage areas; and location(s) of the stormwater discharges(s). The site map shall be at a
scale no smaller than one inch equals 100 feet;
Description of the soil(s) present at the site;
Construction phasing plan describing the intended sequence of construction activities,
including clearing and grubbing, excavation and grading, utility and infrastructure installation
and any other activity at the site that results in soil disturbance. Consistent with the New York
Standards and Specifications for Erosion and Sediment Control (Erosion Control Manual), not
more than five acres shall be disturbed at any one time unless pursuant to an approved
SWPPP.
Description of the pollution prevention measures that will be used to control litter, construction
chemicals and construction debris from becoming a pollutant source in stormwater runoff;
Description of construction and waste materials expected to be stored on site with updates as
appropriate, and a description of controls to reduce pollutants from these materials including
storage practices to minimize exposure of the materials to stormwater, and spill prevention
and response;
Temporary and permanent structural and vegetative measures to be used for soil stabilization,
runoff control and sediment control for each stage of the project, from initial land clearing and
grubbing to project closeout;
A site map/construction drawing(s) specifying the location(s), size(s) and length(s) of each
erosion and sediment control practice;
Dimensions, material specifications and installation details for all erosion and sediment
control practices, including the siting and sizing of any temporary sediment basins;
Temporary practices that will be converted to permanent control measures;
Implementation schedule for staging temporary erosion and sediment control practices,
including the timing of initial placement and duration that each practice should remain in
place;
Maintenance schedule to ensure continuous and effective operation of the erosion and
sediment control practice;
Name(s) of the receiving water(s);
Delineation of SWPPP implementation responsibilities for each part of the site;
Description of structural practices designed to divert flows from exposed soils, store flows, or
otherwise limit runoff and the discharge of pollutants from exposed areas of the site to the
degree attainable; and
Any existing data that describes the stormwater runoff at the site.
Land development activities meeting one or more of the following conditions shall also include
water quantity and water quality controls (postconstruction stormwater runoff controls) as set forth
in this chapter, as applicable:
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 242/441
(1)
(2)
(3)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
C.
Stormwater runoff from land development activities discharging a pollutant of concern to
either an impaired water identified on the Department's 303(d) list of impaired waters, or total
maximum daily load (TMDL) designated watershed for which pollutants in stormwater have
been identified as a source of the impairment; or
Stormwater runoff from land development activities disturbing five or more acres; or
Stormwater runoff from land development activity disturbing between one and five acres of
land during the course of the project.
SWPPP requirements. Land development activities meeting one or more of the foregoing
conditions:
All information in this chapter;
Description of each postconstruction stormwater management practice;
Site map/construction drawing(s) showing the specific location(s) and size(s) of each post
construction stormwater management practice;
Hydrologic and hydraulic analysis for all structural components of the stormwater
management system for the applicable design storms;
Comparison of postdevelopment stormwater runoff conditions with predevelopment
conditions;
Dimensions, material specifications and installation details for each postconstruction
stormwater management practice;
Maintenance schedule to ensure continuous and effective operation of each postconstruction
stormwater management practice;
Maintenance easements to ensure access to all stormwater management practices at the site
for the purpose of inspection and repair. Easements shall be recorded on the plan and shall
remain in effect with transfer of title to the property;
Inspection and maintenance agreement binding on all subsequent landowners served by the
on-site stormwater management measures in accordance with this chapter.
§ 286-12. Plan certification.
The SWPPP shall be prepared by a landscape architect, certified professional or professional engineer
and must be signed by the professional preparing the plan, who shall certify that the design of all
stormwater management practices meets the requirements in this chapter.
§ 286-13. Other environmental permits.
The applicant shall assure that all other applicable environmental permits have been or will be
acquired for the land development activity prior to approval of the final stormwater design plan.
§ 286-14. Contractor certification.
Each contractor and subcontractor identified in the SWPPP who will be involved in soil disturbance
and/or stormwater management practice installation shall sign and date a copy of the following
certification statement before undertaking any land development activity: "I certify under penalty of law
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 243/441
(1)
(2)
A.
A.
B.
that I understand and agree to comply with the terms and conditions of the stormwater pollution
prevention plan. I also understand that it is unlawful for any person to cause or contribute to a violation
of water quality standards." The certification must include the name and title of the person providing
the signature, address and telephone number of the contracting firm; the address (or other identifying
description) of the site; and the date the certification is made. The certification statement(s) shall
become part of the SWPPP for the land development activity.
§ 286-15. SWPPP to be retained on site.
A copy of the SWPPP shall be retained at the site of the land development activity during construction
from the date of initiation of construction activities to the date of final stabilization.
§ 286-16. Performance and design criteria.
All land development activities shall be subject to the following performance and design criteria:
Technical standards. For the purpose of this chapter, the following documents shall serve as the
official guides and specifications for stormwater management. Stormwater management practices
that are designed and constructed in accordance with these technical documents shall be
presumed to meet the standards imposed by this chapter:
The New York State Stormwater Management Design Manual (New York State Department of
Environmental Conservation, most current version or its successor, hereafter referred to as
the "Design Manual");
New York Standards and Specifications for Erosion and Sediment Control, (Empire State
Chapter of the Soil and Water Conservation Society, 2004, most current version or its
successor, hereafter referred to as the "Erosion Control Manual").
§ 286-17. Water quality standards.
No land development activity shall cause an increase in turbidity that will result in substantial visible
contrast to natural conditions in surface waters of the State of New York.
§ 286-18. Maintenance and repair during construction.
The applicant or developer of the land development activity shall at all times properly operate and
maintain all facilities and systems of treatment and control (and related appurtenances) which are
installed or used by the applicant or developer to achieve compliance with the conditions of this
chapter. Sediment shall be removed from sediment traps or sediment ponds whenever their
design capacity has been reduced by 50%.
The applicant or developer or their representative shall be on site at all times when construction or
grading activity takes place and shall inspect and document the effectiveness of all erosion and
sediment control practices. Inspection reports shall be completed every seven days and within 24
hours of any storm event producing 0.5 inch of precipitation or more. The reports shall be
delivered to the Stormwater Management Officer and also copied to the site logbook.
§ 286-19. Maintenance easements.
Prior to the issuance of any approval that has a stormwater management facility as one of the
requirements, the applicant or developer must execute a maintenance easement agreement that shall
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 244/441
A.
B.
C.
A.
B.
A.
B.
be binding on all subsequent landowners served by the stormwater management facility. The
easement shall provide for access to the facility at reasonable times for periodic inspection by the
Village to ensure that the facility is maintained in proper working condition to meet design standards
and any other provisions established by this chapter. The easement shall be recorded by the grantor in
the office of the County Clerk after approval by the Village Attorney.
§ 286-20. Maintenance after construction.
The owner or operator of permanent stormwater management practices installed in accordance with
this chapter shall be operated and maintained to achieve the goals of this chapter. Proper operation
and maintenance also includes, as a minimum, the following:
A preventive/corrective maintenance program for all critical facilities and systems of treatment and
control (or related appurtenances) which are installed or used by the owner or operator to achieve
the goals of this chapter;
Written procedures for operation and maintenance and training new maintenance personnel;
Discharges from the SMPs shall not exceed design criteria or cause or contribute to water quality
standard violations in accordance with this chapter.
§ 286-21. Maintenance agreements.
The Board shall approve a formal maintenance agreement for stormwater management facilities
binding on all subsequent landowners, which agreement shall be in a form approved by the Village
Attorney, and recorded by the owner in the office of the County Clerk as a deed restriction on the
property prior to final plan approval.
In lieu of such maintenance agreement, the Board, in its sole discretion, may accept dedication of
any existing or future stormwater management facility, provided such facility meets all the
requirements of this chapter and includes adequate and perpetual access and sufficient area, by
easement or otherwise, for inspection and regular maintenance.
§ 286-22. Subdivisions.
The following requirements shall be applicable to subdivisions of property in addition to any other
applicable laws, rules or regulations pertaining to subdivisions of property in the Village:
Prior to approval of any preliminary subdivision plat, a satisfactory stormwater pollution prevention
plan (SWPPP) consistent with the requirements of this chapter shall be provided. The SWPPP
shall meet the performance and design criteria and standards in this chapter. The approved
preliminary subdivision plat shall be consistent with the provisions of this chapter.
Prior to approval of any final subdivision plat, a stormwater pollution prevention plan consistent
with the requirements of this chapter and with the terms of preliminary plan approval shall be
required for final subdivision plat approval. The SWPPP shall meet the performance and design
criteria and standards in this chapter. The approved final subdivision plat shall be consistent with
the provisions of this chapter.
§ 286-23. Site plan approvals.
In any case where a site plan approval is required pursuant to this Code, no such approval shall be
granted unless a stormwater pollution prevention plan consistent with the requirements of this chapter
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 245/441
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)
(1)
(2)
A.
B.
C.
has been provided as part of the application for site plan approval. The SWPPP shall meet the
performance and design criteria and standards in this chapter. The approved site plan shall be
consistent with the provisions of this chapter.
§ 286-24. Administration and enforcement.
The following provisions for construction inspection, performance guarantees and bonds, and
enforcement are applicable to any project or development subject to this chapter in addition to the
other provisions of this Code; provided, however, that this section shall not be applicable to the extent
that any other provision of this Code contains a stricter or more stringent requirement:
Inspections.
Erosion and sediment control inspection. The Stormwater Management Officer may require
such inspections as necessary to determine compliance with this chapter and may either
approve that portion of the work completed or notify the applicant wherein the work fails to
comply with the requirements of this chapter and the stormwater pollution prevention plan
(SWPPP) as approved. To obtain inspections, the applicant shall notify the Stormwater
Management Officer at least 48 hours before any of the following, as required by the
Stormwater Management Officer:
Start of construction;
Installation of sediment and erosion control measures;
Completion of site clearing;
Completion of rough grading;
Completion of final grading;
Close of the construction season;
Completion of final landscaping;
Successful establishment of landscaping in public areas.
If any violations are found as a result of any such inspection, the applicant and developer
shall be notified in writing of the nature of the violation and the required corrective actions. No
further work shall be conducted except for site stabilization until any violations are corrected
and all work previously completed has received approval by the Stormwater Management
Officer.
Stormwater management practice inspections. The Stormwater Management Officer is
responsible for conducting inspections of stormwater management practices (SMPs). All
applicants are required to submit as-built plans for any stormwater management practices located
on site after final construction is completed. The plan must show the final design specifications for
all stormwater management facilities and must be certified by a professional engineer.
Inspection of stormwater facilities after project completion. Inspection programs shall be
established on any reasonable basis, including but not limited to: routine inspections; random
inspections; inspections based upon complaints or other notice of possible violations; inspect ion
of drainage basins or areas identified as higher-than-typical sources of sediment or other
contaminants or pollutants; inspections of businesses or industries of a type associated with
higher-than-usual discharges of contaminants or pollutants or with discharges of a type which are
more likely than the typical discharge to cause violations of state or federal water or sediment
quality standards or the SPDES stormwater perm it; and joint inspections with other agencies
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 246/441
inspecting under environmental or safety laws. Inspections may include, but are not limited to:
reviewing maintenance and repair records; sampling discharges, surface water, groundwater, and
material or water in drainage control facilities; and evaluating the condition of drainage control
facilities and other stormwater management practices.
§ 286-25. Submission of reports.
The Stormwater Management Officer may require monitoring and reporting from entities subject to this
chapter as are necessary to determine compliance with this chapter.
§ 286-26. Right-of-entry for inspection.
When any new stormwater management facility is installed on private property or when any new
connection is made between private property and the public stormwater system, the landowner shall
grant to the Village, or its designee, the right to enter the property at reasonable times and in a
reasonable manner for the purpose of inspection as specified in this chapter.
§ 286-27. Construction completion guarantee.
In order to ensure the full and faithful completion of all land development activities related to
compliance with all conditions set forth by the Village in its approval of the stormwater pollution
prevention plan, the Board may require the applicant or developer to provide, prior to construction, a
performance bond, cash escrow, or irrevocable letter of credit from an appropriate financial or surety
institution which guarantees satisfactory completion of the project and names the Village as the
beneficiary. The security shall be in an amount to be determined by the Board based on submission of
final design plans, with reference to actual construction and landscaping costs. The performance
guarantee shall remain in force until the surety is released from liability by the Board, provided that
such period shall not be less than one year from the date of final acceptance or such other certification
that the facility(ies) have been constructed in accordance with the approved plans and specifications
and that a one-year inspection has been conducted and the facilities have been found to be acceptable
to the Board. Per annum interest on cash escrow deposits shall be reinvested in the account until the
surety is released from liability.
§ 286-28. Maintenance guarantee.
Where stormwater management and erosion and sediment control facilities are to be operated and
maintained by the developer or by a person or entity that owns or manages a nonresidential facility, the
developer, prior to construction, may be required to provide the Village with an irrevocable letter of
credit from an approved financial institution or surety to ensure proper operation and maintenance of
all stormwater management and erosion control facilities both during and after construction, and until
the facilities are removed from operation. If the developer or landowner fails to properly operate and
maintain stormwater management and erosion and sediment control facilities, the Village may draw
upon the account to cover the costs of proper operation and maintenance, including engineering and
inspection costs.
§ 286-29. Recordkeeping.
Entities subject to this chapter shall maintain records demonstrating compliance with this chapter.
§ 286-30. Enforcement.
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 247/441
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
A.
B.
Notice of violation. When the Stormwater Management Officer or other authorized Village official
determines that a land development activity is not being carried out in accordance with the
requirements of this chapter, such official may issue a written notice of violation to the landowner.
The notice of violation shall contain, at a minimum:
The name and address of the landowner, developer or applicant;
The address, when available, or a description of the building, structure or land upon which the
violation is occurring;
A statement specifying the nature of the violation;
A description of the remedial measures necessary to bring the land development activity into
compliance with this chapter and a time schedule for the completion of such remedial action;
A statement of the penalty or penalties that shall or may be assessed against the person to
whom the notice of violation is directed;
A statement that the determination of violation may be appealed to the Board by filing a
written notice of appeal within 15 days of service of notice of violation.
Stop-work orders. The Stormwater Management Officer or Code Official may issue a stop-work
order for violations of this chapter. Persons receiving a stop-work order shall be required to halt all
land development activities, except those activities that address the violations leading to the stopwork
order. The stop-work order shall be in effect until the official issuing such order, or the Board,
confirms that the land development activity is in compliance and the violation has been
satisfactorily addressed. Failure to address a stop-work order in a timely manner may result in
civil, criminal, or monetary penalties in accordance with the enforcement measures authorized in
this chapter.
§ 286-31. Remedies.
In addition to any other remedy or penalty applicable by law, any land development activity that is
commenced or is conducted contrary to this chapter may be restrained by injunction or otherwise
abated in a manner provided by law.
§ 286-32. Penalties for offenses.
Unless a higher or more strict penalty is otherwise provided by law, any person who violates the
provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a violation punishable by a fine not exceeding $500 or
imprisonment for a period not to exceed 15 days, or both for conviction of a first offense; for conviction
of a second offense, both of which were committed within a period of five years, such person shall be
punishable by a fine not less than $500 nor more than $1,000 or imprisonment for a period not to
exceed six months, or both; and upon conviction for a third or subsequent offense, all of which were
committed within a period of five years, such person shall be punishable by a fine not less than $1,000
or imprisonment for a period not to exceed six months, or both. Each calendar week in which a
violation occurs or continues shall constitute a separate additional violation.
§ 286-33. Withholding of certificate of occupancy.
If any building or land development activity is installed or conducted in violation of this chapter, the
Stormwater Management Officer or the Code Official may prevent or prohibit the occupancy of said
building or land.
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 248/441
A.
§ 286-34. Restoration of lands.
Any person violating any provision of this chapter may be required to restore land to its undisturbed
condition. In the event that restoration is not undertaken within a reasonable time after notice, the
Board may take necessary corrective action, the cost of which shall become a lien upon the property
until paid.
§ 286-35. Fees for services.
Any person undertaking land development activities regulated by this chapter shall pay the fees and
costs required pursuant to the Village's fee regulations, such costs to be paid at prevailing rates for
review of SWPPPs, inspections, or SMP maintenance performed by the Village or performed by a third
party for the Village.
Chapter 287. Streets and Sidewalks
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Trustees of the Village of Rockville Centre as indicated in article
histories. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Traffic Violation Bureau — See Ch. 62.
Village liability — See Ch. 66.
Awnings — See Ch. 96.
Bicycles — See Ch. 99.
Building code — See Ch. 112.
Dangerous and unsafe buildings — See Ch. 122.
Moving of buildings — See Ch. 126.
Numbering of buildings — See Ch. 129.
Junk and secondhand dealers — See Ch. 215
Licenses — See Ch. 222.
Parades and processions — See Ch. 239.
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 250.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 261.
Soil and earth removal — See Ch. 280.
Solid waste — See Ch. 283.
Taxicabs — See Ch. 297.
Towing — See Ch. 300.
Trees, shrubs and hedges — See Ch. 303.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 309.
Planning Board; site plan review; subdivision of land — See Ch. 330.
Signs and posting bills — See Ch. 335.
Zoning — See Ch. 340.
Article I. Construction of Sidewalks, Curbs and Curb Cuts
[Adopted 2-22-1971 by L.L. No. 1-1971 as Ch. 111, Art. I, of the 1971 Code]
§ 287-1. Permits required; qualifications; fee schedule.
Qualifications. No person not recognized by the Department of Public Works as a duly qualified
sidewalk contractor shall be authorized to construct any sidewalk, curb or curb cut on or adjacent
to any street, highway, public place or other Village properties; and such persons before engaging
upon such work must first obtain from the Village Clerk a permit authorizing such construction.
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 249/441
B.
(1)
(2)
(3)
A.
B.
C.
Fees. At the time of making application to the Village for a permit to construct a sidewalk, curb or
gutter, the owner or agent shall pay the Village the engineering costs for establishing line and
grade for the proposed construction, such costs or charges to be at the levels fixed from time to
time by resolution of the Board of Trustees of the Village of Rockville Centre.
[Amended 12-4-1972]
§ 287-2. Compensation insurance required.
No permit shall be issued until the contractor shall file with the Village Clerk a certificate showing that
said contractor carries workmen's compensation insurance to adequately cover all of said contractor's
employees.
§ 287-3. Bond required.
Each application for a permit shall further be accompanied by a certificate of insurance in form
approved by the Village Counsel and issued by an insurance company authorized to do business in
this state, running to the Village, guaranteeing that the applicant has provided public liability coverage
of not less than $50,000/$100,000 and property damage insurance of $25,000/$50,000 to save the
Village harmless from claims, actions and proceedings brought by any person for injury to person or
property resulting from or occasioned by any fault or default of the person to whom the permit is issued
or by anyone acting thereunder on his behalf.
§ 287-4. Construction to grades.
No person shall construct or cause or permit to be constructed a curb or sidewalk unless the same
shall be constructed in accordance with the grade which shall have been obtained from the Village
Engineer.
§ 287-5. Work and material requirements.
Construction.
All sidewalks shall be four feet in width in residential areas, and in business areas (including
nonconforming business use areas) sidewalks shall be constructed so as to cover the full
area between the curb and the property line, unless otherwise directed by the Superintendent
of Public Works, and shall not be less than four inches thick in areas zoned for residential use
and not less than five inches thick in areas zoned for business use. Sidewalks may be built in
one or two courses. Where crossed by driveways, all sidewalks shall be not less than six
inches thick through the width of the driveway.
All curbs shall be 18 inches in depth and not less than six inches thick in residential areas and
not less than eight inches thick in business areas and shall be built in one course.
Concrete gutters shall not be less than 18 inches wide and six inches thick and shall be built
in one course.
Excavation. All topsoil and loam or impervious material and all tree roots, stumps, rock, sod,
broken concrete and like matters encountered in a subgrade must be removed for a depth of not
less than four inches below the bottom grade of the proposed construction, and the excavation
refilled with sand, gravel or cinders well tamped into place. No concrete shall be placed on a
frozen subgrade or one which is soft or springy.
Composition.
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 250/441
[1]
[2]
(a)
(b)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(a)
(7)
Mixture.
The mixture for concrete in construction of sidewalks, curbs or gutters shall conform to
the following specifications:
One-course walks, curbs and gutters shall have a mixture of not less than one part
of cement to two parts of clean sand to 3 1/2 parts of clean, sharp gravel or broken
stone.
Two-course walks for the base course shall have a mixture of one part of cement to
two parts of clean sand to four parts of clean, sharp gravel or broken stone. The top
course shall consist of one-inch thickness of mortar mixed in the proportions of one
part of cement to two parts of clean sand.
The base course shall be thoroughly tamped and the top course applied soon enough
thereafter to insure complete bonding of courses.
Cement. All cement shall conform to the standard specifications of the American Society for
Testing Materials, Serial Designation C-9-30, or subsequent amendments thereto.
Fine aggregate. Sand shall be clean, free of gravel, uncoated and shall not contain more than
3% by weight of clay or loam nor any vegetable matter, silt or other deleterious matters. Not
more than 5% shall pass a one-hundred-mesh screen. Not more than 25% shall pass a fiftymesh
screen. One hundred percent shall pass a four-mesh screen.
Coarse aggregate. Gravel or broken stone shall be clean, hard, durable and free of
elongated, thin or laminated particles. It shall contain no vegetable or other deleterious
substances. The sizes shall be well graded approximately as follows:
Maximum size shall be one inch.
Not more than 5% shall pass a four-mesh screen.
Intermediate sizes shall not have been removed and shall be well proportioned between
maximum and minimum size limitations.
The use of pit or bank-run gravel will be permitted at the discretion of the Village where
the ratio of fine materials to coarse is approximately that required for the specified mix.
Water. Water used shall be free of oil, alkali, acid or vegetable matter.
Mixing and placing. Ingredients of the concrete shall be measured separately in approved
receptacles. All materials shall be thoroughly mixed for not less than one minute in an
approved mechanical mixer. Mixing by hand will not be accepted except in an emergency, the
repair or replacement of an existing sidewalk or curb of not more than 25 linear feet, and in
the case of other minor repairs. A minimum of water shall be used and the concrete when in
place shall be thoroughly worked to expel the air, fill voids and secure continuous contact with
the forms. All voids or honeycomb appearing after forms are removed shall be plastered with
mortar. Concrete shall not be allowed to stand more than 20 minutes before being placed
between the forms. Retempering and remixing are expressly forbidden. Care shall be
exercised in placing concrete to prevent any segregating of materials.
Joints.
Sidewalk shall be cut into rectangular sections. No plain concrete section shall be longer
than six feet on any one side. Where division plates have been used, they shall be
removed after the concrete has hardened sufficiently to avoid breaking the edges or
corner of the slabs. Where division plates have not been used, the partially set concrete
shall be cut through to the subgrade.
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 251/441
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
D.
E.
F.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
All surface edges of concrete slabs shall be tooled so as to be rounded to a radius of
approximately 1/4 inch.
Expansion joints shall be constructed for the full depth of the concrete. They shall not be
less than 1/2 inch wide and spaced not more than 20 feet apart. Expansion joints shall
also be provided at intersecting sidewalks or curbs and along the curb in business areas
where the sidewalk extends from the building line to the curb.
Curbs shall have dummy joints at intervals not exceeding 10 feet and expansion joints at
intervals not exceeding 20 feet. Expansion joints shall not be less than 1/2 inch wide and
shall extend clear through the concrete so as to completely separate adjoining sections.
Gutters shall have dummy and/or expansion joints as directed by the Engineer, rules for
which are not set forth herein. Persons desiring to construct gutters will be required to
abide by specifications which will be prepared by the Village Engineer to fit the
conditions. All requirements set forth herein are minimum.
Finishing. All sidewalks and gutters shall be struck off true to line and grade and finished with a
wooden float leaving a smooth but nonslippery surface. Troweling will be permitted on the surface
of curbing. Special type of finishes must have the approval of the Village Engineer, who may
require a prepared sample.
Protection. The contractor shall protect the concrete from damage by all elements, including rain,
freezing, pedestrians, animals, falling leaves, etc. Suitable methods shall be employed to cover
the work and to erect barricades and lighted red lights at night.
Cleaning up. Upon completion the contractor or owner must remove all forms, neatly fill the space
occupied by the forms and remove all excess dirt. Where the ground adjoining the sidewalk is high
or low, the contractor shall leave an earth or other ramp to provide safe access to and from the
walk. The entire site shall be left in a clean, orderly manner, all obstructions removed and the work
be made otherwise safe for pedestrian movement.
§ 287-6. Curb cuts.
The following restrictions shall apply to curb cuts unless otherwise approved by the Superintendent of
Public Works:
No curb cut shall be made within 15 feet of the intersection of street property lines.
No curb cut shall exceed 20 feet in length.
There shall be a minimum of 25 feet between curb cuts.
On state and county roads, approval of the appropriate authority, if required, must be presented
before a permit be issued for a curb cut.
No permit for a curb cut from a public street and/or parking field into a private driveway and/or
private lot situated in a commercial area will be issued unless such private driveway and/or private
parking lot has been paved in accordance with the requirements set forth in Article IX, § 287-21, of
this chapter and provision made or proper drainage to prevent the accumulation of water.
[Added 10-6-1980 by L.L. No. 11-1980]
§ 287-7. Availability of permit at site.
Each permit issued in pursuance of this article shall at all times be in the personal possession of the
parties actually prosecuting the work, and available for inspection.
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 252/441
A.
B.
(1)
(2)
C.
D.
§ 287-8. Construction safeguards.
Every person who constructs a sidewalk or curb shall guard any excavation or work by guardrails, red
signal lights or any other means as may be necessary to warn pedestrians and others of the danger to
be approached.
Article II. Maintenance of Sidewalks and Premises
[Adopted 2-22-1971 by L.L. No. 1-1971 as Ch. 111, Art. II, of the 1971 Code]
§ 287-9. Sidewalk maintenance; penalties for offenses; civil
liability.
[Amended 11-9-1981 by L.L. No. 5-1981; 7-14-2014 by L.L. No. 7-2014]
The owner, occupant, agent, lessee or tenant of any premises or lot shall be jointly and severally
responsible for keeping the contiguous sidewalks and the section of land, if any, between said
contiguous sidewalk and the street clean and free from garbage, refuse, rubbish, litter, filth or
other offensive matter, weeds and other obstructions or encumbrances. There shall be a
rebuttable presumption that any person cited for a violation of this subsection shall have
possessed knowledge of said violation and shall have failed to correct the same.
The owner, occupant, agent, lessee or tenant of any premises or lot shall be jointly and severally
responsible for keeping the contiguous sidewalks free from dirt, weeds and other obstructions or
encumbrances and in good and safe repair and shall cause sidewalks to be cleared of snow and
ice within 24 hours after such snowfall shall have ceased or ice has formed.
Penalties.
Any person found guilty of a violation of Subsection A of this section shall be subject to a
minimum fine of $25 for the first violation, $50 for the second violation, $100 for the third
violation and $250 for the fourth violation and subsequent, with a maximum fine of $250 for
each violation.
Any person who has been notified by the Village Clerk or Superintendent of Public Works that
the sidewalks are in violation of Subsection B hereof, except as regards snow and ice, and
shall fail to correct the condition within five days of the sending of such notice to his last
known address by mail shall be in violation of Subsection B of this section. In addition to the
penalties otherwise enforceable, the Village may thereafter correct the prohibited conditions
and assess the cost thereof against the owners of the adjacent property. Such costs, if not
paid, shall be assessable against the property as tax thereon. In the case of a violation of
Subsection B pertaining to snow and ice, no such five-day notice is required, and if, within 24
hours after the cessation of every fall of snow or the formation of any ice, the owner,
occupant, agent, lessee or tenant of any premises or lot shall fail to clear such sidewalk of
snow and ice, he shall be in violation of this article. In addition to any fine levied hereunder,
the Village may clear such sidewalks of snow and ice if they are not cleared by said persons
within said period of 24 hours and assess the cost thereof against the owner of the adjacent
property. Such cost, if not paid, shall be assessable against the property as a tax thereon.
Civil liability. The owner or occupant of lands, other than land used for a one-family or two-family
dwelling, shall be liable for any injury or damage caused to any person or property by reason of
such owner or occupant's omission, failure or negligence to make, maintain or repair such
sidewalk or section of land, or to remove snow, ice or other obstructions therefrom, or for a
violation or nonobservance of the provisions of this Code relating to making, maintaining and
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 253/441
A.
B.
A.
B.
repairing such sidewalks and sections of land and the removal of snow, ice and other obstructions
therefrom.
§ 287-10. Maintenance of lots; penalties for offenses.
[Amended 11-9-1981 by L.L. No. 5-1981]
The owner, occupant, agent, lessee or tenant of any house, store or other building and any person
or corporation owning and being entitled to possession of any vacant lot, unimproved property,
private parking field or any other open portion or area of any lot, shall at all times keep said
premises owned or occupied by them or to the possession of which they are entitled free from
papers, boxes, rubbish, garbage, refuse, litter or flammable material which is likely to cause
damage by fire. There shall be a rebuttable presumption that any person cited for a violation of
this subsection shall have possessed knowledge of said violation and shall have failed to correct
the same.
Any person found guilty of a violation of Subsection A of this section shall be subject to a minimum
fine of $25 for the first violation, $50 for the second violation, $100 for the third violation and $250
for the fourth and subsequent violations, with a minimum fine of $250 for each violation.
§ 287-11. Maintenance of premises; penalties for offenses.
If at any time the Board of Trustees shall deem it necessary or expedient for the preservation of
the public health or safety or for the general welfare of the Village or for any other good reason,
that the owner of land or riparian rights within the Village shall remove therefrom all brush, weeds,
dead or dying trees, stumps, roots, obnoxious growth or things of any kind, filth, garbage, trash,
debris, decayed or decaying buildings or structures, ruins of any kind, buildings, docks or other
structures in a falling or dangerous condition, the Board of Trustees shall have the power to direct
and require the owner or owners of said land or riparian rights to remove the same from his land
or riparian rights. Such notice shall be given by a resolution of the Board of Trustees, a copy of
which shall be served on the owner or owners of the land or riparian rights either personally or by
sending to the owner's or owners' last known address by mail.
Penalties. Any owner or owners of land or riparian rights who are subject to the resolution
described in Subsection A hereof, who fail to remove the condition described in said resolution
within 30 days of the giving of notice of the resolution, shall be in violation of this article. In addition
to the penalties otherwise enforceable, the Village may thereafter correct the prohibited conditions
or the subject of the said resolution and assess the cost thereof against the owner or owners of
the said land or riparian rights. Such costs, if not paid, shall be assessable against the property as
a tax thereon.
Article III. Sidewalk and Curb Repairs
[Adopted 2-22-1971 by L.L. No. 1-1971 as Ch. 111, Art. III, of the 1971 Code]
§ 287-12. Repairs upon notice; noncompliance procedure.
[Amended 1-23-1978 by L.L. No. 1-1978]
It shall be the duty of every property owner or occupant to keep the sidewalk and curb adjoining his
premises in safe, passable condition. For failure, upon notice by the Superintendent of Public Works of
not less than 24 hours, to make such repairs as are specified as to place and manner, the Board of
Trustees may cause the same to be done and assess the expense thereof upon the adjoining land. In
any instance in which the property owner or occupant has failed to make such repairs and
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 254/441
A.
B.
expenditures are made or a contract has been awarded by the Board of Trustees for such repairs, the
procedure for the collection of any such amounts paid or for which the Village is obligated shall be as
follows:
The Board of Trustees shall serve, or cause to be served, a notice upon the owner or occupant of
the adjoining property stating that such expenditure has been made or that a contract for such
repairs has been awarded; the purpose of such expenditure or contract; the amount expended or
contracted for such repairs; at a specified time and place, the Board of Trustees will meet to hear
and determine all objections that may be made to such assessment, including the amount thereof,
and assess upon the land the amount which it may deem just and reasonable, not exceeding, in
the case of default, the amount stated in such notice; if an amount is assessed and is not paid
within 15 days after such assessment, the Board of Trustees, without further notice, will authorize
either the institution of action against the owner or occupant for the recovery thereof or the
issuance of a special warrant by the Board for the collection of such assessment or the inclusion
of such amount, i.e., of the assessment, in the next annual tax levy; and that such owner or
occupant may institute a proceeding to review the assessment in the manner provided by Article
78 of the Civil Practice Law and Rules within 15 days after such assessment.
Such notice shall be served, either personally or by mail, at least 10 days prior to the day fixed in
the notice for such hearing. If the notice is served by mail, then such service shall be deemed
sufficient if it is addressed to the owner or occupant or the person, partnership, agent or
corporation shown on the tax rolls of the Village as the one to whom tax bills are to be sent at the
time of the giving of the notice to repair specified in the first subsection of this section.
Article IV. Land Levels Adjoining Sidewalks
[Adopted 2-22-1971 by L.L. No. 1-1971 as Ch. 111, Art. IV, of the 1971 Code]
§ 287-13. Requirements.
Any person owning, leasing or in possession of lands in the Village shall maintain them at a level or
grade not lower than the level established for the adjoining sidewalk or sidewalk line, as fixed by the
Village Engineer, to a distance of not less than six feet from the sidewalk or sidewalk line, unless he
shall have protected or walled off said land from the sidewalk or street by a fence of such height and
construction as shall have been approved by the Superintendent of Public Works.
Article V. Merchandise Displays on Sidewalks
[Adopted 2-22-1971 by L.L. No. 1-1971 as Ch. 111, Art. V, of the 1971 Code]
§ 287-14. Prohibition; exception for loading and unloading.
No person who is the owner, lessee or occupant of any premises adjoining any street, parking field or
parking field walk shall place or keep, or permit to be placed or kept, on any sidewalk in front of,
adjoining or adjacent to such premises, any goods, wares or merchandise. Nothing contained herein
shall prohibit persons from temporarily placing goods, wares or merchandise or household furniture on
the sidewalks for purposes of loading or unloading, provided that same are removed within a
reasonable time and provided sufficient safe passage room for pedestrians is maintained.
Article VI. Installations Between Curb and Property Line
[Adopted 2-22-1971 by L.L. No. 1-1971 as Ch. 111, Art. VI, of the 1971 Code]
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 255/441
A.
B.
C.
§ 287-15. Prohibition.
[Amended 12-3-2012 by L.L. No. 4-2012; 5-7-2018 by L.L. No. 4-2018]
Except as provided in Chapter 118, Building Drains, or in Article XII of Chapter 287 of this Code, no
person shall install, construct, place or maintain, or permit to be installed, constructed, placed or
maintained, in the area between the curb and property line of premises owned or occupied by him,
adjoining any street, parking field or parking field walk, any structure, masonry, stones, sprinkler pipes,
sprinkler heads, garbage receptacles or any similar devices or fixtures. Notwithstanding the foregoing,
sprinkler pipes and sprinkler heads may be located in such area with the written permission of the
Superintendent of Public Works, provided that any such permission shall be granted only on condition
that the Village shall not be responsible for any damage to such sprinkler pipes and sprinkler heads, or
costs to replace or repair the same, or any other consequential damages resulting from any Village
maintenance or repair activity conducted in the area of such sprinkler pipes or sprinkler heads.
§ 287-16. Penalties for offenses.
Any owner or occupant of any house, store and other building, or any person or corporation owning or
being entitled to possession of any vacant lot or unimproved property or occupied property, who has
been notified by the Village Clerk or the Superintendent of Public Works that the premises are in
violation of § 287-15 hereof and shall fail to correct the condition within five days of the sending of such
notice by mail to his last known address shall be in violation of this article. In addition to the penalties
otherwise enforceable, the Village may thereafter correct the prohibited conditions and assess the cost
thereof against the owner of the property. Such costs, if not paid, shall be assessable against the
property as a tax thereon.
Article VII. Driving on Sidewalks and Paths
[Adopted 2-22-1971 by L.L. No. 1-1971 as Ch. 111, Art. VII, of the 1971 Code]
§ 287-17. Riding or driving.
No person shall ride, drive or operate any vehicle along or upon any public sidewalk or path intended
for use of pedestrians within the Village.
Article VIII. Jaywalking
[Adopted 1-20-1975 by L.L. No. 1-1975]
§ 287-18. Prohibited pedestrian crossings.
No pedestrian shall cross Sunrise Highway at any point within the Village excepting at a
crosswalk.
No pedestrian shall cross any other roadway designated by the Board of Trustees at any point
other than at a crosswalk.
No pedestrian shall cross a roadway intersection diagonally unless authorized by a traffic control
device or a police officer and when authorized to cross it diagonally, pedestrians shall cross only
as directed by the traffic control device or by the direction of a police officer.
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 256/441
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
§ 287-19. Effective date.
This local law shall take effect on February 1, 1975.
Article IX. Private Driveways and Parking Fields in
Commercial Areas
[Adopted 10-6-1980 by L.L. No. 11-1980]
§ 287-20. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
COMMERCIAL AREAS
Areas located wholly or partly within the following use districts, as defined in Chapter 340 of this
Code:
Business AAA.
Business AA.
Business A.
Business B.
Urban Renewal Commercial or Light.
Urban Renewal Recreational and Limited Commercial.
§ 287-21. Paving and drainage.
All private driveways and private parking fields situate in commercial areas must be paved, and the
surface of the parking area shall be suitably graded and drained to prevent the accumulation of water.
The minimum design requirements for such paving are as follows: four inches of compacted stone as
the base, to be covered with a two-inch layer of asphaltic concrete over such base.
§ 287-22. Maintenance of private parking fields in commercial
areas.
All parking fields required pursuant to this article shall be kept clean and free from rubbish, debris and
snow, and the surface of the parking area shall be suitably graded and drained to prevent the
accumulation of water. The failure of the owner or occupant of the premises upon which a parking area
is required pursuant to this article to maintain such parking area as above provided shall constitute a
violation of this article and shall subject the violator to the penalties prescribed in this article.
§ 287-23. Penalties for offenses.
Any owner failing to comply with the provisions of this article shall be subject to the closing of any
existing curb cut between the private driveway and/or private parking field and a public street and/or
parking field by the Village. The costs for such closure shall be added to the tax bill of the property
owner.
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 257/441
A.
[1]
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
B.
A.
§ 287-24. When effective.
This article shall take effect 12 months after its adoption by the Board of Trustees of the Village of
Rockville Centre.
Article X. Excavations
[Adopted 2-22-1971 by L.L. No. 1-1971 as Ch. 56 of the 1971 Code]
§ 287-25. Compliance with provisions.
No person shall open up, alter the grade, dig or excavate in the roadbed, pavement or gutters of
any street of the Village for any purpose whatever except upon compliance with the provisions
herein, and no person shall tunnel under the roadbed of any street, in whole or in part, for any
purpose.
No street opening permit shall be issued in accordance with the provisions hereinafter contained
in this article unless the applicant has complied with the following provisions:
The applicant shall produce proof of compliance with § 322-a of the General Business Law[1]
relating to notice to the person, corporation or municipality engaged in the distribution of gas
in the area of such street opening.
Editor's Note: Section 322-a was repealed by L. 1980, c. 699, effective 6-26-1980. See now
Energy Law § 16-116.
The street opening permit as hereinafter set forth is required for all streets in the Village of
Rockville Centre, whether the same are Village streets or roads, county streets or roads or
state highways.
The deposit and charges as hereinafter set forth shall not be required where such street
opening permit applies to county and state roads and highways.
It shall be a condition of the issuance of such street opening permit that the applicant shall not
use any machinery or other mechanical equipment for excavating in any street in the
incorporated Village of Rockville Center within a distance of five feet (measured in a
horizontal plane on the road surface from the vertical upward projection of the pipeline in
question) from any gas transmission line operating at a pressure in excess of 125 pounds per
square inch gauge, running through such streets or roads, and all digging or excavating within
an area of five feet from such pipe lines or conduits shall be done by use of hand equipment.
This shall not prohibit the use of pneumatic drills for the fracture of pavement, provided that
such drills are so constructed so as to prevent penetration of more than 12 inches, nor the
use of a mechanical backhoe or similar device to remove the fractured pavement only to a
depth of not in excess of 18 inches from the surface. Pavement breakers involving the use of
weights, balls, hydrahammers and similar equipment shall not be permitted within said handdigging
area.
§ 287-26. Application for permit.
Except as provided in § 287-34 hereof, not less than 24 hours prior to the proposed time for such
digging or excavating, application shall be made to the Village Clerk for a permit therefor. Such
application shall state:
The name of the applicant.
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 258/441
B.
C.
A.
B.
C.
A.
B.
The fact the applicant is either a contractor or a representative of a division, a department or
branch of government, or a utility corporation, or is a plumber or electrician licensed by the Village,
or a person engaged in some business or occupation whose work requires such excavation to be
made and whose name has been approved and placed on file with the Village Clerk.
The precise plan where the applicant desires to dig or excavate, with the distance from the
nearest street intersection or from the property abutting the street at the point proposed for
excavation.
§ 287-27. Deposit and charges.
Such applicant shall deposit with the Clerk of the Village of Rockville Centre such sums as may be
fixed from time to time by resolution of the Board of Trustees of the Village of Rockville Centre or,
in lieu thereof, a performance bond in such sum as may be fixed from time to time by resolution of
the Board of Trustees of the Village of Rockville Centre. The deposit required shall be for a
concrete road opening or for an asphaltic road opening.
[Amended 12-4-1972]
All street openings shall be repaired by the Village, and the cost thereof shall be charged to the
applicant at the rate fixed from time to time by resolution of the Board of Trustees of the Village of
Rockville Centre.
[Amended 1-17-1972; 12-4-1972]
In making such repairs to road openings, the Village shall square off the street opening so as to
avoid irregular cuts, the repaired surface shall be so made that the entire repairs shall overlay firm,
unexcavated earth by at least 1 1/2 feet around the entire perimeter of the excavation.
§ 287-28. Insurance.
[Amended 5-16-1983 by L.L. No. 6-1983]
Each application for a permit shall further be accompanied by the certificate of insurance in a form
approved by the Village Counsel and issued by an insurance company authorized to do business in
this state, running to the Village, guaranteeing that the applicant has provided public liability coverage
of not less than $1,000,000 and property damage insurance of $1,000,000 to save the Village
harmless from all claims, actions and proceedings brought by any person for injury to person or
property resulting from or occasioned by any fault or default of the person to whom the permit is issued
or by anyone acting thereunder on his behalf.
§ 287-29. Backfill provisions.
As a condition precedent to receiving a permit, the applicant shall agree that immediately upon
completion of his work and when its inspection and approval is required, he will backfill the
excavation, using water to properly compact such backfill. Thereafter, when the Village restores
the street at the place excavated to complete repair, the cost thereof will be paid by the permittee,
the amount due to be billed to the permittee in accordance with the charge schedule in § 287-27
hereof. Until such complete repair has been made, all liability for the condition of the street
remains upon the permittee.
In the alternative, upon permission in writing by authorization of the Board of Trustees, the
permittee may himself restore the pavement to complete repair under supervision of the Chief
Engineer and in conformity with grades and specifications to be provided for such work.
§ 287-30. Permits and fees.
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 259/441
A.
B.
A.
B.
C.
[Amended 12-4-1972]
No permit shall be granted for any single excavation which exceeds a surface area of 25 square
yards, and a separate permit shall be required for every additional area of 25 square yards or
fraction thereof where such excavation is in excess of 25 square yards.
The fees for any permit required by the provisions of this article shall be at the levels fixed from
time to time by resolution of the Board of Trustees of the Village of Rockville Centre.
§ 287-31. Permit to be issued.
When there has been full compliance with the provisions herein stated and no other objections have
appeared, the Village Clerk will issue a permit to the applicant therefor.
§ 287-32. Time of using permit.
Every permittee shall notify the Department of Public Works at least 24 hours prior to starting the work
covered by such permit. Like notice shall be given upon completion of such work.
§ 287-33. Permit available for inspection.
Each person to whom a permit is issued hereunder must at all time have it available at the place of the
excavation, and upon demand show it to the representative of the Village.
§ 287-34. Emergencies.
Application. In an emergency, such as the breaking of a main or stoppage or a sewer line or other
conditions calling for immediate opening of a street to prevent loss or injury to property, application
may be made to the Village Clerk for an emergency permit, in person or by telephone, and
authority shall be granted to proceed with the necessary work forthwith.
Notifying police. If such emergency develops during hours when the Village office is closed, as
during the night or on holidays, notification thereof shall be made to the Police Department in
person or by telephone before proceeding with the street opening.
Duties thereafter. It shall be the duty of every person who undertakes to open a street under the
provisions of this section to place warning signs, lights and barriers to protect the public, and,
upon the first day of resumption of regular business at the Village office, to comply with the
provisions of §§ 287-26, 287-27, 287-28, 287-29 and 287-30 hereof, to be held in violation of this
article.
§ 287-35. Adequate warning devices.
Whenever the surface of a street is disturbed or an opening made therein, or when as a result of work
done thereon there exists a depression below the surrounding grade or an elevation higher than the
grade because of excess backfill or for other reasons, the persons to whom the permit was issued or
who have caused the hazard shall provide adequate safeguards to the public by erecting a barrier or
fence of distinctive type or color, marking the outside limits of the affected area and bearing warning
signs distinguishable by day, and adequate numbers of lighted lanterns or flares to give warning of the
danger after dark.
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 260/441
§ 287-36. Penalties for offenses.
For the infraction of any provision hereof, any permit may be canceled and permission to do similar
work may be withheld from the offender for a period of three months from the time of such violation.
This penalty is in addition to and not in derogation of or in substitution for the general penalties
provided in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article I of this Code.
Article XI. Impounding of Personal Property on Streets
[Adopted 2-22-1971 by L.L. No. 1-1971 as Ch. 94 of the 1971 Code]
§ 287-37. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
PERSON
Includes a natural person of either sex, corporations, partnerships, associations, joint-stock
companies, societies and all other entities capable of being sued.
STREET
Includes a street, avenue, road, alley, lane, highway, boulevard, concourse, driveway, culvert and
crosswalk, and every class of road, square, place or municipal parking field used by the general
public.
§ 287-38. Leaving belongings on streets or public property
unlawful.
[Amended 5-7-2018 by L.L. No. 4-2018]
Except as provided in Article XII of Chapter 287 of this Code, it shall be unlawful for any person, his
agent or employee to leave, or to suffer or permit to be left, any vehicle, cart, wagon, box, barrel, bale
of merchandise or other movable property, either owned by him or in his possession, custody or
control, upon any street, sidewalk or municipal parking field, or to erect or cause to be erected thereon
any shed, building or other obstruction; excepting, however, that this section shall not apply to
materials lawfully placed at the curbs or sides of streets for collection by the Department of Sanitation.
§ 287-39. Parked vehicles.
It shall be deemed a violation of this article if a motor vehicle remains parked for a period in excess of
24 hours.
§ 287-40. Removal.
[Amended 5-7-2018 by L.L. No. 4-2018]
The Police Commissioner shall remove or can cause to be removed any vehicle, cart, wagon, box,
barrel, bale of merchandise or other movable property found upon any street, sidewalk or municipal
parking field in violation of any law, rule or regulation, and shall take same, or cause same to be taken,
to property or premises of the Village where same shall be held until redeemed or sold as hereinafter
provided.
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 261/441
§ 287-41. Penalties for offenses.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be liable for and forfeit and pay a penalty
of $10 for each violation, and it is further ordained and enacted that the violations of any provisions of
this article shall constitute disorderly conduct and the person so violating the same shall be and is
hereby declared a disorderly person. This is in addition to any fees for redemption of impounded
property or costs of sale chargeable to an owner or person entitled to possession of impounded
property as hereinafter provided.
§ 287-42. Removal of vehicles: notification of Commissioner.
The Chief of Police shall notify in writing the Nassau County Police Department and the Commissioner
of Motor Vehicles of the removal of any motor vehicle as hereinabove provided, and in the event that
the Commissioner of Motor Vehicles declines to accept custody of such motor vehicle in accordance
with Section 60 of the Vehicle and Traffic Law, the same shall be disposed of as herein provided.
§ 287-43. Notice to property owners.
Whenever the Chief of Police shall receive any property containing identification of ownership or right
to possession, a notice shall be sent by ordinary mail to such person advising that such property is
held by the Chief of Police and advising the amount necessary to redeem.
§ 287-44. Redemption fees; recovering procedures.
Such property may be redeemed by the owner thereof at any time prior to the sale, dismantling,
destruction or disposal thereof, and he shall be entitled to receive such property upon tendering, in the
case of a vehicle, the sum of $10 plus the sum of $1 per day commencing the third day after the
vehicle is removed to the date of redemption, and for all other property the sum of $5. In addition, the
person seeking to redeem shall be required to pay the cost of advertising the sale thereof, if any. No
property shall be delivered to a person seeking to redeem unless proof establishing to the satisfaction
of the Chief of Police such person's ownership or right to possession is submitted. Any delivery to a
person apparently entitled thereto shall be a good defense to the Village against any other person
claiming to be entitled thereto, but if the person to whom delivery is made is in fact not entitled thereto,
the person to whom the same ought to have been made may recover the same with interest and costs
from the person to whom the same shall have been delivered.
§ 287-45. Sale of unclaimed property.
Where any such property remains in the custody of the Chief of Police for a period of 15 days after
removal and with respect to which no person has presented to the Chief of Police proof establishing to
his satisfaction such person's ownership or right to possession as hereinabove stated, the Chief of
Police shall give public notice in the official newspaper of the Village advising that at a specified place
and time, not less than five days after such notice is published, such property will be sold at public
auction for the best price he can obtain. A general description in such notice of the property to be sold
shall be sufficient. Said sale shall be conducted by the Chief of Police or by any employee of his
Department designated by him, or by an auctioneer designated by the Chief of Police.
§ 287-46. Disposition of unsold property.
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 262/441
In the event that said property shall remain unsold at public auction, the Chief of Police may reoffer
said property for sale at a subsequent public auction held pursuant to this article, or he may dismantle,
destroy or otherwise sell or dispose of such property. Any such sale or other disposition of such
property pursuant to this article shall be without liability on the part of the Village to the owner of such
property or other person lawfully entitled thereto or having an interest therein.
§ 287-47. Disposition of money received.
Immediately after property is redeemed, the Chief of Police shall pay over to the Treasurer of the
Village the amount received for redemption, costs and expenses of the article redeemed, together with
an itemized statement thereof. Immediately after a sale or other disposition of such property, the Chief
of Police shall pay over to the Treasurer the proceeds of sale or other disposition of such property, with
an itemized statement of the article sold, the price received and the costs and expenses of sale, and
the Treasurer shall retain and credit the general fund with so much of the proceeds as equals the costs
and expenses of such sale, plus the sum of $10 for each motor vehicle sold and $5 for such other
article sold, to cover the cost of removing and storing the property. The remainder of the moneys
realized from such sales shall be paid without interest to the lawful owner thereof.
§ 287-48. Nonapplicability.
The provisions of this article shall not apply to any property which may come into the possession or
custody of the Police Department pursuant to any other ordinance, law or regulation.
Article XII. Recreational Equipment and Activities In or
Upon Public Streets, Highways, Sidewalks or Adjacent
Areas
[Adopted 5-7-2018 by L.L. No. 4-2018]
§ 287-49. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the indicated meaning:
ADJACENT PROPERTY
The area of property located between the paved portion of any public right-of-way and the
property line of any adjoining property, whether in private or public ownership, or adjacent to and
within 15 feet of the boundary of any public right-of-way or sidewalk.
PUBLIC PLACE
Any property open to public use which is not part of a public street or highway.
PUBLIC STREET OR HIGHWAY
Any property (including a sidewalk) constituting part of a public right-of-way, whether paved or
unpaved, or used or open to use by the public for vehicular, bicycle or pedestrian traffic or
passage, including adjacent property.
RECREATIONAL EQUIPMENT
Equipment or materials designed and intended to be used for play, which is either portable or
attached to a moveable support base, including a portable basketball hoop, or other sports
equipment, net, base or frame.
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 263/441
A.
B.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
C.
A.
§ 287-50. Placement of recreational equipment in or upon public
places, streets or highways, or adjacent property.
No person may place or maintain, or cause or suffer to be placed or maintained, any equipment or
materials designed and intended to be used for play in or upon, or over, any public place (other
than a public street or highway) without the express written permission of each Village department
having jurisdiction over such public place.
No equipment or materials designed or intended to be used for play may be permanently affixed
or installed in or upon, or over, any public street or highway, sidewalk, or adjacent property.
No person may place or maintain, or cause or suffer to be placed or maintained, any recreational
equipment in or upon, or over, any public street or highway, sidewalk or adjacent property, except
as authorized pursuant to this section.
No recreational equipment may be used or located in or upon, or over, any street or highway
having more than two lanes for vehicular travel.
No recreational equipment may be located within five feet of any manhole, catch basin, traffic
sign, fire hydrant, light pole, mailbox, ground electrical transformer, telephone or other
communication ground equipment or installation.
Recreational equipment shall be located in a manner which does not impede the safe lawful
passage of motor vehicles, bicycles, or pedestrians or the lawful parking of motor vehicles.
All persons using recreational equipment in, upon or over a public street or highway, or on
adjacent property, shall yield to the lawful passage of motor vehicles, bicycles or pedestrians,
including the removal or relocation of such equipment to permit such passage.
No recreational equipment may be located in, upon or over a public street or highway when
such equipment is not in active use. No recreational equipment may be located or stored in,
upon or over an adjacent property when such equipment is not in active use, unless such
equipment is in an upright position and in a location where it will not unreasonably obstruct or
interfere with lawful passage of vehicles or pedestrians.
All recreational equipment shall be maintained in good repair and in a clean and serviceable
condition at all times when located on or over a public street or highway, or adjacent property.
All recreational equipment in active use shall be attended by one or more persons responsible
for such equipment.
All persons using recreational equipment shall move or remove the same at the request of
any Village official or employee in a manner, and for a period of time, reasonably required to
accommodate cleaning, maintenance, construction, snow removal or regulation of traffic upon
such public street or highway or adjacent property.
§ 287-51. Liability.
The Village shall not be subject to any claim, nor be liable for any injury, loss or damage to person
or property which results from the use or placement of recreational equipment in or upon any
public street or highway, whether in compliance with this article or otherwise, unless the Village
has received prior written notice of any cause or condition in the same manner as provided for any
claim arising out of the use, maintenance, or design of any public sidewalk, street or highway.
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 264/441
B.
C.
A.
B.
[1]
C.
Any person who places or maintains any recreational equipment, or causes or suffers such
equipment to be placed or maintained, in, upon or over any public street, highway, sidewalk, or
public place, whether in compliance with this article or otherwise, shall be liable for, and shall
indemnify and hold harmless the Village, its officers, agents and employees from and against, any
and all claims, liability and expenses (including reasonable attorneys' fees) for or related to any
injury to person or property caused or arising out of the use, maintenance, or placement of any
recreational equipment on any street, highway, sidewalk or public place.
The Village shall not be subject to any claim, nor be liable, for any injury, loss or damage to
recreational equipment which is placed, located or maintained in, upon or over any public place or
street, or adjacent property, in violation of this article.
§ 287-52. Violations.
Any person who shall be found to have performed or caused to be performed any act in violation of this
article shall be guilty of a violation, and shall be subject to punishment as provided in this Code.
Chapter 291. Swimming Pools
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Trustees of the Village of Rockville Centre as indicated in article
histories. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building code — See Ch. 112.
Building drains — See Ch. 118.
Fences — See Ch. 175.
Fire prevention and control — See Ch. 185.
Licenses — See Ch. 222.
Electric and water utilities — See Ch. 306.
Unlawful use of water — See Ch. 318, Art. I.
Zoning — See Ch. 340.
Article I. Private Swimming Pools
[Adopted 2-22-1971 by L.L. No. 1-1971 as Ch. 113, Art. I, of the 1971 Code]
§ 291-1. Permits required; approval of plans and specifications.
[Amended 12-4-1972; 1-24-1983 by L.L. No. 2, 1983]
No person or persons, corporation or organization shall construct a private swimming pool until the
plans and specifications thereof shall first have been submitted to and received the approval of the
Superintendent of Buildings or his duly authorized representative and shall have complied with
Chapter 340 of this Code.
The fee for any permit required by the provisions of this article shall be at the level fixed from time
to time by resolution of the Board of Trustees of the Village of Rockville Centre.
Water connections and drainage facilities of all swimming pools, whether indoor or outdoor, shall
comply with the rules and regulations of the Department of Public Works and the Water
Department of the village.[1]
Editor's Note: Original §§ 113-2 through 113-8, dealing with requirements for private swimming
pools, as amended, which immediately followed this subsection, were repealed 1-24-1983 by L.L.
No. 2-1983.
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 265/441
[1]
Chapter 294. Taxation
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Trustees of the Village of Rockville Centre as indicated in article
histories. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Comptroller — See Ch. 10.
Electric and water utilities — See Ch. 306.
Article I. Utility Services Tax
[Adopted 2-22-1971 by L.L. No. 1-1971 as Ch. 117 of the 1971 Code]
§ 294-1. Imposition of tax.
This article provides for the imposition of a tax of 1% per annum on the gross income of every utility
doing business within the Village of Rockville Centre which is subject to the supervisions of the State
Department of Public Service, except a utility engaged in the business of operating or leasing sleeping
and parlor railroad cars or of operating railroad other than street-surface, rapid-transit, subway and
elevated railroads. A similar tax is imposed on the gross operating income of every other utility doing
business within the Village of Rockville Centre.
§ 294-2. First class utilities.
Utilities in the first class are mainly street-surface, rapid-transit, subway and elevated railroads and all
other nonoperating railroads which lease their property to others, omnibus lines, gas, electric, steam,
water, telephone, telegraph, bridge, express, baggage, transfer and freight terminal companies.
However, the law exempts motor carriers or brokers subject to the provision of the State Department of
Public Service under Article 3-b of the Public Service Law.[1]
Editor's Note: Article 3-B of the Public Service Law was repealed by L. 1970, c. 267, effective 3-1-1971.
See now § 240 et seq. of the Transportation Law.
§ 294-3. Second class utilities.
Utilities in the second class are mainly those which, generally speaking, would not be classed as
utilities but which are made utilities by law for the purpose of this tax. Ordinarily, although there are
exceptions, utilities in this group resell utility services which are purchased from utilities in the first
class.
§ 294-4. Tax imposed on transaction within the Village.
The tax is imposed only on transactions wholly within the Village. No tax is imposed on any transaction
originating or consummated outside of the territorial limits of the Village, notwithstanding that some act
be necessarily performed with respect to said transaction within such limits.
§ 294-5. Tax based on income.
The tax applies to income from and after May 1, 1950. Returns must be filed annually on or before
March 25 in each year, but may be filed quarter-annually.
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 266/441
[1]
[1]
[1]
§ 294-6. Certain omnibus corporations exempted.
Pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 844 of the Laws of 1955 of the State of New York, there shall be
exempt from the tax imposed by this article, omnibus corporations subject to the supervision of the
State Department of Public Service under Article 3-A of the Public Service Law.[1]
Editor's Note: Article 3-A of the Public Service Law was repealed by Ch. 267 of the Laws of 1967. See
now Art. 6 of the Transportation Law.
Article II. Business Tax Exemption
[Adopted 11-1-1976 by L.L. No. 8-1976]
§ 294-7. Statutory exemption amended.
Pursuant to the authority granted by Subdivision 7 of § 485-b of the Real Property Tax Law,
Subdivision 2(a) of such section is hereby changed, superseded and amended to read as follows:
Subsection 2(a). Such real property shall be exempt to the extent of 0% of the increase in assessed
value thereof attributable to such construction, alteration, installation or improvement.
Article III. Tax Liens: Collection of Taxes
[Adopted 8-29-1994 by L.L. No. 12-1994]
§ 294-8. Continuation of property tax collection procedures.
Pursuant to Section 6 of Chapter 602 of the Laws of 1993, as amended by a chapter of the Laws of
1994 as proposed in legislative bill number S. 8560-A,[1] the Village of Rockville Centre hereby enacts
a local law, not subject to referendum, to provide that the collection of property taxes shall continue to
be enforced pursuant to Title 3 of Article 14 of the Real Property Tax Law, as is in effect on December
31, 1994.
Editor's Note: See now L. 1994, c. 532.
§ 294-9. Filing with Board of Equalization and Assessment.
Upon adoption, and no later than October 1, 1994, a copy of this article shall be filed with the New York
State Board of Equalization and Assessment.
§ 294-10. When effective.
This article shall take effect on the same day as a chapter of the Laws of 1994 as proposed in
legislative bill number S. 8560-A takes effect, except that if S. 8560-A shall become a law prior to
adoption of this article, this article shall take effect immediately.[1]
Editor's Note: S. 8560-A was signed into law 8-26-1994 and became Chapter 532 of the Laws of 1994.
Article IV. Veterans Tax Exemption
[Adopted 11-25-1996 by L.L. No. 4-1996; amended in its entirety 12-15-1997 by L.L. No. 4-1997]
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 267/441
A.
B.
§ 294-11. Definitions.
[Amended 2-13-2006 by L.L. No. 1-2006]
Definitions of the terms in this article are in accordance with those set forth in § 458-a, Subdivisions
1(a) through (g), in the Real Property Tax Law.
§ 294-11.1. Gold Star Parents.
[Added 12-17-2007 by L.L. No. 11-2007]
Qualifying residential real property owned by a Gold Star Parent (i.e., a parent of a child who died in
the line of duty while serving in the armed forces of the United States during a period of war) shall be
eligible for exemption to the extent provided in Real Property Tax Law § 458-a, provided such parent
uses such property as his/her primary residence. Such qualifying residential real property shall be
entitled to the maximum exemption provided for Real Property Tax Law § 458-a exemptions in the
Village of Rockville Centre.
§ 294-12. Amount of exemption.
Pursuant to § 458-a of the Real Property Tax Law, as amended, real property in the Incorporated
Village of Rockville Centre owned by an eligible noncombat, combat or disabled veteran, shall be
exempt from taxation by the Village to the maximum extent as provided in the following schedule,
subject to the other provisions of this article. (NOTE: Exemption based on home value of
$360,000, amount reduced by current equalization rate.)
[Amended 2-13-2006 by L.L. No. 1-2006]
Alternative Veterans Law of 2006 Property Tax Relief for Wartime Veterans, Combat Zone
Veterans and Disabled Veterans
Noncombat 15%
Combat 25% (total)
Disabled (percent) 1/2 of disability rating from Veterans' Administration
The computed dollar amount shall be published annually in This Month in Rockville Centre.
§ 294-13. Application for exemption.
Application for such exemption shall be made by the owner or all of the owners of the property on
forms prescribed by the State Board, to be furnished by the Village Assessor, and the applicant or
applicants shall furnish the information and execute the application in the manner required or
prescribed in such forms in the Village Assessor's office on or before the appropriate tax status date.
§ 294-14. Effective date.
[Amended 2-13-2006 by L.L. No. 1-2006]
This article shall take effect immediately, and any exemptions obtained thereunder shall be applicable
to assessment rolls prepared on the basis of taxable status data occurring on or after January 1, 2007.
Article V. Senior Citizens, Disabled Persons With Limited
Incomes and Volunteer Firefighters Tax Exemption
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 268/441
A.
B.
C.
A.
B.
[Adopted 12-18-2000 by L.L. No. 5-2000; amended in its entirety 10-21-2002 by L.L. No. 14-2002]
§ 294-15. Eligibility for and amount of exemption for senior
citizens and persons with disabilities.
[Last amended 11-6-2006 by L.L. No. 12-2006, § 4]
Eligibility for exemption from real property taxation by the Village for persons 65 years of age or
over shall be in accordance with § 467 of the Real Property Tax Law, as amended.
Eligibility for exemption from real property taxation by the Village for persons with disabilities and
limited incomes shall be in accordance with § 459-c of the Real Property Tax Law, as amended.
The amount of exemption shall be in accordance with the following schedule.
Annual Income
Percentage of Assessed
Valuation Exempt From Taxation
Less than $29,000 50%
At least $29,000 but less than $30,000 45%
At least $30,000 but less than $31,000 40%
At least $31,000 but less than $32,000 35%
At least $32,000 but less than $32,900 30%
At least $32,900 but less than $33,800 25%
At least $33,800 but less than $34,700 20%
At least $34,700 but less than $35,600 15%
At least $35,600 but less than $36,500 10%
At least $36,500 but less than $37,400 5%
$37,400 or higher 0%
§ 294-16. Eligibility for and amount of exemption for volunteer
firefighters; continuation of exemption for unremarried spouses.
[Amended 1-10-2005 by L.L. No. 1-2005; 11-6-2006 by L.L. No. 12-2006]
Eligibility for and amount of exemption for volunteer firefighters. Eligibility and amount of
exemption for volunteer firefighters for the Village of Rockville Centre from real property taxation
by the Village shall be in accordance with § 466-c of the Real Property Tax Law as enacted by
Chapter 719 of the Laws of 2004, which provides that the exemption shall be to the extent of 10%
of the assessed value of such property for Village purposes, exclusive of special assessments.
Continuation or reinstatement of preexisting exemption for unremarried spouse. Eligibility and
amount of continuation or reinstatement of preexisting exemption from real property taxation by
the Village for unremarried spouses of volunteer firefighters for the Village of Rockville Centre
shall be in accordance with § 466-h of the Real Property Tax Law as enacted by Chapter 305 of
the Laws of 2006.
§ 294-17. Application for exemption.
[Amended 1-10-2005 by L.L. No. 1-2005]
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 269/441
A.
B.
(1)
(2)
C.
A.
B.
For persons 65 years of age and older, the application procedure shall be in accordance with the
provisions and requirements of § 467 of the Real Property Tax Law.
For persons with disabilities and limited incomes, the application procedure shall be in accordance
with the provisions and requirements of § 459-c of the Real Property Tax Law.
For volunteer fire fighters for the Rockville Centre Fire Department, the application shall be in
accordance with the provisions and requirements of § 466-c of the Real Property Tax Law.
A volunteer fire fighter with at least five years but less than 20 years of Rockville Centre Fire
Department service must file an annual application with the Village on a form prescribed by
the State Board and furnished by the Village Comptroller. The application must be filed on or
before the taxable status date.
A volunteer fire fighter with 20 years or more of Rockville Centre Fire Department service may
file an application for a permanent exemption with the Village on or before the taxable status
date.
§ 294-18. When effective.
[Amended 1-10-2005 by L.L. No. 1-2005]
This exemption shall take effect on the first of January next succeeding the date on which it shall have
become a law (November 24, 2004) and shall apply to taxable status dates occurring on or after such
date.
Article VI. Cold War Veterans Tax Exemption
[Adopted 10-27-2008 by L.L. No. 12-2008]
§ 294-19. Definitions.
Definitions of the terms in this article are in accordance with those set forth in § 458-b of the Real
Property Tax Law.
§ 294-20. Eligibility; statutory authority.
Qualifying residential real property owned by a Cold War veteran or the spouse or unremarried
surviving spouse of a Cold War veteran shall be eligible for exemption in accordance with Real
Property Tax Law § 458-b, to the extent provided in this article.
§ 294-21. Amount of exemption; exceptions.
Pursuant to Real Property Tax Law § 458-b and subject to its eligibility requirements, real property
in the Incorporated Village of Rockville Centre owned by a Cold War veteran, or the spouse or
unremarried surviving spouse of a Cold War veteran, shall be exempt from taxation to the extent
of 15% of the assessed value thereof, not to exceed $54,000, or $54,000 multiplied by the latest
state equalization rate of the assessing unit, whichever is less.
[Amended 1-26-2010 by L.L. No. 1-2010]
In addition to the exemption provided in Subsection A of this section, where a Cold War veteran
has received a compensation rating because of a service-connected disability, qualifying
residential real property shall be exempt from taxation to the extent of the product of the assessed
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 270/441
C.
A.
valuation of such property, multiplied by 50% of the disability rating, but such additional exemption
shall not exceed $180,000, or the product of $180,000 multiplied by the latest state equalization
rate for the assessing unit, whichever is less.
[Amended 1-26-2010 by L.L. No. 1-2010]
A Cold War veteran receiving an exemption under Real Property Tax Law § 458 or 458-a shall not
be eligible to receive an exemption under this article.
§ 294-22. Application for exemption.
Application for such exemption shall be made by the owner, or all the owners, of the property on forms
prescribed by the State Board, and including the information and executed in the manner required or
prescribed in such forms on or before the appropriate taxable status date.
§ 294-23. When effective.
The exemption authorized by this article shall apply to assessment rolls prepared with a taxable status
date occurring at least 90 days after the effective date of this article.
Article VII. Superstorm Sandy Assessment Relief
[Adopted 12-5-2013 by L.L. No. 4-2013]
§ 294-24. Definitions.
Definitions of the terms in this article are in accordance with those set forth in Chapter 424 of the New
York Laws of 2013.
§ 294-25. Exemptions authorized.
Pursuant to Section 3 of Chapter 424 of the New York Laws of 2013, the Village of Rockville Centre
hereby adopts the provisions of the Superstorm Sandy Assessment Relief Act, and directs that the
provisions of such act be applicable in the Village to the extent now provided in said state legislation. In
doing so, it is the intent of the Village of Rockville Centre, and the Village hereby elects, to provide all
those exemptions enumerated and authorized in L. 2013, c. 424, Section 4, Subdivision (a), and the
Village specifically elects to provide the exemptions enumerated in Paragraphs (i), (ii), (iii) and (iv) of
such legislation.
§ 294-26. Applications.
Applications for relief authorized by this article shall be made and processed in accordance with the
provisions of the New York State Superstorm Sandy Assessment Relief Act.
§ 294-27. Application to assessment rolls.
In accordance with the provisions of L. 2013, c. 424, the relief available pursuant to this article shall be
applicable only with respect to the final assessment roll which satisfies both of the following conditions:
The roll is based upon a taxable status date occurring prior to October 28, 2012; and
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 271/441
B. Taxes levied upon that roll by the Village are payable without interest on or after October 28, 2012.
Chapter 297. Taxicabs
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Trustees of the Village of Rockville Centre 2-22-1971 by L.L. No.
1-1971 as Ch. 115 of the 1971 Code.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Traffic Violation Bureau — See Ch. 62.
Businesses — See Ch. 138.
Licenses — See Ch. 222.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 287.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 309.
Article I. Purpose; Legislative Findings
§ 297-1. Legislative findings.
It is hereby declared and found that the taxicab industry in the Village of Rockville Centre is vested with
a public interest as a vital and integral part of the transportation facilities of the Village and that its
regulation is necessary to secure adequate and safe transportation for the inhabitants of the Village
and to prevent undue aggravation of the traffic and parking problems of the Village.
Article II. Definitions
§ 297-2. Definitions.
Unless otherwise expressly provided, the following words, for the purpose of this chapter, shall have
the meaning herein indicated:
DRIVER
Any person driving a taxicab or limousine upon the public highways for hire.
LIMOUSINE
A vehicle seating not less than five nor more than seven persons, used solely for hire in
connection with funerals, weddings and similar functions.
OWNER
A person owning or controlling one or more taxicabs or limousines and driving or causing any
such vehicle to be driven upon the public highways for hire.
PASSENGER
A person paying a fee for transportation.
PERSON
Includes an individual, a partnership, any unincorporated association, a corporation and any other
legal entity.
TAXICAB
A vehicle engaged in the business of carrying passengers for hire, having a seating capacity of
less than eight persons and not operated on a fixed route.
TAXI STAND
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 272/441
A.
B.
C.
A public place alongside the curb of a street or elsewhere which has been so designated as
reserved exclusively for the use of all taxicabs licensed hereunder.
VILLAGE
The Incorporated Village of Rockville Centre.
ZONE
An area within the Village established by the Board of Trustees for the purpose of determining the
rates to be charged for the hiring of taxicabs and within which an operator may be licensed to
establish depots or terminals and pick up passengers.
Article III. Zones
§ 297-3. Establishing or abolishing zones.
The Board of Trustees may, from time to time, after public notice and a public hearing, establish zones
or abolish zones so established or enlarge or diminish the boundaries of any zone.
Article IV. Owner's Licenses and Licensing
§ 297-4. License required.
It shall be unlawful for any owner to operate any taxicab or limousine owned or controlled by him, or
permit the same to be operated or driven upon the public highways of the Village without having first
obtained and having then in force an owner's license therefor, as hereinafter provided.
§ 297-5. Issuance and expiration dates.
Every owner's license issued hereunder shall be issued as of the first day of October or subsequent
date of issue and shall expire on the 30th day of September next succeeding such date, unless sooner
revoked by the Board of Trustees.
§ 297-6. Application: information required.
Every person who desires to operate a taxicab or taxicabs, limousine or limousines owned or
controlled by him upon the public highways within the Village shall file with the Village Clerk a written
application upon forms to be furnished by the Village Clerk, verified under oath, stating:
The name and address of the applicant, specifying in the case of any unincorporated association
the names and addresses of each member thereof, and in the case of any corporation the names
and addresses of each officer, director and stockholder thereof.
A complete statement by the applicant specifying the amounts of all unpaid judgments against the
applicant and the nature of the transaction or acts giving rise to said judgments and the name and
location of the court in which and the date on which each was entered.
All violations of any traffic law, ordinance or regulation of which the applicant and any member
thereof if an unincorporated association, and any officer, director and stockholder thereof if a
corporation, has been convicted within 18 months prior to the date of application, and all crimes of
which the applicant and any member thereof if an unincorporated association, and any officer,
director and stockholder thereof if a corporation, has been convicted, stating the name and
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 273/441
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
I.
A.
B.
C.
location of the court in which and the date on which such convictions were had and the penalties
imposed therefor.
The experience of the applicant and each member thereof if an unincorporated association, and
each officer, director and stockholder thereof if a corporation, in the transportation of passengers.
Any facts which the applicant believes tend to prove that the public convenience and necessity
require the granting of a license.
The number of vehicles to be operated by the applicant and a description of each such vehicle,
including the make, model, passenger seating capacity, year of manufacture, New York State
registration number and motor number thereof, and, if it has ever been in any accident, the date
and nature of the accident and a description of the damage done to such vehicle.
The age and citizenship of the applicant and each member thereof if an unincorporated
association, and each officer, director and stockholder thereof if a corporation.
The location of any and all depots and terminals proposed to be used by the applicant.
Any other relevant information which the Village Clerk may require.
§ 297-7. Issuance or denial.
If the Village Clerk shall find that further taxicab service in the Village and particularly in the area in
which the applicant proposes to operate is required by the public convenience and necessity and,
from the statements contained in the application for a taxicab owner's license, that the applicant is
qualified and able to perform such public transportation and to conform to the provisions of this
chapter and the rules and regulations adopted under this chapter, then the Village Clerk, upon the
certification of each taxicab proposed to be operated by the applicant pursuant to Article IX hereof,
and the furnishing by the applicant of proof of insurance, as hereinafter provided, shall issue a
license stating the name and address of the applicant and the date of the issuance thereof, the
number of vehicles the applicant is authorized to operate, and at the same time the Village Clerk
shall issue for each vehicle licensed hereunder a license bearing the words "Licensed Taxicab"
and an assigned number and the year of issuance; otherwise such application shall be denied.
Before making any finding as to whether public convenience and necessity justify the issuance of
a taxicab owner's license or the licensing of additional taxicabs, the Village Clerk shall cause to be
published in a newspaper of general circulation in the Village of Rockville Centre a notice stating
that application has been made for the licensing of a vehicle or vehicles as taxicabs, the number
of vehicles for which such application has been made, and containing a statement that written
arguments as to whether public convenience and necessity require the licensing of such vehicles
must be filed with the Village Clerk on or before the date fixed therein, which date must be not less
than eight days after the date of such publication. Any arguments so filed must be considered by
the Village Clerk in making his finding as to public convenience and necessity.
If the Village Clerk shall find from the statements contained in the application that an applicant for
an owner's license for a limousine or limousines is qualified and able to conduct the business of
operating the limousine or limousines and to conform to the provisions of this chapter and the
rules and regulations adopted under this chapter, then the Village Clerk, upon the certification of
each limousine proposed to be operated by the applicant pursuant to Article IX hereof, and the
furnishing by the applicant of proof of insurance, as hereinafter provided, shall issue a license
stating the name and address of the applicant, the number of vehicles the applicant is authorized
to operate and the date of issuance thereof; otherwise such application shall be denied.
§ 297-8. Consideration of taxicabs already in operation.
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 274/441
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
In making the findings required by § 297-7A hereof, the Village Clerk shall take into consideration the
number of taxicabs already in operation in the Village, particularly in the area in which the applicant
proposes to locate his depots and terminals, whether existing transportation is adequate to meet the
public need, the probable effect of additional taxicabs on local traffic conditions, and the character,
experience and responsibility of the applicant and the adequacy of the service which the applicant
proposes to give.
§ 297-9. Submission to examination under oath.
The Village Clerk, may in his discretion, before the issuance of a license under this article, require the
applicant and any others having knowledge of the facts to submit to an examination under oath and to
produce evidence relating thereto, or hold a hearing upon such application as hereinafter provided.
§ 297-10. Adding to number of taxicabs.
Every owner licensed under this article who shall desire to add to the number of taxicabs he is then
operating shall file with the Village Clerk a written application under oath, stating:
The name and address of the applicant.
The applicant's owner's license number.
Any facts which the applicant believes tend to prove that the public convenience and necessity
require such addition.
A description of each such additional taxicab, including the make, model, passenger seating
capacity, year of manufacture, New York State registration number, motor number and, if it has
ever been in any accident, the date and nature of the accident and description of the damage
done to such vehicle.
If the Village Clerk shall find that the addition of such taxicab or taxicabs is required by the public
convenience and necessity, then he shall issue a supplementary owner's license stating the name
and address of the applicant, the number of the applicant's operator's license, the number of
additional vehicles the applicant is authorized to operate, and the date of the issuance thereof;
otherwise such application shall be denied.
§ 297-11. Consideration in findings for additional taxicabs.
In making the finding required by § 297-10 hereof, the Village Clerk shall take into consideration the
matters specified in § 297-8 hereof.
§ 297-12. Renewal.
Any license issued under this article may be renewed annually for additional periods of one year each
from the date of expiration upon the filing of an application containing all the information required by
§ 297-6 hereof, except the facts with respect to public convenience and necessity which are required
by Subdivision E thereof, and upon the approval of the Village Clerk pursuant to §§ 297-7 and 297-8,
except as to the finding of public convenience and necessity.
§ 297-13. Inspection of vehicles prior to issuance of licenses.
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 275/441
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
No license shall be issued or renewed under this article which shall permit the use of any vehicle as a
taxicab or limousine unless and until it has been inspected pursuant to Article IX hereof and certified to
the Village Clerk as conforming to the provisions of the Article.
§ 297-14. Evidence of insurance.
Each applicant shall, before the issuance to him of a license under this article, file with the Village
Clerk evidence that he is insured against public liability in the limits of $10,000 for personal injuries to
each person and $20,000 for personal injuries for each accident and $5,000 for property damage,
which insurance shall be maintained in force during the period covered by the license.
§ 297-15. Nontransferability.
The owner's license issued hereunder shall not be transferable.
Article V. Driver's Licenses
§ 297-16. License required.
No person shall drive any taxicab upon the public highways of the Village without having first obtained
and having then in force a New York State chauffeur's license and a driver's Rockville Centre license
issued as hereinafter provided.
§ 297-17. Issuance and expiration date.
Every driver's license issued under this article shall be issued as of the date of the granting thereof and
shall expire on the 30th day of September next succeeding, unless sooner revoked by the Board of
Trustees.
§ 297-18. Application: information required.
Every person desiring to drive a taxicab for hire upon the streets of the Village shall file an application
for license so to drive with the Village Clerk, which application shall be in writing upon forms to be
furnished by the Village Clerk and verified under oath and shall state:
The name, address and age of the applicant.
A full description of the applicant, including his color, height, weight, color of eyes and hair, any
scars or marks and the nature of any physical infirmity from which he may suffer.
Recommendation by four residents of the County of Nassau who have known the applicant for a
period of five years or more and who will vouch for the applicant's sobriety, honesty and general
good character or other sufficient proof thereof.
Whether or not he is a citizen of the United States.
The names and addresses of the applicant's employers during the last 10 years prior to his
application.
All violations of any traffic law, ordinance or regulation for which the applicant has been arrested or
convicted within 18 months prior to the date of the application, and all crimes of which the
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 276/441
G.
H.
I.
A.
B.
C.
D.
applicant has ever been arrested or convicted, stating the date and place of each such arrest and
the name and location of the court in which and the date on which each such conviction was had
and the penalty imposed therefor.
The number and date of issuance of the applicant's New York chauffeur's license.
Whether or not any operator's or chauffeur's license held by the applicant has ever been revoked
or suspended by the State of New York or any state, and if so, by what court or other authority, on
what date, for what cause, and if suspended, the period of such suspension.
Any other relevant information which the Village Clerk may require.
§ 297-19. Additional information: photographs, physician's
certificate, fingerprints.
Every applicant for a driver's license shall, at the time of submitting his application, also:
Submit two individual photographs of the applicant, taken within 30 days prior to the date of
application, 1 1/2 by 1 1/2 inches in size, and such pictures must be a true likeness of the
applicant and must show only neck, shoulders and uncovered head.
Submit a certificate from a physician duly licensed to practice in the State of New York, certifying
that in his opinion the applicant is not afflicted with any physical or mental disease or infirmity
which makes him an unsafe or unsatisfactory driver.
Exhibit his current New York State chauffeur's license for inspection.
Be fingerprinted under the direction and supervision of the Village Clerk by the Rockville Centre
Police Department for which a charge shall be made. Said fingerprints shall be referred to the
Division of Criminal Justice of the State of New York for investigation for which a charge shall be
made.
[Amended 6-22-1981 by L.L. No. 2-1981]
§ 297-20. Investigation by Police Department.
Upon receipt of any application, the Village Clerk shall refer the same to the Rockville Centre Police
Department for such investigation as it shall deem necessary or desirable and report thereon.
§ 297-21. Issuance or denial of license.
Upon receipt of the report provided for in this article, the Village Clerk shall issue a taxicab driver's
license to the applicant if he shall find that the applicant holds a New York State chauffeur's license
and is a fit and proper person to drive a taxicab, considering his age, experience, police and accident
records, character and driving ability; otherwise, such application shall be denied.
§ 297-22. Issuance of badges.
At the time of issuance of such license the Village Clerk shall also furnish to the applicant a numbered
badge which must be conspicuously displayed on the outer clothing in the hollow of the left shoulder of
each licensed driver. Such badges shall be returned to the Village Clerk upon suspension, revocation
or failure to renew the taxicab driver's license.
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 277/441
A.
B.
C.
D.
A.
B.
§ 297-23. Nontransferability.
The driver's license issued hereunder shall not be transferable.
§ 297-24. License mounted in view of passengers.
The driver's license issued hereunder shall be enclosed in a plastic case, mounted in the center rear of
the front seat in such a manner to be visible to passengers sitting in the rear of the taxicab.
Article VI. Applications to Board of Trustees
§ 297-25. Application procedure.
Any applicant who shall have been denied a license under this chapter may apply to the Board of
Trustees for a review of the action of the Village Clerk as hereinafter provided:
Such application to the Board of Trustees shall be in writing, signed and acknowledged by the
applicant, and shall state the ground or grounds on which the applicant claims that the
determination of the Village Clerk was erroneous.
Such application shall be filed with the Village Clerk by the applicant within 20 days after notice of
denial of his application by the Village Clerk has been mailed to him or delivered to him in person.
Upon the filing of such application, the Board of Trustees shall hold a hearing thereon pursuant to
the provisions of Article VII hereof.
At such hearing the Board of Trustees shall consider the applicant's application upon the record
before the Village Clerk in connection with the Village Clerk's consideration thereof, and in its
discretion may receive new or additional evidence in support thereof or in opposition thereto.
§ 297-26. Action of Board after hearing.
The Board of Trustees, after such hearing, may affirm the action of the Village Clerk or direct the
Village Clerk to issue a proper license, pursuant to this chapter.
Article VII. Hearings
§ 297-27. Procedures.
Whenever it shall be provided herein that a hearing shall or may be held by the Board of Trustees with
respect to any matter:
Such hearing shall be held on a date and at a place and hour designated by the Board of
Trustees.
The Village Clerk shall give notice thereof, stating the name and address of the applicant or
license holder concerned, the subject matter of the hearing and the date, place and hour thereof
designated therefor, by mailing a copy thereof to the applicant or license holder concerned at the
address shown upon the most recent application of such applicant or licensee, at least 10 days
before such hearing.
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 278/441
C.
D.
E.
In the case of a public hearing, the notice required in Subsection B of this section shall also be
published, at least once a week for two successive weeks, in a newspaper of general circulation in
the Village of Rockville Centre, the first publication to be at least 10 days before the date fixed for
such public hearing.
The applicant or license holder involved shall be entitled to be represented by legal counsel and to
present such competent and material testimony or other evidence in his own behalf as may be
relevant to the subject matter of the hearing.
All witnesses shall be sworn and examined under oath.
Article VIII. Issuance of Licenses
§ 297-28. Fees for filing applications.
[Amended 10-18-1971; 12-4-1972]
The fee for any license and for the filing of applications therefor required by the provisions of this article
shall be at the levels fixed from time to time by resolution of the Board of Trustees of the Village of
Rockville Centre.
§ 297-29. Signing and sealing of license.
Every license issued hereunder shall be signed at the direction and in the name of the Village Clerk
and sealed with the seal of the Village of Rockville Centre.
§ 297-30. Records to be kept by Village Clerk.
The Village Clerk shall keep a record of the name and address of each person to whom a taxicab or
limousine owner's license has been issued under this chapter, showing the date and number of such
license and all renewals, suspensions and revocations thereof; and a record of each taxicab or
limousine licensed hereunder, stating the make, model, passenger seating capacity, year of
manufacture, New York State registration number and motor number thereof, and the name and
address of the person owning said taxicab or limousine; and a record of each driver's license issued
hereunder, showing the name and address of such driver, his New York chauffeur's license number, his
driver's license issued hereunder, and the date of issuance of such driver's license.
Article IX. Condition and Inspection of Taxicabs
§ 297-31. Vehicles to be kept sanitary, clean and in safe
condition.
Every vehicle operated upon the streets of the Village as a taxicab or limousine shall be kept clean,
sanitary, fit and of good appearance and in a safe condition for the transportation of passengers.
§ 297-32. Inspections.
All taxicabs and limousines licensed hereunder shall be inspected at least once in every three months
by a New York State licensed motor vehicle inspection station and a certificate of such inspection
showing compliance with all state safety inspection rules, which certificate must be filed with the
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 279/441
A.
B.
Village Clerk. Such certificate must be properly signed and stamped in accordance with the
requirements of the Motor Vehicle Safety Inspection Law of the State of New York. Unless such
certificate is furnished as herein required, the license for such taxicab or limousine shall stand
suspended until such time as such taxicab or limousine is placed in proper condition and such
certificate thereof is filed with the Village Clerk.
Article X. Suspension and Revocation
§ 297-33. Suspension and revocation; hearing.
Any license issued hereunder may be suspended for a period of not more than three months or
revoked by the Board of Trustees if the holder thereof shall be convicted of a violation of any
provision of this chapter or any rule or regulation adopted hereunder, or of any violation of any
ordinance of the Village or of any traffic law, ordinance or regulation of the State of New York or of
any municipality of the State of New York, or of any crime, or be guilty of making a false statement
or misrepresentation in his application. Any license issued hereunder may be suspended by the
Village Board if the holder thereof shall be indicted or charged, upon information duly filed with the
public authorities, with or for the commission of any crime or offense as above mentioned, until
such holder shall be convicted or acquitted of such crime or offense.
No license shall be either suspended or revoked hereunder without a hearing thereon held not
less than 20 days after written notice thereof shall have been given to the licensee either in person
or by registered mail.
§ 297-34. Temporary suspension.
The Village Clerk, upon receiving information giving him reasonable cause to believe that the holder of
any license issued hereunder has violated any provision of this chapter or been convicted of any
violation referred to in § 297-33 hereof or indicted or charged with or for any crime or offense, or is
guilty of having made a false statement or misrepresentation in his application, may forthwith
temporarily suspend such license until a hearing can be held by the Village Board as provided in
§ 297-33.
Article XI. Taxi Stands
§ 297-35. Locations established.
The Board of Trustees may from time to time, by resolution, establish stands at such locations upon
the streets or other public places of the Village as it deems necessary for the use of taxicabs operated
and driven by the persons licensed hereunder, and prescribe the number of taxicabs that may occupy
each such stand, provided that it shall find that such stands are required by the public convenience
and necessity and will not tend to create a traffic hazard.
§ 297-36. Stands used by licensed taxicab drivers.
All taxi stands may be used by any taxicab licensed hereunder and driven by any driver licensed
hereunder, provided there is a vacant space available therefor.
§ 297-37. Occupancy by other vehicles prohibited.
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 280/441
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
I.
J.
K.
No vehicle other than a taxicab duly licensed hereunder and driven by a person duly licensed
hereunder shall at any time occupy any space established as a taxi stand.
Article XII. Regulations
§ 297-38. Operation and driving regulations.
The following regulations shall be observed in the operation and driving of every taxicab upon the
public highways of the Village:
Each taxicab operated hereunder shall have a permanently affixed roof light with the word "Taxi"
imprinted thereon in such manner that it shall be visible at all times, and shall bear on the outside
of each front door the word "Taxi" and the name and address of the owner in letters not less than
two inches and not more than four inches in height, either painted thereon or otherwise securely
affixed thereto. There shall also be affixed to the left front door in a conspicuous place the license
issued by the Village Clerk as hereinabove provided. In addition, there shall also be affixed to the
left rear bumper a medallion issued by the Village Clerk.
[Amended 6-22-1981 by L.L. No. 2-1981]
No person shall drive any taxicab upon the streets of the Village unless there are displayed in
such taxicab, in a manner in which they are clearly visible and can be readily observed by all
passengers therein, the license of the driver and a schedule of the maximum fares applicable
within the Village.
The driver of every taxicab shall at all times remain in the driver's compartment or immediately
adjacent to his taxicab when such vehicle is in any public place, except that when necessary a
driver may be absent from his cab for not more than 20 consecutive minutes.
No taxicab driver shall solicit passengers except while parked or standing at a taxi stand and
except when sitting in the driver's compartment of such taxicab or while standing immediately
adjacent thereto, nor in a loud or annoying tone of voice nor by sign nor in any manner annoy,
obstruct the movement of or follow any person for the purpose of soliciting patronage.
No taxicab driver shall cruise in search of passengers.
No taxicab driver shall stop to pick up any additional passengers while proceeding to the
destination of any passengers then occupying the taxicab without the consent of all such
passengers.
No taxicab driver shall permit more persons to be carried in his taxicab than the number for which
he has seating facilities.
Except as provided in Subsection F hereof, no taxicab driver shall refuse or neglect to convey any
orderly person, upon request, unless previously engaged to full capacity or unless the
transportation of such person shall substantially delay or inconvenience passengers who have
already engaged his taxicab.
If a taxicab is carrying two or more persons to different destinations, the driver shall be the sole
judge of the order in which such persons shall be delivered to their destinations and the route
which shall be followed in so delivering them.
No taxicab shall park or stand on any public street or place other than at a taxi stand designated
or established and so marked pursuant to a resolution of the Village Board of Trustees.
No passenger in a taxicab shall be kept waiting longer than five minutes before proceeding to his
announced destination.
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 281/441
L.
M.
N.
O.
P.
Q.
R.
S.
T.
(a)
[1]
[2]
(b)
(c)
(d)
(1)
U.
All accidents in which any taxicab shall be involved shall be reported to the Rockville Centre
Police Department within 24 hours after the happening thereof.
Every taxicab driver, as soon as practicable after his taxicab is emptied of passengers, shall
carefully search his taxicab for any property lost or left therein by any passenger and, if he shall
find any such property, shall immediately deliver it to the Rockville Centre Police Department.
Every taxicab driver shall obey all traffic laws, ordinances, rules and regulations while driving a
taxicab, and upon the receipt of a summons for his arrest for any alleged violation of any such law,
ordinance, rule or regulation shall report the same within three days to the Village Clerk, advising
him of the nature of the offense charged and the name and location of the court and the date on
which such summons is returnable or on which the hearing or trial is to be held.
No person other than the driver or a passenger shall enter any taxicab while it is in operation as
such.
Every taxicab driver licensed as such pursuant to this chapter shall within 48 hours notify the
Village Clerk of any change of his address or loss of either his taxicab driver's license, his
chauffeur's license or his driver's badge.
No taxicab owner or driver shall demand or suggest that any passenger or prospective passenger
pay a fare larger than that prescribed herein.
Every person licensed as a taxicab owner under this chapter shall maintain continuous service
seven days each week, 24 hours each day from at least one depot or terminal, except that
individual owner-drivers shall maintain continuous service at least eight hours per day and at least
five days each week.
Every driver shall keep a written record of all trips, on a form approved by the Village Clerk,
showing the time and place each passenger engaged his taxicab and the time and place he left
such taxicab. Such record shall be retained by the owner of such taxicab for at least one year.
It shall be unlawful for a passenger to refuse to pay the agreed or established fare.
Rates of fare. No fare shall be charged for transportation that is greater than the prescribed and
fixed rates as set forth in this section, provided, however, that the Board of Trustees of the Village
of Rockville Centre may, from time to time, by resolution, establish and amend the prescribed and
fixed rates for transportation:
[Amended 12-16-1974 by L.L. No. 9-1974; 11-20-1978 by L.L. No. 12-1978; 6-22-1981 by L.L. No.
2-1981; 3-19-1990 by L.L. No. 6-1990; 2-12-2001 by L.L. No. 1-2001; 9-13-2004 by L.L. No. 1-
2004; 3-2-2020 by L.L. No. 1-2020]
Pickup and discharge of a passenger from any point in the Incorporated Village of Rockville
Centre to any other point therein:
For persons over the age of 18: $4.
For persons over 12 years of age up to and including 18 years of age:
Weekdays between the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. to 7:00 p.m.:
$2.50.
All other times: $1.50.
For persons over four years of age but not over the age of 12: $0.50.
No additional charge for any single child under the age of four, when accompanied by an
adult passenger.
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 282/441
(e)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
[1]
[2]
[3]
(f)
(2)
[1]
(3)
For senior citizens and disabled persons: $2.50.
Additional charges:
For packages on seats or floor: $0.25.
For bulky items such as carriages, strollers, wagons or trunks: $0.50 per item if carried
inside the vehicle or $0.50 per load if carried inside the trunk.
For waiting time during trips: $18 per hour or $3 every 10 minutes or portion thereof.
For rental of a cab: $28 per hour, plus tolls, back to the point of origin.
For carriage of animals: $0.50 per animal.
For trips to and from the airport:
LaGuardia Airport: $59 for the first person, with an additional charge of $3/person 18
years of age or older.
John F. Kennedy International: $36 for the first person, with an additional charge of
$3/person 18 years of age or older.
Islip McArthur Airport: $75 for the first person, with an additional charge of $5/person
18 years of age or older.
Fuel surcharge, with the surcharge payable to the fuel purchaser. The fuel surcharge will be
set at levels fixed from time to time by resolution of the Board of Trustees of the Village of
Rockville Centre.
[Added 11-14-2005 by L.L. No. 6-2005[1]]
Editor's Note: This local law also provided as follows: "The purpose of the provision for a
surcharge, as set forth in § 297-38U(3), is to recognize the high cost of fuel in the United
States, including the Village of Rockville Centre at the present time, as well as the fluctuation
in the cost of fuel in the United States and the Village of Rockville Centre at the present time.
The intention of the Board of Trustees is to address this matter through this legislative
amendment that allows the Board of Trustees to periodically review the status of fuel prices to
protect the residents of the Village of Rockville Centre by ensuring that taxi cab service is
available when needed.”
Article XIII. Penalties
§ 297-39. Penalties for offenses.
Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall be liable to a fine of not more than
$100 or imprisonment for not more than six months, or to both such fine and imprisonment, and to the
suspension or revocation of any license hereunder held by him.
Article XIV. Nonapplicability
§ 297-40. Taxicabs of other communities exempted.
Nothing herein contained shall be construed to prevent a taxicab duly licensed by another municipality
from delivering a passenger in the Village of Rockville Centre from such other municipality. Any taxicab
entering the Village of Rockville Centre for delivery of a passenger from such other municipality shall
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 283/441
A.
B.
C.
A.
under no circumstances pick up a passenger within the Village of Rockville Centre. The right of a
taxicab operator who is duly licensed to operate by another municipality, to deliver a passenger within
the Village of Rockville Centre from such other municipality, shall apply only where such other
municipality grants like privileges to a taxicab operator duly licensed by the Village of Rockville Centre.
Chapter 300. Towing
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Trustees of the Village of Rockville Centre 6-29-1998 by L.L. No.
2-1998; amended in its entirety 4-26-2011 by L.L. No. 9-2011. Subsequent amendments noted where
applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Penalties — See Ch. 1, § 1-2.
Traffic Violation Bureau — See Ch. 62.
Secondhand automobile sales — See Ch. 93.
Junk and secondhand dealers — See Ch. 215.
Licenses — See Ch. 222.
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 250.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 287.
Taxicabs — See Ch. 297.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 309.
Signs and posting bills — See Ch. 335.
§ 300-1. Purpose; intent.
The purpose of this chapter is to ensure safety, traffic control and the orderly use of the streets
and highways within the Village of Rockville Centre (Village). This chapter is necessary to provide
an orderly arrangement for tow service within the Village and to provide responsible tow service to
owners and operators of motor vehicles.
In furtherance of such intent, this chapter provides for issuance of tow licenses to tow services that
tow at police request. Towing services that otherwise tow vehicles from property in the Village at
the request of the vehicle owner or operator or at the request of the owner of private property from
which such vehicles are towed are required to be licensed by the Town of Hempstead and to
comply with § 300-3 of this chapter.
Except as provided in § 300-3, which pertains to towing from private property, the intent of this
chapter is to allow owners and operators of motor vehicles requiring tow service to select a tow
operator of their choosing. If towing of a vehicle is necessary as provided in the Rules and
Regulations of the Village Police Department, and such owner or operator does not select a tow
service, the Village shall require the towing to be done using the call system established pursuant
to the Village Police Department Rules and Regulations for the Towing of Motor Vehicles.
§ 300-2. Prohibited acts.
Removal of motor vehicle from the scene of accident. It is unlawful for any person, firm or
corporation to service or tow any motor vehicle that has been involved in an accident without the
prior consent of the owner or operator or the police officer at the scene of the accident. No motor
vehicle will be secured at or removed from the scene of an accident where a police officer requires
or requests that an examination be made of the damaged motor vehicle to determine whether the
motor vehicle is defective or for any other purposes, or where the police officer requires or
requests that photographs and/or diagrams of the accident scene be completed prior to the
removal of the motor vehicle.
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 284/441
B.
C.
D.
E.
A.
B.
C.
Failure to remove debris. Once called to the scene of an accident, the tow service is responsible
for completely removing all debris from the roadway, including glass, metal fragments, etc., and for
leaving the roadway free and broom clean from such debris. The tow service is prohibited from
leaving the scene until the cleanup has taken place. The fees charged by a tow service for
cleanup of the roadway at an accident scene shall not exceed the fees authorized by the Town of
Hempstead for such services.
Solicitation. It is unlawful for any owner, employee, operator or agent of a tow service to drive
along any public street or highway within the Village of Rockville Centre, or park or stand on any
public or private property, for the sole purpose of soliciting of towing and/or repair work. It is
unlawful for any owner, employee, operator or agent of a tow service to solicit towing or repair
work at the scene of any motor vehicle accident on public streets or highways within the Village of
Rockville Centre. The stopping of any tow truck or service truck within 500 feet of the scene of any
accident or disabled motor vehicle on any public street or highway in the Village of Rockville
Centre, without the prior authorization of the operator of the motor vehicle, owner of the motor
vehicle or member of the Rockville Centre Police Department, will be presumptive evidence of the
intent of the operator of a tow truck or service truck to solicit towing or repair work, except if the
vehicle operator flags down a passing tow truck or service truck.
Cruising. Cruising for the purpose of solicitation of towing or repair work is unlawful. "Cruising" is
defined as driving along the public highways or roadways, or parking or standing on public or
private property, solely for the purpose of soliciting towing or repair work without having first been
called or otherwise requested to provide service.
In addition to any other prohibition provided by law, no vehicle may be towed from any public or
private property in the Village except by a tow truck and tow truck operator duly licensed by the
Town of Hempstead to engage in such activities.
§ 300-3. Vehicles improperly parked on private property.
Prohibition, and limitation on fees. A vehicle improperly parked on private property other than a
one- or two-family residence may be towed from such property only with the express consent of
the owner or operator of the vehicle, or as provided in this section. Where a vehicle improperly
parked on private property is towed from such private property without the express consent of the
vehicle owner or operator, a tow car operator licensed by the Town of Hempstead may collect fees
from the owner of such vehicle or other person in control of such vehicle, payable before the
vehicle is released, provided that such charges do not exceed the charges set by and in effect in
the Town of Hempstead as of the date that the motor vehicle is towed. No fee may be collected
unless a licensed tow car operator has removed a vehicle because it is improperly parked on
private property that has posted instructions in compliance with § 300-3B, and the motor vehicle
removal is pursuant to a contract between the owner of private property and the licensed tow car
operator for the removal of any such improperly parked vehicles.
Signage required on private property. No owner or operator of parking facilities on private property
shall tow or cause any motor vehicle to be towed from such private property without the express
consent of the vehicle owner or operator unless such facility owner or operator shall conspicuously
post and maintain upon such private property a sign stating the name, address and telephone
number of the tow operator, the hours of operation for vehicle redemption, and the hours vehicles
are prohibited from parking and subject to tow. Any signs installed pursuant to this section must
comply with Chapter 335 of the Code of the Village of Rockville Centre.
Written authorization by private property owner. No vehicle shall be removed by a tow car operator
from private property without express written authorization by the owner of the private property or
his or her agent as designated in the contract between the owner of the private property and the
tow car operator.
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 285/441
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
I.
J.
K.
Occupied vehicles. A tow car operator is prohibited from removing any vehicle that is occupied by
a person.
Storage requirements. When a vehicle is towed pursuant to this section, it must be taken directly
to a facility for storage that is maintained by the tow car operator who has removed such vehicle.
Such facility for storage must be a secure place for the safekeeping of vehicles, and may be
located a distance no more than two miles from the Village Police station.
Village Police notification. Any person who removes a vehicle pursuant to this section shall
remove the vehicle directly to its facility and shall, within one hour of the vehicle's removal, notify
the Police Department in writing and via facsimile. The written notification must include the
purpose of reporting, the location of the storage site, the time the vehicle was removed, the
location from which the vehicle was removed, the name of the person who authorized the removal,
and the fact that the removal was pursuant to a contract with the owner of the private property.
The person notifying the person at the Police Department must maintain records that include the
name of the person at the Police Department who took the report, as well as the time and date
that the vehicle was removed and the location from where the vehicle was removed.
Vehicle disconnection. If the registered owner or other person in control of a vehicle arrives at the
tow scene prior to the removal of the vehicle and the vehicle has already been connected to any
apparatus for removal, the vehicle shall immediately be disconnected from such apparatus and
such registered owner or other person in control of such vehicle shall be allowed to remove the
vehicle from the premises without interference. The fee for the disconnection service shall be no
more than 1/2 of the charge allowed for removal, as set forth in the charges that are set by and in
effect in the Town of Hempstead as of the date that the motor vehicle is connected to the
apparatus.
Release of vehicle. When the registered owner or other person in control of a vehicle arrives at the
storage facility, upon proper payment, in accordance with Subsection A of this section, the storage
facility must release the vehicle within one hour of the arrival of the owner or other person in
control of the vehicle. No vehicle shall be towed to any facility unless that storage facility is open
and available seven days a week from 8:00 a.m. until 12:00 midnight to release vehicles to the
registered owner or other person in control of the vehicle.
Waiver of liability prohibited. No waiver of liability for the person or entity who has towed the
vehicle may be required as a condition of release of the vehicle from the owner or other person in
control of the towed vehicle. A detailed, signed receipt showing the legal name of the person or
company removing the vehicle must be given at the time of payment to the person paying the
removal and storage charges.
No charge for tow in violation of Chapter 300. When a vehicle is towed in violation of any section
of this chapter, the owner of private property and the agent designated in the contract to tow from
the private property shall not charge any fee for the towing or storage of the vehicle. Any excess
fee that has been charged and received must be refunded within three days of demand.
Emergency vehicle removal prohibited. No person may, under the authority of this chapter, cause
the removal of any ambulance, police vehicle, civil defense emergency vehicle, emergency
ambulance service vehicle, environmental emergency response vehicle, sanitation patrol vehicle,
hazardous materials emergency vehicles or Armed Forces vehicle.
§ 300-4. Licenses for tow services which tow at police request.
No person, firm, corporation or company may engage in the business of towing of motor vehicles
within the Village without first obtaining a license in accordance with the provisions of this chapter,
Chapter 222 of the Village Code and in accordance with the Rockville Centre Police Department Rules
and Regulations for Towing of Motor Vehicles. Expiration and renewal of licenses issued by the Village
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 286/441
[1]
A.
B.
C.
D.
A.
B.
C.
will take place in accordance with Chapter 222 of the Incorporated Village of Rockville Centre, except
as otherwise provided by law. No licensee shall have any vested or property right to the renewal of any
license.[1]
Editor's Note: See also § 300-5.1B.
§ 300-5. Fees and charges.
Towing. Charges for towing of motor vehicles pursuant to this chapter shall not exceed those in
effect in and set by the Town of Hempstead as of the date the motor vehicle is towed.
Storage. Charges for storage of towed motor vehicles pursuant to this chapter shall not exceed
those in effect in and set by the Town of Hempstead as of the date the motor vehicle is stored.
Repairs and cleanup. Charges for repairing towed motor vehicles and/or for the cleanup of debris
from the roadway and scene pursuant to this chapter shall not exceed those in effect in and set by
the Town of Hempstead as of the date the motor vehicle is repaired or the cleanup takes place.
Licenses. The fee for any license required by the provisions of this chapter to be obtained from the
Village shall be established or amended from time to time by resolution of the Village Board of
Trustees.
§ 300-5.1. Limitation on number of licenses; qualifications for
licenses.
Pursuant to its authority to determine the best interests of the Village, and the appropriate manner
in which to assure the provision of towing services at police request, the Board of Trustees may
impose a limit on the number of licenses to be issued by the Village for towing of vehicles at police
request, and/or may establish or amend a system of licensing in which potential licensees are
required to submit bids or proposals to provide such services. All licensees shall be placed on one
or more rotational lists, as deemed appropriate by the Police Department, to assure to a
reasonable degree that each licensee shall have equivalent opportunities to provide towing
services as may be required by the Police Department and which such licensee is capable to
provide.
The Board of Trustees may determine by resolution, in its sole discretion, to limit the number of
towing licenses or issue such licenses on other or different terms and conditions as may be
determined by the Board, including limiting the number of such licenses and issuing licenses by
random selection among qualified applicants therefor, or by public auction, bids or proposals;
provided, however, that no such method shall terminate any license prior to the expiration of the
term thereof. The Board of Trustees may also determine by resolution, in its sole discretion, that
no new or renewed towing license shall be issued by the Village for towing at police request
pursuant to this chapter, and that the Village shall instead enter into one or more contracts or
concessions for towing services to be provided at police request, upon terms and conditions
determined by the Board.
[Amended 6-7-2011 by L.L. No. 11-2011]
In addition to any requirements reasonably imposed by rule or regulation of the Police
Department, no license to provide towing services at police request shall be issued unless the
licensee maintains a bona fide business location and vehicle storage facility, including a staffed
office and appropriate yard space, within a direct line distance of 1.5 miles from the Rockville
Centre Village Hall. If such yard space is shared with any other business or entity, the Police
Department shall determine whether sufficient yard space is available to the licensee for the
purposes of storing vehicles towed at the request of the Police Department.
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 287/441
D.
E.
The Police Commissioner is authorized to promulgate standard forms of towing authorizations
and/or towing contracts. In the event any such standard forms are promulgated, no licensee may
use any other authorization or contract, nor require the owner or operator of any vehicle to sign
any other authorization or contract, with respect to any vehicle towed at police request.
Except as may be provided in a standard form authorization or contract promulgated pursuant to
this section, no licensee may enter into any agreement with any owner or operator for the repair of
a vehicle towed or being towed at police request unless such agreement provides for cancellation
by the owner or operator within 72 hours after it is executed, and no licensee shall commence any
repair of such vehicle until the expiration of the required cancellation period. Any repair agreement
entered into in violation of this section shall be null and void, and no licensee shall be entitled to
be paid for any repair made pursuant to a repair agreement entered into in violation of this section.
Violation of the provisions of this section shall be grounds for revocation or suspension of a towing
license issued by the Village pursuant to this chapter.
§ 300-6. Suspension or revocation of license.
Any license issued pursuant to this chapter is subject to suspension or revocation in accordance with
this chapter, Chapter 222 of the Village Code and/or the Rules and Regulations of the Village Police
Department.
§ 300-7. Penalties for offenses.
Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be subject to the
penalty provisions of § 1-2 of this Code and such other provisions of law as may be applicable.
§ 300-8. Severability.
If any part of this chapter is deemed or found to be unenforceable, illegal or unconstitutional, or
otherwise void, such judgment will not affect or impair the validity of the remainder of the chapter or the
application of the chapter.
Chapter 303. Trees, Shrubs and Hedges
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Trustees of the Village of Rockville Centre 2-22-1971 by L.L. No.
1-1971 as Ch. 122 of the 1971 Code. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building code — See Ch. 112.
Open burning — See Ch. 135.
Fences — See Ch. 175.
Fire prevention and control — See Ch. 185.
Landscapers and gardeners — See Ch. 219.
Licenses — See Ch. 222.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 247.
Soil and earth removal — See Ch. 280.
Solid waste — See Ch. 283.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 287.
Excavations — See Ch. 287, X.
Signs and posting bills — See Ch. 335.
Zoning — See Ch. 340.
§ 303-1. Planting in sidewalk area; existing plantings.
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 288/441
A.
B.
[Amended 8-17-1981 by L.L. No. 3-1981]
No trees, shrubs or hedges shall be planted within the area between the sidewalk and curb in front of
or adjacent to any private premises without a permit first being obtained from the Superintendent of
Public Works. All such plantings shall conform to appropriate regulations as may be set for the
issuance of said permit. The care and maintenance of all new and existing trees, shrubs or hedges
located within the sidewalk area shall be the responsibility of the owners or occupants of the premises
located immediately adjacent to said trees, shrubs or hedges, as provided in § 303-2 of this chapter.
§ 303-2. Removing and trimming; repairing root damage to
sidewalks.
[Amended 8-17-1981 by L.L. No. 3-1981]
It shall be the duty of every owner, tenant or other occupant of any house or structure, and every
owner or person entitled to possession of any vacant lot, to remove trees, shrubs or hedges when
required by the Village authorities and to keep trees, shrubs and hedges in front of or adjacent to their
premises and within the sidewalk area trimmed so that dead limbs are removed and overhanging limbs
will not interfere with passersby on the sidewalk or roadway, such overhanging limbs to be kept
trimmed at all times to allow a passage space of not less than eight feet above center of the sidewalk
and not less than 13 feet above the roadway measured at a point five feet from the curbline. It shall
also be the duty of every owner, tenant or other occupant of any house or structure, and every owner
or person entitled to possession of any vacant lot, to repair any sidewalk or curb in front of or adjacent
to such premises damaged by tree, shrub or hedge roots located in front of or adjacent to said
premises whether or not within the property line or sidewalk area.
§ 303-3. Injuring or removing trees planted within area between
sidewalk and curb in front of or adjacent to private premises:
written approval required.
[Amended 5-6-2002 by L.L. No. 4-2002]
No person shall in anywise injure, destroy or remove any shade tree planted within the area between
the sidewalk and curb in front of or adjacent to any private premises of over 10 feet in height without
first securing the written approval of the Superintendent of Public Works of the Village of Rockville
Centre.
§ 303-4. Certain types of trees prohibited; removal procedures.
No person or persons, firm, association or corporation shall plant or permit to be planted any
poplar trees of any type, willow trees or trees known as swamp maple trees on any street within
the Village limits of the Village of Rockville Centre, or within 25 feet of any water conduit, sewage
main or storm drain belonging to either the Village of Rockville Centre, the Town of Hempstead,
the County of Nassau or the State of New York.
It shall be the duty of the Superintendent of Public Works of the Village to cause any poplar trees,
willow trees or swamp maple trees now growing in any street in the Village of Rockville Centre
which are causing any damage to any water conduit, sewage main or storm drain belonging to the
Village of Rockville Centre or the Town of Hempstead or the County of Nassau or the State of New
York, to be forthwith removed, and it shall be further the duty of the Superintendent of Public
Works of the Village to cause to be removed any poplar trees, willow trees or swamp maple trees
growing on any property within 25 feet of a water conduit, sewage main or storm drain belonging
to either the Village of Rockville Centre, the Town of Hempstead, the County of Nassau or the
State of New York, and which are causing any damage to any such water conduit, sewage main or
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 289/441
C.
A.
(1)
(2)
B.
C.
D.
storm drain, after giving the owner of the property on which such tree is or trees are located five
days' written notice by mail of his intention.
It shall be the duty of each owner or occupant of real property within the Village to afford access to
such property to the Superintendent of Public Works of the Village or his employees or
appointees, for the purpose of inspecting any tree or removing the same in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter.
§ 303-5. Hedges at street intersections.
[Amended 5-2-1966]
No person, persons, firm, association or corporation shall suffer or permit any fence, hedge,
ornamental planting, bush or other structure or plant which reduces visibility to an extent which
creates a hazard to vehicular traffic, to be erected or to grow on any property owned or occupied
by him or them at a street intersection in the Village of Rockville Centre, to a height greater than
2 1/2 feet above street level, within the area of the triangle formed by the property corner and a
line connecting the two "property line cutback points" as tabulated in the included cutback distance
chart showing required cutback distances for various angles of street intersections. If intersections
have different angles than those shown, then the property line cutbacks shown for the closest
corresponding angle will prevail.
The following are exceptions:
At any street intersection where all approaches are controlled by traffic control devices.
At T-intersections where at least one approach is controlled by a traffic control device.
Cutback distance chart.
Angle of Intersection
P/L Cutback Distance in
Feet
(Minor Street)
P/L Cutback Distance in Feet
(Major Street)
90º 3 35
85º 5 57
80º 8 78
75º 10 94
70º 13 108
65º 16 116
60º 19 125
55º 22 134
50º 24 138
45º 28 139
Definitions.
MINOR STREET
Street having minor traffic movement and/or regulated by traffic control device.
P/L CUTBACK DISTANCE
Distance from corner formed by the intersection of the property lines to property line cutback
point.
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 290/441
PROPERTY LINE CUTBACK POINT
That point on the property line of the major or the minor street established by proceeding
along the property lines from their point of intersection the cutback distances as shown in the
cutback distance chart.
§ 303-6. Penalties for offenses; noncompliance procedures.
Any owner who has been notified by the Village Clerk or Superintendent of Public Works that the trees
or shrubs on his premises are in violation of §§ 303-1, 303-2, 303-3, 303-4 or 303-5 hereof, and shall
fail to correct the condition within five days of the sending of such notice to his last known address by
mail, shall be in violation of this chapter, and in addition to the penalties otherwise enforceable, the
Village may thereafter so trim offending trees and hedges as to correct the prohibited conditions and
assess the cost thereof against the owners of the adjacent property. Such costs, if not paid, shall be
assessable against the property as a tax thereon.
Chapter 306. Utilities: Electric and Water
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Trustees of the Village of Rockville Centre 11-7-1983 by L.L. No.
10-1983. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Water — See Ch. 318.
§ 306-1. Incorporation of rules and regulations.
The rules and regulations governing electric light and power installations and the rules and regulations
of the Water Department heretofore adopted by the Board of Trustees of the Incorporated Village of
Rockville Centre, as amended, and any which may hereafter be adopted by said Board of Trustees are
hereby incorporated into the Code of the Incorporated Village of Rockville Centre.
§ 306-2. Enforcement.
The rules and regulations referred to in § 306-1 above are to have the same force and effect and are to
be enforceable in the same manner as if they were completely restated herein.
§ 306-3. Penalties for offenses.
Any person, firm or corporation which shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter and the rules
and regulations incorporated herein shall be subject to the penalties and restrictions contained in the
rules and regulations referred to in § 306-1 above and in addition, shall be subject, for each violation
thereof, to a penalty not exceeding the sum of $100 for each offense. A violation of this chapter shall
constitute disorderly conduct, and the person violating the same shall be a disorderly person. Each day
any such violation shall be permitted or suffered to exist or continue shall constitute a separate
offense. Nothing contained herein will limit the right of the Board of Trustees to enforce obedience to
this chapter by injunction.
§ 306-4. Rules and regulations on file.
Current rules and regulations are on file in the office of the Village Clerk and in the office of the
Superintendent of Public Utilities.
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 291/441
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
I.
J.
Chapter 309. Vehicles and Traffic
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Trustees of the Village of Rockville Centre as indicated in article
histories. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Traffic Violation Bureau — See Ch. 62.
Aircraft — See Ch. 78.
Secondhand automobile sales — See Ch. 93.
Bicycles — See Ch. 99.
Parades and processions — See Ch. 239.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 287.
Taxicabs — See Ch. 297.
Towing — See Ch. 300.
Article I. General Street Traffic and Parking Regulations
[Adopted 2-22-1971 by L.L. No. 1-1971 as Ch. 124, Art. I, of the 1971 Code]
§ 309-1. Delegation of regulations to police.
Pursuant to the provisions of § 1603(a) of the Vehicle and Traffic Law of the State of New York, as
adopted by L. 1959, c. 775, amended by L. 1959, c. 514, the Police Department of the Incorporated
Village of Rockville Centre is hereby authorized to:
Designate through highways and order stop signs, flashing signals or yield signs erected at
specified entrances thereto or designate any intersection as a stop intersection or a yield
intersection and order like signs or signals at one or more entrances to such intersection.
Prohibit or regulate the turning of vehicles or specified types of vehicles at intersections or other
designated locations.
Regulate the crossing of any roadway by pedestrians.
Designate any highway or any separate roadway thereof for one-way traffic.
Exclude trucks, commercial vehicles, tractors, tractor-trailer combinations and trucks in excess of
any designated weight from designated highways.
Prohibit, restrict or limit the stopping, standing or parking of vehicles.
Determine those highways or portions of highways which shall be marked to indicate where
overtaking and passing or driving to the left of the roadway would be especially hazardous in
accordance with the standards, minimum warrants and sign or marking specifications established
by the State Traffic Commission.
Designate safety zones.
Provide for the installation, operation, maintenance, policing and supervision of parking meters,
establish parking time limits at such meters, designate hours of operation of such meters.
Establish a system of truck routes upon which all trucks, tractors and tractor-trailer combinations
having a total gross weight in excess of 10,000 pounds are permitted to travel and operate, and
excluding such vehicles and combinations from all highways except those which constitute such
truck-route system. Any such system of truck routes shall provide suitable connection with all state
routes entering or leaving the Incorporated Village of Rockville Centre.
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 292/441
K.
L.
M.
N.
O.
A.
B.
Regulate traffic by means of traffic-control signals.
License, regulate or prohibit processions, assemblages or parades. Whenever such a procession,
assemblage or parade authorized by a local authority will block the movement of traffic on a state
highway maintained by the state, or on a highway which connects two state highways maintained
by the state to make a through route, for a period in excess of 10 minutes, such authority must,
prior to such blocking, provide and designate with conspicuous signs a detour adequate to prevent
unreasonable delay in the movement of traffic on said highway maintained by the state.
Prohibit or regulate the operation and the stopping, standing or parking of vehicles in public parks.
Provide for the removal and storage of vehicles parked or abandoned on highways during
snowstorms, floods, fires or other public emergencies, or found unattended where they constitute
an obstruction to traffic or any place where stopping, standing or parking is prohibited, and for the
payment of reasonable charges for such removal and storage by the owner or operator of any
such vehicle.
Prohibit, restrict or limit the stopping, standing or parking of vehicles upon property owned or
leased by the Incorporated Village of Rockville Centre.
§ 309-2. Directions to be followed.
It shall be unlawful for any person to pass, drive or operate any automobile, wagon, motor vehicle or
other vehicle along, over or through any public street, highway or parking field or space in a direction
opposite or contrary to the direction designated by the said Police Department, or to drive or operate a
heavy truck along, over or through a public street, highway or parking field or space from which heavy
trucks have been excluded by rules and regulations prescribed by said Police Department. It shall also
be unlawful to enter such designated main artery of travel without first coming to a full stop, unless
otherwise directed by a peace officer or signal. The operator of any vehicle which has come to a stop,
as herein required, shall proceed with caution so as not to interfere with or endanger traffic. It shall also
be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to pass a stop sign when same is placed at a school
crossing designated by said Police Department between the hours of 7:30 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. without
having come to a full stop where a stop sign has been placed unless otherwise directed by a peace
officer. A person having stopped a vehicle as directed by such stop sign shall remain standing until all
persons standing at the side of the roadway between such signs who desire to cross the roadway have
done so, and shall then proceed with caution so as not to interfere with or endanger any person or
traffic. It shall also be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to violate any rules and regulations made
by such Police Department with respect to traffic when proper notices of such regulations have been
posted conspicuously on the highways to which such regulations apply. It shall also be unlawful for the
operator of any vehicle to violate any system of pavement markings adopted by such Police
Department.
§ 309-3. Penalties for offenses.
[Amended 4-11-2011 by L.L. No. 7-2011]
Except as otherwise provided in this section, any person violating any provision of this article shall
upon conviction be guilty of a violation, and shall be subject to and pay a penalty or fine not
exceeding $100 for the first offense, not more than $150 for the second such offense committed
within six months after the date of the first such offense and not more than $250 for the third such
offense committed within one year after the date of the first such offense.
Any person violating any provision of this article by disobedience of a traffic control device or by
failing to stop at a stop sign as required by law shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a violation, and
shall be subject to and pay a penalty or fine not exceeding $250 for the first offense, not more than
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 293/441
A.
B.
(1)
(2)
C.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
D.
(1)
(2)
E.
$350 for the second such offense committed within six months after the date of the first such
offense and not more than $500 for the third such offense committed within one year after the date
of the first such offense.
Article IA. Dimensions and Weights of Vehicles
[Adopted 3-2-2010 by L.L. No. 2-2010]
§ 309-3.1. Prohibited acts; dimension and weight standards;
exceptions; enforcement.
Except as expressly permitted by federal law, the New York State Vehicle and Traffic Law, the
regulations of the New York State Department of Transportation or by special permit granted by
the Mayor, no person shall operate or move or cause or knowingly permit to be operated or moved
on any public road, street or highway (hereinafter collectively referred to as "road") in the Village of
Rockville Centre any vehicle or combination of vehicles exceeding the weight of 80,000 pounds
gross vehicular weight (GVW) where posted with official traffic regulation signs. This restriction
shall not apply where the requirement for local delivery will permit no alternative route.
Width. The width of a vehicle, inclusive of load, shall not be more than 96 inches, plus safety
devices, on any Village road.
Height.
The height of a vehicle from the underside of a tire to the top of the vehicle, inclusive of load,
shall be no more than 13 1/2 feet.
Any damages to highways, overpasses or highway structures resulting from the use of a
vehicle exceeding 13 1/2 feet in height where such excess height is the proximate cause of
the damage shall be compensated for by the owner and operator of such vehicle.
Length.
The length of a single vehicle, inclusive of a load and bumpers, shall not be more than 40 feet
unless otherwise provided in this section.
The length of a semitrailer or trailer shall not exceed 48 feet, except as provided in this
section; provided, however, that the length of any trailer or semitrailer being operated in
combination with another trailer or semitrailer shall not exceed 28 feet.
The length of a bus having a carrying capacity of more than seven passengers shall not
exceed 45 feet, except that the length of an articulated bus shall not exceed 62 feet.
The provisions of this section shall not apply to fire or other emergency vehicles.
Any semitrailer with a length not to exceed 48 feet may be operated on any Village road,
provided that the total length of a combination of vehicles, including such a semitrailer, does
not exceed 60 feet.
Additional restrictions on length; exceptions.
The total length of a combination of vehicles, inclusive of load and bumpers, shall not be more
than 65 feet.
The provisions of Subsection E(1) shall not apply to:
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 294/441
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
F.
G.
H.
I.
J.
(1)
(2)
K.
Vehicles of a corporation which is subject to the jurisdiction of the Interstate Commerce
Commission, the Public Service Commission or other regulatory body, which are used in
the construction, reconstruction, repair or maintenance of its property or facilities,
provided that the length of such vehicles are regulated by and comply with the safety
requirements of the applicable federal or New York State laws and regulations.
Vehicles hauling poles, girders, columns or other similar objects of excess length,
provided such vehicles comply with the safety requirements of applicable federal or New
York State Law and regulations.
Fire or other emergency vehicles.
State and/or municipally owned vehicles engaged in snow plowing, ice clearing or other
emergency-type operations.
In determining the number of wheels and axles in the vehicle or combination of vehicles within the
meaning of this section, only two wheels shall be counted for each axle, and axles which are less
than 46 inches apart from center to center shall be counted as one axle. However, in the case of
multiple tires or multiple wheels, the sum of the widths of all the tires on a wheel or combination of
wheels shall be taken in determining the width.
Subject to the provisions of this section governing maximum vehicle gross weights, the weight, per
inch width of tire, on any one wheel of a single vehicle or a combination of vehicles equipped with
pneumatic tires, when loaded, shall not be more than 800 pounds.
Subject to the provisions of this section governing maximum vehicle gross weights, the weight on
any one wheel of a single vehicle with pneumatic tires, when loaded, shall not be more than
11,200 pounds.
Subject to the provisions of this section governing maximum vehicle gross weights, the weight on
any one axle of a single vehicle equipped with pneumatic tires, when loaded, shall not be more
than 22,400 pounds.
Subject to the provisions of this section governing maximum vehicle gross weights, the weight of
any two consecutive axles of a single vehicle or a combination of a vehicle equipped with
pneumatic tires, when loaded, and when axles are spaced less than eight feet from center to
center shall not be more than 36,000 pounds, except that, where axles are spaced eight feet apart
or greater, but less than 10 feet, the weight on those two axles shall not exceed that permitted by
Subsection K(2) of this section and, in addition, shall not exceed 40,000 pounds. Axles shall be
counted as provided in Subsection F of this section.
Subject to the provisions of this section governing maximum vehicle gross weights, a single
vehicle, or combination of vehicles having three axles or more and equipped with pneumatic tires,
when loaded, may have a total weight on all axles not to exceed 34,000 pounds, plus 1,000
pounds for each foot and major fraction of a foot of the distance from the center of the foremost
axles to the center or the rearmost axles. Axles are to be counted as provided in Subsection F of
this section. In no case, however, shall the total weight exceed 80,000 pounds. For any vehicle or
combination of vehicles having a total gross vehicle weight of less than 71,000 pounds, the higher
of the following shall apply:
The total weight on all axles shall not exceed 34,000 pounds for each foot and major fraction
of a foot of the distance from the center of the foremost axles to the center of the rearmost
axles; or
The overall weight on a group of two or more consecutive axles shall not exceed the weight
produced by application of the following formula:
W = 500 (LxN) / (N-1) + (12xN) + (36)
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 295/441
L.
M.
N.
O.
P.
Where:
W = overall gross weight on any group of two or more consecutive axles, to the nearest
500 pounds.
L = distance in feet from the center of the foremost axle to the center of the rearmost
axle of any group of two or more consecutive axles.
N = the number of axles in the group under consideration, except that the two
consecutive sets of tandem axles may carry a gross load not to exceed 34,000
pounds, provided that the overall distance between the first and last axles of such
consecutive sets of tandem axles is 36 feet or more.
For any vehicle or combination of vehicles having a total gross weight of 71,000
pounds or greater, this Subsection K(2) shall apply to determine maximum gross
weight which is permitted hereunder, subject to the provisions of this section
governing maximum gross weights.
No vehicle shall be operated on the public streets of the Village of Rockville Centre other than on
pneumatic tires.
For the purpose of this section, the width of pneumatic tires shall be ascertained by measuring the
greatest width of the tire casing when the tire is inflated.
No person shall operate nor shall any owner permit the operation or movement of a vehicle or any
combination of vehicles over, or through, any road if the weight of such vehicle, or combination of
vehicle and load, is greater than the posted weight or exceeds the height of the posted clearance
as shown on an official sign.
If a vehicle or combination of vehicles is operated in violation of this section, an appearance ticket
or summons may be issued to the registrant of the vehicle or, if a combination of vehicles, to the
registrant of the hauling vehicles, rather than the operator. In the event that the vehicle is operated
by a person other than the registrant, any appearance ticket or summons issued to the registrant
shall be served upon the operator, who shall be deemed the agent of the registrant only for the
purpose of receiving such appearance ticket or summons. In addition, a notice containing all
pertinent information relating to the charge which is contained on the summons or appearance
tickets shall be mailed by or on behalf of the person who issued the appearance ticket or
summons to the registrant of said vehicle or trailer on file with the Department of Motor Vehicles of
said state no less than five days before the return date specified on the appearance ticket or
summons. Proof of mailing to the registrant under this section shall be filed with the court in which
the appearance ticket or summons is returnable on or before the return date. A failure of a
corporate registrant to appear or answer upon arraignment or trial shall constitute a default which
shall result in the entry of a civil judgment in an amount corresponding to the amount of fine for a
violation of this section. The provisions of this subsection shall not apply to owner-operators of any
motor vehicle or to any motor vehicle or trailer which is registered in the name of a person whose
principal business is the lease or rental of motor vehicles or trailers, unless the motor vehicle or
trailer is being operated by an employee of the registrant or for a community of interest other than
the lease or rental agreement between the parties to the lease or rental agreement.
In any case wherein the charge before the court alleges a violation of this section, any plea of
guilty thereafter entered in satisfaction of such charge must include at least a plea of guilty to a
violation of one of the subsections of this section. No other disposition of plea of guilty to any other
charge in satisfaction of such shall be authorized; provided, however, that if the prosecuting
attorney, upon reviewing the available evidence, determines that the charge of a violation of this
section is not warranted, the prosecuting attorney may consent, and the court may allow, a
disposition by plea of guilty to that or another charge in satisfaction of such charge; provided,
however, that the court must impose at least the minimum fine, as authorized in this section, for
the offense.
§ 309-3.2. Penalties for offenses.
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 296/441
A.
B.
Each violation of the provisions of this article shall be punishable by a fine of not less than $200
nor more than $500 or by imprisonment for not more than 30 days, or by both such fine and
imprisonment, for the first offense; by a fine of not less than $500 nor more than $1,000 or by
imprisonment for not more than 60 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment, for the second or
subsequent violation of this article committed within a period of 60 days after the previous such
violation, plus, in both cases, the fine provided in Subsection B of this section.
Each violation of the provisions of this article with respect to any vehicle or combination of vehicles
whose weight exceeds the weight limitations set forth in any of these sections or the weight
limitations specified by a permit issued by the United States Department of Transportation or the
New York State Department of Transportation shall be punishable by fines levied on the registered
owner of the vehicle or vehicles, whether at the time of the violation the vehicle was in the charge
of the registered owner or his agent or lessee, in accordance with the following schedule, which
shall be in addition to the penalties provided in Subsection A of this section:
[Amended 4-11-2011 by L.L. No. 7-2011]
Fines For Excess Total Weight
Percent of Excess Weight
Greater than Less Than or Equal To Amount of Fine
0.0% 2.0% $250
2.0% 4.0% $300
4.0% 6.0% $450
6.0% 7.0% $525
7.0% 8.0% $600
8.0% 10.0% $750
10.0% 12.0% $950
12.0% 14.0% $1,150
14.0% 16.0% $1,350
16.0% 18.0% $1,550
18.0% 20.0% $1,750
20.0% 22.0% $1,950
22.0% 24.0% $2,150
24.0% 26.0% $2,350
26.0% 28.0% $2,550
28.0% 30.0% $2,750
30.0% 32.0% $2,950
32.0% 34.0% $3,150
34.0% 36.0% $3,350
36.0% 38.0% $3,550
38.0% 40.0% $3,750
40.0% or greater $3,750 plus $125 for each
percent over 40%
NOTES:
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 297/441
C.
A.
B.
NOTES:
1. Where the total weight or axle weight or axles grouping weight is greater than 7%,
including enforcement scale tolerance in excess of the limits specified by a United States
or New York State Department of Transportation excess weight permit, the permit shall, for
the purposes of computing the fine, be deemed void, and the amount of the fine shall be
determined in accordance with the maximum weight which would have been in effect for
the operation of such vehicle if the permit to exceed such maximum weight had not been
issued.
2. In connection with the weighing of a vehicle or combination of vehicles, if it is found that
there is a violation of Subsection K and also Subsection I or Subsection J, or a violation of
both Subsections I and J, of this section, there shall be a single fine imposed, and the
maximum amount of such fine shall not exceed the highest fine that could be imposed
under this section.
3. The court may impose any sentence authorized by this section; provided, however, that
any such sentence must include a fine as provided in this section.
4. All fines collected as a result of the above schedule shall remain the property of the Village
of Rockville Centre.
Service of summons. If a vehicle or combination of vehicles is operated in violation of this article,
an appearance ticket or summons may be issued to the registrant of the vehicle, or in the case of
a combination of vehicles, to the registrant of the hauling vehicle, rather than the operator. In the
event the vehicle is operated by a person other than the registrant, any appearance ticket or
summons issued to the registrant shall be served upon the operator, who shall be deemed the
agent of the registrant for the purpose of receiving such appearance ticket or summons. Such
operator-agent shall transmit such ticket or summons to the registrant of the vehicle or hauling
vehicle. If the registrant does not appear on the return date, a notice establishing a new return
date accompanied by a copy of the summons or appearance ticket shall also be mailed by
certified mail by the court to the registrant at the address given on the registration certificate for
the vehicle or, if no registration certificate is produced at the time the appearance ticket or
summons is issued, the address of the registrant on file with the Department of Motor Vehicles or
given to the police officer issuing the appearance ticket or summons. Whenever proceedings in
court result in a conviction for a violation of this section, and the court has made the mailing
specified herein, the court shall levy a mandatory surcharge, in addition to any sentence permitted
by law, in the amount of $30. This mandatory surcharge shall be paid to the Clerk of the Court.
The provisions of this subsection shall not apply to owner-operators of any motor vehicle which is
registered in the name of a person whose principal business is the lease or rental of motor
vehicles or trailers unless the motor vehicle or trailer is being operated by an employee of the
registrant.
§ 309-3.3. Applicability of Federal Motor Carrier Safety
Regulations.
No person shall operate, cause or knowingly permit or move any motor vehicle on any road in the
Village of Rockville Centre in violation of Federal Motor Carrier Safety Regulations Parts 393
through 397, inclusive.
Penalties for offenses. A violation of this section shall be punishable by a fine not less than $200
nor more than $500 or by imprisonment for not more than 15 days, or by both such fine and
imprisonment. In the event the violation of this section is one which requires, pursuant to
applicable regulations, that the motor vehicle be taken out of service, then the fine shall be not
less than $500 nor more than $1,000 or imprisonment of not more than 15 days, or both such fine
and imprisonment.
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 298/441
C.
D.
(1)
(2)
A.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(1)
(a)
(b)
(2)
B.
The court may impose any sentence authorized by this section; provided, however, that any such
sentence must include a fine as provided in this section.
All fines collected as a result of the above sections shall remain the property of the Village of
Rockville Centre.
Article II. Speed Limits
[Adopted 2-22-1971 by L.L. No. 1-1971 as Ch. 124, Art. II, of the 1971 Code; amended 2-5-1973; 1-7-
1985 by L.L. No. 1-1985]
§ 309-4. Maximum speed limits.
General.
The general health, welfare and good of the inhabitants of the Village require that there be
reasonable speed limits for vehicles traveling on roads, whether state-, county- or Villagemaintained,
within the Village. Experience has revealed that excessively high limits endanger
the lives and well-being of inhabitants of the Village and of others traveling within the Village.
Except for one short strip of state-maintained highway, the maximum speed limits do not
anywhere exceed 40 miles per hour. Near accidents and accidents, one of a fatal nature,
have occurred as a result of the failure of the Department of Transportation of the State of
New York to accede to the repeated requests of the Village to lower the speed limits so that
the maximum speed limit will be consonant with the safety and well-being of the inhabitants
and of travelers within the Village.
Speed limits.
[Amended 12-16-1985 by L.L. No. 6-1985]
Thirty miles per hour is hereby established as the maximum speed at which vehicles may
proceed within the corporate limits of the Village except on the following highways:
The eastbound roadway of Route 27, Sunrise Highway, between the westerly Village line
and its intersection with Banks Avenue and between its intersection with North Forest
Avenue and the easterly Village line.
The westbound roadway of Route 27, Sunrise Highway, between the easterly Village line
and its intersection with Morris Avenue and between its intersection with Banks Avenue
and the westerly Village line.
The eastbound and westbound roadway of Peninsula Boulevard within the Village of
Rockville Centre.
Princeton Road and Shepherd Street between North Long Beach Road and the property
of Rockville Centre School District at South Side Senior High School.
Forty miles per hour is hereby established as the maximum speed at which vehicles may
proceed within the corporate limits of this Village on the following highways:
The eastbound roadway of Route 27, Sunrise Highway, between the westerly Village line
and its intersection with Banks Avenue and between its intersection with North Forest
Avenue and the easterly Village line.
The westbound roadway of Route 27, Sunrise Highway, between the easterly Village line
and its intersection with Morris Avenue and between its intersection with Banks Avenue
and the westerly Village line.
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 299/441
(c)
(a)
(3)
A.
B.
C.
D.
The eastbound and westbound roadway of Peninsula Boulevard within the Village of
Rockville Centre.
Twenty-five miles per hour is hereby established as the maximum speed at which vehicles
may proceed within the corporate limits of the Village on the following highways:
Princeton Road and Shepherd Street between North Long Beach Road and the property
of Rockville Centre School District at South Side Senior High School.
Article III. Turning Movements
[Adopted 2-22-1971 by L.L. No. 1-1971 as Ch. 124, Art. III, of the 1971 Code]
§ 309-5. Requirements.
The driver of a vehicle intending to turn at an intersection shall do as follows:
Both the approach to a right turn and a right turn shall be made as close as practical to the righthand
curb or edge of the roadway.
Approach for a left turn shall be made in that portion of the right half of the roadway nearest the
center line thereof, and after entering the intersection the left turn shall be made so as to leave the
intersection to the right of the center line of the roadway being entered.
Approach for a left turn from a two-way street into a one-way street shall be made in that portion of
the right half of the roadway nearest the center line thereof and by passing to the right of such
center line where it enters the intersection. A left turn from a one-way street into a two-way street
shall be made by passing to the right of the center line of the street being entered upon leaving the
intersection.
Where both streets or roadways are one-way, both the approach for a left turn and a left turn shall
be made as close as practicable to the left-hand curb or edge of the roadway.
Article IV. Crossing or Parking on Malls or Road Dividers
[Adopted 2-22-1971 by L.L. No. 1-1971 as Ch. 124, Art. IV, of the 1971 Code]
§ 309-6. Prohibition.
No motor vehicle or motorcycle shall cross any mall or road divider within the Village, nor shall any
motor vehicle or motorcycle park or stop at any time on any mall or road divider within the Village.
Article V. Method of Parking
[Adopted 2-22-1971 by L.L. No. 1-1971 as Ch. 124, Art. V, of the 1971 Code]
§ 309-7. Standing or parking close to curb.
No person shall stand or park a vehicle in a roadway other than parallel with the edge of the roadway,
headed in the direction of lawful traffic movement and with the right-hand wheels of the vehicle within
12 inches of the curb or edge of the roadway, except as otherwise provided in this article.
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 300/441
A.
B.
C.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
A.
§ 309-8. Permit required for loading or unloading at an angle to
the curb.
The Chief of Police is authorized to issue special permits to permit the backing of a vehicle to the curb
for the purpose of loading or unloading merchandise or materials subject to the terms and conditions of
such permit. Such permits may be issued either to the owner or lessee of real property or to the owner
of the vehicle, and shall grant to such person the privilege as therein stated and authorized herein, and
it shall be unlawful for any permittee or other person to violate any of the special terms or conditions of
any such permit.
§ 309-9. Lights on parked vehicles.
Whenever a vehicle is lawfully parked at nighttime upon any street within a business or residence
district, no lights need be displayed upon such parked vehicle.
Whenever a vehicle is parked upon a street or highway outside of a business or residence district
during the hours between 1/2 hour after sunset and 1/2 hour before sunrise, such vehicle shall be
equipped with one or more lamps which shall exhibit a white light on the roadway side visible from
a distance of 500 feet to the front of the vehicle and a red light visible from a distance of 500 feet
to the rear.
Any lighted headlamps upon a parked vehicle shall be depressed or dimmed.
§ 309-10. Stopping, standing or parking prohibited; no signs
required.
No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other
traffic or in compliance with law or the directions of a police officer or traffic control device, in any
of the following places:
On a sidewalk.
In front of a public or private driveway.
Within an intersection.
Within 15 feet of a fire hydrant.
On a crosswalk.
Within 20 feet of a crosswalk at an intersection.
Within 30 feet upon the approach to any flashing beacon, stop sign or traffic control signal
located at the side of a roadway.
Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb or within 30 feet of points on the curb
immediately opposite the end of a safety zone, unless the Chief of Police has indicated a
different length by signs or markings.
Within 50 feet of the nearest rail or railroad crossing.
Within 20 feet of the driveway entrance to any fire station and on the side of a street opposite
the entrance to any fire station within 75 feet of said entrance (when properly signposted).
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 301/441
(11)
(12)
(13)
(14)
B.
Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when stopping, standing or parking
would obstruct traffic.
On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge or curb of a street.
Upon any bridge or other elevated structure upon a highway or within a highway tunnel.
At any place where official signs prohibit stopping.
No person shall move a vehicle not lawfully under his control into any such prohibited area or
away from a curb such distance as is unlawful.
§ 309-11. Penalties for offenses.
It shall be a violation of the provisions of this article for any person to park, cause, allow, permit or
suffer any vehicle registered in the name of or operated by such person to commit any violation
prohibited by this article.
Article VI. All-Night Parking
[Adopted 5-18-1981 by L.L. No. 1-1981]
§ 309-12. Prohibition; penalty for offense.
No person shall park or leave standing a vehicle on any street between the hours of 3:00 a.m. and
5:00 a.m. of any day, except physicians on emergency calls or where a vehicle is legally parked in any
designated parking space alongside or next to which a parking meter is located and the meter
indicates legal parking time or in an area where a sign signifies that twenty-four-hour parking is
permitted or in an area designated by the Police Department pursuant to regulations issued by the
Police Department. It shall be a violation of the provisions of this article for any person to park, cause,
allow, permit or suffer any vehicle registered in the name of or operated by such person to be parked
or left standing as prohibited by this article.
Article VII. Privately-Owned Parking Fields
[Adopted 2-22-1971 by L.L. No. 1-1971 as Ch. 124, Art. VII, of the 1971 Code]
§ 309-13. Licenses required.
No person shall maintain or conduct a parking lot for motor vehicles or other vehicles where a charge
of any kind is made without first obtaining a license therefor.
§ 309-14. Definition of "Parking lot."
PARKING LOT
Whenever used in this article, shall be deemed to mean any outdoor space or uncovered plot of
ground which has the capacity to hold five or more vehicles for the payment of a fee or other
consideration, charged directly or indirectly.
§ 309-15. Fees.
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 302/441
[Amended 12-4-1972]
The annual license fee for any license required by the provisions of this article shall be at the levels
fixed from time to time by resolution of the Board of Trustees of the Village of Rockville Centre.
Article VIII. Municipal Parking Fields
[Adopted 2-22-1971 by L.L. No. 1-1971 as Ch. 124, Art. VIII, of the 1971 Code]
§ 309-16. Definitions.
[Amended 11-7-1988 by L.L. No. 13-1988]
Unless otherwise expressly provided, the following words, for the purpose of this article, shall have the
meaning herein indicated:
EMPLOYEE PARKING FIELD
Any municipal parking field or portion thereof established by the Board of Trustees for the parking
of motor vehicles by persons who are owners of or engaged in business or actually employed
within the Village of Rockville Centre.
MUNICIPAL PARKING FIELD
Any place owned, leased or operated by the Village of Rockville Centre for the parking of motor
vehicles by the public.
PARKING STALL
A space in a municipal parking field, marked or indicated, within which a single motor vehicle is to
be parked.
PARKING TIME LIMITATION
The period of time specified as the space of time during which a motor vehicle may be parked in a
municipal parking field during a twenty-four-hour period.
RESIDENT PARKING FIELD
Any municipal parking field or portion of any municipal parking field established by the Board of
Trustees for the use of residents who have obtained a parking permit as hereinafter provided.
SHOPPERS' FIELD
Any municipal parking field or portion of any municipal parking field established by the Board of
Trustees as an area designed for and limited to the use of persons who desire to park their
automobiles while making purchases from places of business or for the purpose of transacting
business with financial institutions, professional offices or other business offices.
UNRESTRICTED FIELDS
Any municipal parking field or portion thereof established by the Board of Trustees for the parking
of motor vehicles in which there is no restriction as the use thereof, either by resident requirement,
employment or otherwise.
§ 309-17. Permits required; residents and employee parking
fields.
[Amended 11-7-1988 by L.L. No. 13-1988]
All parking permits shall be issued by the Village Clerk, subject to the approval of the Board of
Trustees, in accordance with the applications and forms therefor approved by the Board of Trustees,
and all vehicles for which such permit shall be issued shall have conspicuously displayed on the rear
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 303/441
(1)
(2)
(3)
A.
(1)
(2)
B.
C.
(1)
(2)
(3)
D.
E.
F.
G.
bumper thereof a distinctive permit issued by the Village Clerk and bearing the number of the license
plate and the year for which the same shall be issued.
§ 309-18. Parking permits: restrictions, fees, terms.
[Amended 12-4-1972; 10-20-1975 by L.L No. 5-1975; 9-9-1980 by L.L. No. 10-1980; 7-11-1988 by L.L.
No. 10-1988; 11-7-1988 by L.L. No. 13-1988]
Parking permits shall be issued only for pleasure vehicles and to:
Residents of the Village.
Persons engaged in business within the Village.
The persons actually employed within the Village.
Fees; number of permits.
No permit shall be issued hereunder unless the fees hereinafter provided for are first paid by
the resident or employer.
Employees are entitled to only one permit per calendar year.
No permit shall be transferable from one owner to another or from one car to another without the
prior approval of the office of the Village Administrator and the endorsement of such approval in
writing on such permit by the Village Clerk.
Time period for validity.
For those included within the provisions of Subsection A(1), the permit year shall commence
April 1 of each year and terminate on the last day of March of the following year.
For those included within the provisions of Subsection A(2) and (3) hereof, the permit year
shall commence on October 1 of each year and terminate on the last day of September of the
following year.
A special holiday permit will be issued commencing November 1 of each year and terminate
on the last day of January the following year for a period of three months.
An overnight permit will be issued only to residents of the Village. This permit will enable the
holder to park a pleasure vehicle overnight in a Village parking field designated for use by
overnight permit holders during the hours posted at such parking field for that use. The overnight
permit year shall commence April 1 of each year and terminate on the last day of March the
following year.
Prior to the issuance of any permit thereunder, the applicant must furnish the Village Clerk with
proof satisfactory to the Village Clerk that the applicant is qualified to receive the permit for which
application is made.
The fees for any permit required by the provisions of this article shall be the levels fixed from time
to time by resolution of the Board of Trustees of the Village of Rockville Centre.
§ 309-19. Parking limited.
[Amended 11-7-1988 by L.L. No. 13-1988]
The permit issued pursuant to this article shall permit the holder of a resident or employee parking
permit to park a noncommercial vehicle in a resident or an employee parking lot, whichever is
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 304/441
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
appropriate to the permit, for a time period not longer than that which is posted at such lot.
§ 309-20. Rules and regulations.
All automobiles must be parked in accordance with the rules and regulations enacted for the
operation of municipal parking fields, and automobiles parked in such municipal parking fields
shall be parked in a parking stall and in no other area. In any municipal parking field in which
parking stalls are not marked out or indicated, all motor vehicles shall be parked with respect to
any indicated line of parking as is designated on any sign therein, and no automobile shall be
parked or permitted to stand in any lane or driveway in any parking field.
It is unlawful for any person to park a truck, wagon, trailer or any other vehicle used for
commercial purposes in a parking field designated as resident or employee parking.
In areas in municipal parking fields designated as shoppers' fields, no permits shall be required for
parking a motor vehicle therein, but no motor vehicle shall be parked in such shoppers' field
except in a parking stall and for a period no longer than the parking time limitation established for
such shoppers' field or fields as shall be clearly marked on signs erected under the supervision of
the Police Commissioners, and parking beyond the length of time thus indicated shall constitute a
violation this article.
The Police Commissioner is authorized to designate by regulation any safety zone, parking space,
parking areas, parking time limitations or other traffic regulations within any public parking field, in
addition to those otherwise provided for in this article, limiting or prohibiting parking in those
zones, spaces and areas, and a violation of any such regulation marked and indicated by suitable
signs shall constitute a violation of this article.
It shall be unlawful for any person to park a motor vehicle in any shoppers' field in the same or any
other parking stall in the same shoppers' field for a period longer than the parking time limitation
specified for such field during any twenty-four-hour period.
No commercial vehicle shall be permitted to stand in any shoppers' field for a longer period of time
than is necessary for the unloading, loading or making of deliveries to places of business in the
area of such field.
§ 309-21. Penalties for offenses.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be liable for and pay a penalty or fine of
not more than $50 for each offense; in addition thereto, each of such violations shall constitute and is
hereby declared to be disorderly conduct, and any person violating the same shall be and is hereby
declared a disorderly person. It shall be a violation of the provisions of this article for any person to
park, cause, allow, permit or suffer any vehicle registered in the name of or operated by such person to
commit any violation prohibited by this article.
Article IX. Metered Parking Fields
[Adopted 2-22-1971 by L.L. No. 1-1971 as Ch. 124, Art. IX, of the 1971 Code]
§ 309-22. Installation authorized.
For the control of parking and traffic and the good and welfare of the Village, the installation,
maintenance and operation of metered parking fields is authorized as more fully provided herein.
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 305/441
A.
B.
A.
B.
§ 309-23. Definitions.
The following words shall have the meaning herein indicated:
METERED PARKING FIELDS
Any place owned, leased or operated by the Village for the parking of vehicles by the public
wherein the field or space in the field is so designated. Such designation shall be by means of
signs to that effect in the fields or adjacent thereto or by parking meters adjacent to parking stalls
marked or indicated by lines appearing on the pavement, within which a single vehicle is to be
parked.
PARKING METER, VEHICLE, PERSON, OPERATOR and PARKING METER SPACE
Shall be the same as the definitions contained in § 309-28 of the Code of the Village of Rockville
Centre.
§ 309-24. Provisions of Article X restated.
Sections 309-29, 309-30, 309-31, 309-32, 309-34, 309-35 and 309-36 of Article X of the ordinances of
Rockville Centre are hereby included in this section as if they were restated in full.
§ 309-25. Parking time limits.
[Amended 8-29-2011 by L.L. No. 12-2011]
Parking or standing a vehicle in a designated space in a parking meter zone shall be lawful for the
period indicated on the meter.
Said parking meters shall be operated from 9:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. in parking meter zones every
day except Sundays and holidays.
§ 309-26. Penalties for offenses.
Any person who shall violate or fail to comply with any of the provisions of this article, or who shall
counsel, aid or abet any such violation or failure to comply, shall be deemed guilty of disorderly
conduct and shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $50 or by imprisonment not to exceed 30
days, either or both penalties to be imposed at the discretion of the court; provided, nevertheless,
that should the violation consist solely of parking or standing a vehicle beyond the lawful time as is
provided in § 309-25 of this article, upon due notification of such violation to the operator or owner
of such vehicle, the payment of a fine in such amount and payable under such conditions as may
be determined by the Village Justice pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 62 of this Code, with a
plea of guilty, shall be considered settlement in full of any and all penalties hereunder; and
provided, further, that the privilege of paying such fine shall be limited to an owner or operator who
is guilty of such violation as a first offense. An operator or owner guilty of second or further
violations shall be subject to the imposition of all the penalties as may be imposed by the Village
Justice.
[Amended 5-1-1972]
Failure to pay as hereby provided or to appear voluntarily in court will subject the operator or
owner of such vehicle to a warrant for arrest and the imposition of such penalties as the law may
provide.
Article X. Parking Meters
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 306/441
A.
[Adopted 2-22-1971 by L.L. No. 1-1971 as Ch. 124, Art. X, of the 1971 Code]
§ 309-27. Installation authorized.
For the control of parking and traffic and the good and welfare of the Village, the installation,
maintenance and operation of street parking meters is authorized as more fully provided herein. Such
parking in a metered space requires payment of the fee indicated on the meter for the privilege of
parking.
§ 309-28. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article:
OPERATOR
Includes every individual who shall operate a vehicle as the owner thereof, or as the agent,
employee or permittee of the owner, or who is in actual physical control of a vehicle.
PARKING METER
Any mechanical device or meter, not inconsistent with this article, placed or erected for the
regulation of parking by authority of this article. Each parking meter installed shall indicate by
proper legend the legal parking time established by the Village, and when operated shall at all
times indicate the balance of legal parking time, and at the expiration of such period shall indicate
illegal or overtime parking.
PARKING METER SPACE
Any space within a parking-meter zone adjacent to a parking meter and which is duly designated
for the parking of a single vehicle by lines painted or otherwise durably marked upon the curb or
the surface of the street adjacent to or adjoining a parking meter.
PARKING METER ZONE
Any and all streets and parking fields set aside under provisions of this article for the installation of
parking meters, and upon which parking meters shall have been installed and are in operation;
and, in addition, those areas further defined in § 309-29 of this article.
PARK or PARKING
The stopping of a motor vehicle or motorcycle upon any public highway and leaving such motor
vehicle or motorcycle, whether occupied or not, for a period longer than necessary to board or
unload passengers or freight.
PERSONS
Includes any individual, firm, copartnership, association or corporation.
STREET
Any public street, highway, road, avenue, lane, path, court or other public way in the Village
established for the use of vehicles.
VEHICLE
Any device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be transported upon a highway,
except a device which is operated upon rails or tracks, except baby carriages.
§ 309-29. Parking meter zones extended.
Parking meter zones are hereby designated and established as being those streets and parts of
streets and public parking fields upon which limited parking is not permitted under authority and by
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 307/441
B.
C.
A.
B.
A.
B.
virtue of all limited parking ordinances now effective, and the parking limits and restrictions
hereinbefore provided are hereby incorporated in this article for all uses and purposes applicable
to the conditions, terms and enforcements hereof, and such other parking meter zones as may be
hereafter created by the Board of Trustees or authority delegated to the Police Department by the
Board of Trustees, but spaces designated as bus stops and loading zones shall be excluded from
the above described parking meter zones.
The entire portion of the state highway situate within the east and west boundaries of the
Incorporated Village of Rockville Centre, known and designated as Sunrise Highway and also
New York State Route No. 27, on both the north and south sides thereof, is hereby specifically
designated and established as a parking meter zone. The individual parking meter spaces
established on Sunrise Highway, also known as New York State Route No. 27, shall be marked so
that vehicles will be required to park parallel with the curb or edge of the pavement on said
highway and so that no vehicles will be required to park in violation of Section 86.7 of the Vehicle
and Traffic Law.
All frontages in said areas, streets or portions of streets defining said zones are to be included
therein.
§ 309-30. Designation of parking spaces.
The Chief of Police, or his designee is hereby directed and authorized to mark off individual parking
spaces in the parking zones and in such other zones as may thereafter be established. Said parking
spaces are to be designated by lines painted or durably marked upon the curbing or surface of the
street. At each space so marked it shall be unlawful to park any vehicle in such a way that said vehicle
shall not be entirely within the limits of the space so designated.
§ 309-31. Installation of meters.
In said parking meter zones, the Chief of Police or his designee shall cause parking meters to be
installed upon the curb or sidewalk immediately adjacent to the parking space designated as
provided in § 309-30 hereof, and he shall be responsible for the regulation, control, maintenance
and use of such parking meters.
Each meter shall be so set as to display a signal showing legal parking upon the deposit of the
appropriate coin or coins, lawful money of the United States of America, for the period of time
prescribed by this article. Each meter shall be so arranged that upon the expiration of the lawful
time limit it will indicate by a proper visible signal that the lawful parking period has expired, and in
such cases, or in the case where a coin of proper designation is not visible in the upper coin
window, the right of such vehicle to occupy such space shall cease and the operator, owner or
manager thereof shall be subject to the penalties hereinafter provided.
[Amended 12-4-1972]
§ 309-32. Operation of meters.
Except in a period of the emergency determined by an officer of the Fire or Police Department, or
in compliance with the directions of a police officer or traffic control sign or signal, when any
vehicle shall be parked in any parking space alongside or next to which a parking meter is located,
the operator of such vehicle shall, upon entering the said parking meter space, immediately
deposit or cause to be deposited in said meter such proper coin of the United States of America
as is required for such parking meters.
When required by the directions on the meter, the operator of such vehicle, after the deposit of the
proper coin or coins, shall also set in operation the timing mechanism on such meter in
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 308/441
C.
D.
E.
F.
A.
B.
A.
B.
C.
D.
accordance with directions properly appearing thereon.
Failure to deposit such proper coin and to set the timing mechanism in operation when so required
shall constitute a violation of this article.
Upon deposit of such coin (and the setting of the timing mechanism in operation when so
required), the parking space may be lawfully occupied by such vehicle during the period of time
which has been prescribed for the part of the street in which said parking space is located.
Any person placing a vehicle in a parking meter space adjacent to a meter which indicates that
unused time has been left in the meter by the previous occupant of the space shall not be required
to deposit a coin so long as a coin of the proper designation is visible in the upper coin window
and the occupancy of said space does not exceed the indicated unused parking time.
[Amended 12-4-1972]
If said vehicle described in Subsection E above shall remain parked in any such parking space
beyond the parking time limit set for such parking space, and if the meter shall indicate such illegal
parking or should a coin of proper designation not be visible in the upper coin window, then and in
that event such vehicle shall be considered as parking overtime and beyond the period of legal
parking time, and such parking shall be deemed a violation of this article.
[Amended 12-4-1972]
§ 309-33. Parking time limits.
[Amended 8-29-2011 by L.L. No. 12-2011]
Parking or standing a vehicle in a designated space in a parking meter zone shall be lawful for the
period indicated on the meter.
Said parking meters shall be operated in curb parking meter zones every day between the hours
of 9:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. except Sundays and holidays; provided, however, that within the
meaning of this article the term "holiday" shall include the following days only: the First of January,
the 30th of May, the Fourth of July, the first Monday in September, the 25th day of December, and
any day designated and set aside by the President of the United States of America as a legal
holiday.
§ 309-34. Prohibited acts.
It shall be unlawful and a violation of the provisions of this article for any person:
To cause, allow, permit or suffer any vehicle registered in the name of or operated by such person
to be parked overtime or beyond the period of the legal parking time established for any parking
meter zone as herein described, or to deposit in any parking meter any coin for the purpose of
parking beyond the maximum legal parking time for the particular parking meter zone.
To permit any vehicle to remain or be placed in any parking space adjacent to any parking meter
while said meter is displaying a signal indicating that any vehicle occupying such parking space
has already been parked beyond the period prescribed for such parking space.
To park any vehicle across any line or marking of a parking meter space or in such position that
the vehicle shall not be entirely within the area designated by such lines or markings.
To deface, injure, tamper with, open or willfully break, destroy or impair the usefulness of any
parking meter installed under the provisions of this article.
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 309/441
E.
A.
B.
To deposit or cause to be deposited in any parking meter any slugs, device or metal substance or
other substitute for lawful coins.
§ 309-35. Enforcement.
It shall be the duty of the Police Department to enforce the provisions of this article.
§ 309-36. Collections.
It shall be the duty of the Village Treasurer to designate a person or persons to make regular
collections of the money deposited in said meters, and it shall be the duty of such persons so
designated to remove from the parking meters the coins so deposited and to deliver such coins to the
Village Treasurer to count the funds and deposit such funds as required by law.
§ 309-37. Use of funds.
The coins deposited in parking meters shall be used to defray the expense of proper regulation of
traffic upon the public streets of the Village of Rockville Centre, including the cost of the acquisition of
land and constructing and maintaining off-street parking facilities; to provide for the cost of supervision,
regulation and control of the parking of vehicles in parking meter zones; and to cover the cost of
purchases, supervision, protection, inspection, installation, operation, maintenance, control and use of
the parking meters, insofar as such specific use of said moneys is permissible under the law.
§ 309-38. Penalties for offenses.
Any person who shall violate or fail to comply with any of the provisions of this article or who shall
counsel, aid or abet any such violation or failure to comply shall be deemed guilty of disorderly
conduct and shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $50 or by imprisonment not to exceed 30
days, either or both penalties to be imposed at the discretion of the court; provided, nevertheless,
that should the violation consist solely of parking or standing a vehicle beyond the lawful time as is
provided in § 309-33 hereof, upon due notification of such violation to the operator or owner of
such vehicle, the payment of a fine in such amount as may be determined by the Village Justice
pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 62 of this Code, with a plea of guilty, shall be considered
settlement in full of any and all penalties hereunder; and provided, further, that the privilege of
paying such fine shall be limited to an operator or owner who is guilty of such violation as a first
offense. An operator or owner guilty of second or further violations shall be subject to the
imposition of such penalties as may be imposed by the Village Justice.
[Amended 5-1-1972]
Failure to pay as hereby provided or to appear voluntarily in court will subject the operator or
owner of such vehicle to a warrant for arrest and the imposition of such penalties as the law may
provide.
§ 309-39. Reservation of powers.
Nothing in this article shall be construed as prohibiting the Village of Rockville Centre from providing
for bus stops, for taxicab stands and similar matters, including the loading or unloading of trucks, vans
or other commercial vehicles.
§ 309-40. Parking in violation deemed offense.
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 310/441
A.
B.
C.
A.
B.
C.
It shall be a violation of the provisions of this article for any person to park, cause, allow, permit or
suffer any vehicle registered in the name of or operated by such person to commit any violation
prohibited by this article.
Article XI. Removal of Vehicles During Emergencies
[Adopted 2-22-1971 by L.L. No. 1-1971 as Ch. 124, Art. XI, of the 1971 Code]
§ 309-41. Emergency rules.
No owner or operator of a motor vehicle shall allow the same to remain on any affected streets during
a snowfall, flood, fire or other extraordinary condition.
§ 309-42. Obstructions to traffic.
No vehicle shall be parked or allowed to remain upon any street in any of the following circumstances:
When it is in a disabled condition so as to be incapable of operation.
When its position on a street is at such an hour or in such a location as to constitute a potential
hazard or obstruction to the normal flow of traffic.
When it has been left unattended for a period of more than 24 hours after the owner or operator
has been notified to remove it; or for a period of more than 24 hours after efforts to notify the
owner or operator have proved futile.
§ 309-43. Removal at owner's expense.
Should the owner or operator of any vehicle which is on a street in violation of the provisions of
§§ 309-41 and 309-42 hereof fail to remove it with reasonable expedition, such vehicle may be
removed by the Police Chief.
After such removal the Police Chief may store the vehicle in a suitable place at the expense of the
owner. Such owner or person in charge of the vehicle may redeem the same upon payment to the
Village Clerk of the amount of all expenses actually and necessarily incurred in effecting such
removal, such charges not to exceed the legally established tow-car fee, but in any event not less
than $15 for removal, together with any charges for storage, such charges not to exceed $2 per
day or fraction thereof.
The Police Chief shall, without delay, report the removal and disposition of such vehicle to the
Village Clerk, and it shall be the duty of such Village Clerk to ascertain the owner of such vehicle
or person having the same in charge and to notify him of the disposition of such vehicle and of the
amount which will be required to redeem the same.
§ 309-44. Noncompliance deemed violation.
In addition to the provisions contained in § 309-43 hereof, the owner or operator of a motor vehicle
who allows the same to remain on any affected street contrary to §§ 309-41 and 309-42 hereof shall
be in violation of this article.
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 311/441
Article XII. Delegating Traffic Regulations to Police
Department
[Adopted 2-22-1971 by L.L. No. 1-1971 as Ch. 124, Art. XII, of the 1971 Code]
§ 309-45. Designations by Police Department.
Pursuant to the provisions of Section 1603 of the Vehicle and Traffic Law of the State of New York, as
amended, the Police Department of the Incorporated Village of Rockville Centre is hereby authorized
to designated safety zones, parking spaces, and bus, cab or taxicab stands, respectively, in the public
streets or highways of said Village and in parking fields or spaces either owned, operated or controlled
by the said Village, and to limit or prohibit parking in spaces and zones in said public streets, highways
and parking fields or spaces, and to cause such zones, spaces and stands to be marked and indicated
by suitable signs, and all drivers and operators of vehicles shall obey the rules and regulations
prescribed by the said Police Department for such zones, spaces and stands.
§ 309-46. Unlawful to park or stand except as prescribed.
It shall be unlawful for any person to park or leave standing any automobile, wagon, motor vehicle or
other vehicle in the public streets, highways, parking fields or spaces or safety zones in said Village
other than those designated by the said Police Department, and/or for a longer period of time or as
prohibited by the rules and regulations prescribed by the said Police Department as authorized in
§ 309-45 of this article. It shall be a violation of the provisions of this article for any person to park,
cause, allow, permit or suffer any vehicle registered in the name of or operated by such person to be
parked or left standing as prohibited by this article.
§ 309-47. Penalties for offenses.
Any person violating any provisions of this article shall be liable for and pay a penalty or fine not
exceeding $10 for the first offense and not more than $25 for the second offense and not more than
$100 for the third offense, and in addition thereto each of said violations shall constitute and is hereby
declared to be disorderly conduct, and any person violating the same shall be and is hereby declared a
disorderly person.
Article XIII. Movement of Traffic on Green Arrow
[Adopted 2-22-1971 by L.L. No. 1-1971 as Ch. 124, Art. XIII, of the 1971 Code]
§ 309-48. Delegation to Police Department.
Pursuant to Section 81, Subdivision 21 of the Vehicle and Traffic Law of the State of New York the
Police Department of the Incorporated Village of Rockville Centre is hereby authorized to issue
regulations permitting the movement of traffic on a red light at intersections where traffic conditions
warrant such regulation.
§ 309-49. Regulation to be followed.
Wherever such movement of traffic is permitted, the direction of movement shall be indicated by a
green arrow, which arrow shall flash or light simultaneously with the red light. Such regulations shall
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 312/441
[1]
(1)
(2)
A.
B.
C.
D.
provide that such movement of traffic on a red traffic light may be made only after the vehicle moving in
each case shall have first come to a full stop, and only when interference with vehicular and pedestrian
traffic is not occasioned thereby.
Article XIV. Words and Phrases
[Adopted 2-22-1971 by L.L. No. 1-1971 as Ch. 124, Art. XIV, of the 1971 Code]
§ 309-50. Definitions.
The definitions given in the Vehicle and Traffic Law § 2[1] shall be applied to the words therein defined
whenever they are used in this chapter.
Editor's Note: See now Vehicle and Traffic Law §§ 125 and 128.
Article XV. Impoundment of Vehicles
[Adopted 6-20-1983 by L.L. No. 7-1983]
§ 309-51. Authority to impound or immobilize.
[Amended 4-7-1986 by L.L. No. 2-1986; 11-19-1990 by L.L. No. 8-1990]
In addition to any other penalties or fines imposed for the violation of this chapter, the provisions of
this section shall apply to the following categories of vehicles:
Vehicles operated or parked on any public street, on any public highway, on any portion of the
entire width between the boundary lines of any way publicly maintained when any part thereof
is open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel or on any property leased by
or in the possession and control of the Village of Rockville Centre, in violation of any provision
of any local law, state law, rule or regulation or when such vehicle is on said street, highway
or Village-controlled property during a public emergency.
Vehicles which have three or more outstanding and unpaid parking violations issued against
them and which, after mailing to the registered owner a final notice, are found operated or
parked on any public street, on any public highway, on any portion of the entire width between
the boundary lines of any way publicly maintained when any part thereof is open to the use of
the public for purposes of vehicular travel or on any property leased by or in the possession
and control of the Village of Rockville Centre.
Any such vehicle may be removed or caused to be removed by or under the direction of a member
of the Police Department by towing or otherwise. In addition to or in lieu of towing, any such
vehicle may be immobilized in such a manner as to prevent its operation, except that no such
vehicle shall be immobilized by any means other than by the use of a device or other mechanism
which will cause no damage to such vehicle unless it is moved while such device or mechanism is
in place. In any case involving immobilization of a vehicle pursuant to this subsection, such
member of the Police Department shall cause to be placed on such vehicle, in a conspicuous
manner, notice sufficient to warn any individual to the effect that any attempt to move such vehicle
might result in damage to such vehicle.
Within 24 hours after towing or immobilization, the Police Department shall notify the owner of
such vehicle of the fact of its towing or immobilization, the place where it may be recovered and
the conditions under which it will be released.
Release of vehicle.
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 313/441
(a)
(b)
(c)
(1)
(2)
E.
(a)
(b)
(1)
(2)
(3)
[1]
[2]
(a)
(4)
F.
Before the owner or person in charge of any vehicle taken into custody or immobilized as
above provided shall be allowed to repossess or to secure the release of said vehicle, the
owner or his/her agent shall pay the following:
All sums legally due for any Village of Rockville Centre parking violations issued and
outstanding against such vehicle.
To the Village of Rockville Centre, the cost of towing the vehicle and an impound
administrative fee to be determined by resolution of the Mayor and Board of Trustees.
To the towing service, the cost of storage for each day or portion of a day that such
vehicle is so stored in excess of the first 24 hours.
No such vehicle shall be released until the owner or his agent has established his identity and
right to possession and has signed a proper receipt therefor.
Any person who, after having had his vehicle towed or immobilized, shall remove such vehicle
without complying with Subsection D(1) and (2) shall, in addition to the charges provided for in
said subsection, be liable for any damage done to the immobilization device or mechanism and be
subject to a fine of not more than $250.
If an impounded vehicle has not been properly and lawfully released within 10 days after the
Police Department notifies the owner of such vehicle of the impounding pursuant to Subsection C
above, then such vehicle shall be deemed to be an abandoned motor vehicle.
The Police Department shall make an inquiry concerning the last owner of such abandoned
vehicle as follows:
If the abandoned vehicle had number plates affixed to it, the inquiry shall be directed to
the jurisdiction which issued such number plates.
If the abandoned vehicle did not have number plates affixed to it, inquiry shall be directed
to the Department of Motor Vehicles.
The Police Department shall notify the last owner, if known, that the vehicle has been
recovered as an abandoned vehicle and that, if it is not claimed, it will be sold at public
auction, by bid, or the ownership of such vehicle may be transferred to the tow company in
lieu of towing and storage charges after 10 days from the date of notice. If the agency notified
as per Subsection F(1) above notifies the Police Department that a lien or other security
interest exists, a notice will be promptly sent to the lienholder or party in interest. This notice
shall be given in the manner presented by the Commissioner of Motor Vehicles. Any party
claiming the abandoned vehicle shall be required to pay the amounts described in Subsection
D(1) above.
If the Police Department determines that an abandoned vehicle is not suitable for operation
on the public highways, it shall sell the vehicle or cause the vehicle to be delivered to a
vehicle dismantler or scrap processor who is registered or certified pursuant to Vehicle and
Traffic Law § 415-a.
If the abandoned vehicle is not released by the owner or lienholder in accordance with
Subsection D above, the Village may:
Sell the vehicle at auction and apply the proceeds as follows:
To the towing service, the cost of storage for each day; then
The costs of towing incurred by the Village of Rockville Centre; then
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 314/441
[3]
[4]
[1]
[2]
(b)
G.
(1)
(2)
A.
(1)
B.
All sums legally due the Village of Rockville Centre for parking violations issued and
outstanding against such vehicle and the impound administrative fee; then
The remainder to the owner and any known lienholder.
Convert unclaimed vehicles to Village use.
The Village may convert in any calendar year up to 1% of its unclaimed abandoned
vehicles not affected by Subdivision 2 of § 1224 of the Vehicle and Traffic Law or two
such vehicles, whichever is greater, to its own use.
Any proceeds from the sale of an abandoned vehicle less expenses incurred by the
Village shall be held by the Village, without interest, for the benefit of the owner of
such vehicle for a period of one year. If not claimed within such one-year period,
such proceeds shall be paid into the general fund of the Village.
The last owner of an abandoned vehicle shall be liable to the Village for the costs of removal and
storage of such vehicle.
Chapter 311. Village Property
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Trustees 4-1-2019 by L.L. No. 2-2019. Amendments noted where
applicable.]
§ 311-1. Findings.
The Board of Trustees ("Board") of the Village of Rockville Centre ("Village") concludes that it is in the
best interests of the residents of the Village, and others, that the Village have a clear policy regarding
placement of objects or materials on Village property. Due to the passage of time, and changes in legal
standards, the current provisions of the Village Code in regard to this subject may now be unclear,
insufficiently effective, or inadequate, to provide guidance in regard to the Village's policies and
practices in regard to objects or materials placed on Village property, without permission from the
Village or other legal authority to do so. Accordingly, the provisions of this chapter are hereby enacted,
to clarify the permissible placement of objects or materials on Village property.
§ 311-2. Prohibition.
No person or entity shall place, or cause to be placed, any objects or material on any property
owned by the Village of Rockville Centre except as specifically authorized by law, or pursuant to
the provisions of this chapter.
As used in this chapter, the term "Village property" includes, but is not limited to, all property
owned by the Village or under the control of the Village, whether or not the property has been
made available for public use either as a limited or unlimited public forum or for any other
purpose. The term "Village property" also includes streets and utility strips owned by the
Village or which are under the Village's control. The Village policy prohibiting placement of
objects or materials includes the prohibition of signs or structures of any type and for any
purpose unless authorized by law.
As used in this chapter, the term "law" includes a local law, ordinance, rule or regulation, or
other provision of the Village Code.
The prohibitions set forth in this section shall not apply where:
A provision of the Village Code authorizes such placement;
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 315/441
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(1)
(2)
C.
The Village has granted express permission for such placement, as permitted by law and
under conditions clearly stated in such permission;
The placement is by, or authorized by, a person acting under the authority of the Village, and
in furtherance of Village business or purposes;
The placement is by, or authorized by, a person acting under authority of another
governmental entity having jurisdiction to allow such placement, and the placement is in
furtherance of the business or purposes of that governmental entity;
The placement of such object or material on Village property is specifically authorized by law.
Any object or material placed on Village property in violation of the provisions of this chapter shall
be considered to have been abandoned by the owner thereof. Any such object or material may be
removed by any person acting under authority of the Village, and upon such removal shall be
brought to the Village Department of Public Works for storage until disposition.
Where the owner of such object or material can reasonably be identified, the Village shall give
written notice to such owner that the object or material has been removed to the Department
of Public Works, and will be disposed of if not claimed by the owner within 30 days after the
date of such notice. Any person purporting to be the owner of such property, and claiming
return of the property, shall provide identification and proof of ownership of such object or
material reasonably satisfactory to the Department of Public Works. Prior to the return of such
property to such owner, such owner shall be required to pay to the Village the reasonable
costs or expenses incurred by the Village for the removal and storage of such object or
material, as determined by the Department of Public Works, but in no event less than $100.
Where the owner of such object or material cannot reasonably be identified, the Village shall
retain such object or material for a period of 30 days after removal. If the owner of such object
or material does not claim the object or material within such period of time, and pay the costs
of removal and storage, in the same manner as provided in the preceding Subsection (1),
then upon the expiration of the said thirty-day period the Village may dispose of the object or
material in any manner permitted by law.
Chapter 315. Washing Machines
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Trustees of the Village of Rockville Centre 2-22-1971 by L.L. No.
1-1971 as Ch. 129 of the 1971 Code. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building code — See Ch. 112.
Businesses — See Ch. 138.
Coin-operated dry-cleaning machines — See Ch. 154.
Fire prevention and control — See Ch. 185.
Licenses — See Ch. 222.
Electric and water utilities — See Ch. 306.
Unlawful use of water — See Ch. 318, Art. I.
Planning Board; site plan review; subdivision of land — See Ch. 330.
Zoning — See Ch. 340.
§ 315-1. License required.
[Amended 10-18-1971]
No person or persons, firm, association or corporation shall engage in the business of maintaining and
operating for hire separate washing machines, drying machines or combination washing and drying
machines for personal and individual use within the Village without a license.
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 316/441
A.
B.
[1]
§ 315-2. Fees.
[Amended 10-18-1971; 12-4-1972]
The fee for any license required by the provisions of this chapter shall be at the levels fixed from time
to time by resolution of the Board of Trustees of the Village of Rockville Centre.
§ 315-3. Applications.
Applications for such licenses shall be made in accordance with the provisions stated in Chapter 222,
Licenses, and in addition the following is required:
A detailed description of the place and a plan of the building wherein the business will be
conducted.
The total number of washing machines proposed to be operated as of the date of the application.
§ 315-4. Attendant to be present.
Each owner, operator or management of a licensed business of maintaining and operating for hire
separate washing machines for personal and individual use where made available to the public shall
provide an attendant who is familiar with the operation of such washing machines and any other
laundry machines installed therein, and who shall be in attendance at all times when such machines
are made available for hire.
§ 315-5. Penalties for offenses.
Any person, persons, firm, association or corporation violating any of the provisions of this chapter
shall be liable for and pay a penalty or fine of not less than $10 for each offense; addition thereto, each
of such violations shall constitute and is hereby declared to be disorderly conduct, and any person
violating the same shall be and hereby is declared a disorderly person.
Chapter 318. Water
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Trustees of the Village of Rockville Centre as indicated in article
histories. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Coin-operated dry-cleaning machines — See Ch. 154.
Fire prevention and control — See Ch. 185.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 247.
Swimming pools — See Ch. 291.
Electric and water utilities — See Ch. 306.
Washing machines — See Ch. 315.
Article I. Water Conservation
[Adopted 9-22-2003 by L.L. No. 8-2003[1]]
Editor’s Note: This local law also repealed former Art. I, Unlawful Use of Water, adopted 2-22-1971 by
L.L. No. 1-1971 as Ch. 130 of the 1971 Code.
§ 318-1. Purpose and intent.
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 317/441
A.
B.
The purpose of this article is to establish a comprehensive plan for water conservation and regulation
throughout the Village of Rockville Centre (Village), and for enforcement of regulations, in compliance
with laws and regulations promulgated by the New York State Department of Environmental
Conservation for water conservation and the County of Nassau. Further, the purpose of this article is to
conserve, protect and manage the water supply within the Village and to impose restrictions to regulate
and limit the use of water.
§ 318-2. Prohibited uses.
During the hours of 10:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m., all persons are prohibited from the use of water to water,
hose, sprinkle or otherwise irrigate any outdoor lawn, field, garden, hedge or shrub.
§ 318-3. Watering on alternate days.
Other than between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m., persons occupying residences or other
premises with even-number addresses may water, hose, sprinkle or otherwise irrigate on evennumbered
days of the month.
Other than between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m., persons occupying residences or other
premises with odd-number addresses may water, hose, sprinkle or otherwise irrigate on oddnumbered
days of the month.
§ 318-4. Air-conditioning systems.
All commercial and industrial water-operative systems, refrigeration or other water-cooling equipment
must be equipped with a water-recycling system.
§ 318-5. Car washes and fleet maintenance.
All commercial car washes and all fleet vehicle washes must install water-recycling systems.
§ 318-6. Penalties for offenses.
Any person who shall violate any provision of this article shall, upon conviction, be subject to a
maximum fine of $250 or a maximum term of imprisonment of 15 days, or both, for each offense.
Part III, Land Use Regulations
Chapter 330. Planning Board; Site Plan Review;
Subdivision of Land
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Trustees of the Village of Rockville Centre 6-24-2002 by L.L. No.
6-2002. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building code — See Ch. 112.
Building code administration — See Ch. 115.
Dangerous and unsafe buildings — See Ch. 122.
Moving of buildings — See Ch. 126.
Numbering of buildings — See Ch. 129.
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 318/441
A.
B.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(a)
(7)
C.
Rehabilitation of buildings — See Ch. 132.
Environmental quality review — See Ch. 166.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 188.
Freshwater wetlands — See Ch. 197.
Illicit discharges, activities and connections to storm sewer systems — See Ch. 212.
Stormwater management and erosion and sediment control — See Ch. 286.
Signs and posting bills — See Ch. 335.
Zoning — See Ch. 340.
Article I. Planning Board
§ 330-1. Creation; duties; membership; rules; meetings; reports;
expenses.
Authorization. The Village Board of Trustees hereby creates a Planning Board of five members
and shall provide for the compensation of the Planning Board members.
Duties. It is the intent and purpose of the Board of Trustees in adopting this article to grant the
Planning Board the full authority that is or may be granted to such body by New York State Village
Law, including but not limited to the review, and approval or disapproval, of site plans; the review,
and approval or disapproval, of proposed subdivisions, and the review and approval or
disapproval, of applications for special use permits.
[Amended 1-13-2003 by L.L. No. 4-2003]
Eligibility and membership.
No person who is a member of the Village Board of Trustees or a member or an alternate
member of the Zoning Board of Appeals shall be eligible for membership on the Planning
Board.
The Mayor shall appoint members and the Chairperson of the Planning Board, subject to the
approval of the Board of Trustees. In the absence of a Chairperson, the Planning Board may
designate a member to serve as Chairperson.
Vacancy in office. If a vacancy shall occur otherwise than by expiration of term, the Mayor
shall appoint the new member for the unexpired term.
Removal of members. The Mayor shall have the power to remove, after public hearing, any
member of the Planning Board for cause.
Chairperson duties. All meetings of the Planning Board shall be held at the call of the
Chairperson and at such other times as such Board may determine. Such Chairperson or, in
his or her absence, the acting Chairperson may administer oaths and compel the attendance
of witnesses.
Service on other planning boards. No member of the Village Planning Board shall sit on the
Town or County Planning Board.
Alternate members.
In accordance with Village Law § 7-718(16)(a) through (c), the Board of Trustees may
establish alternate Planning Board member positions for purposes of substituting for a
member who is unable to participate because of a conflict of interest or protracted
absence. The Mayor shall appoint alternate members, subject to the approval of the
Board of Trustees, in a number sufficient to meet the needs of the Village, for terms
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 319/441
(b)
(a)
(b)
(8)
D.
(1)
[1]
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
E.
established by the Board of Trustees. Alternates shall be selected to serve on the
Planning Board on a rotating basis.
The Chairperson of the Planning Board may designate an alternate member to substitute
for a member when such member is unable to participate because of a conflict of interest
or protracted absence on an application or matter before the Board. When so designated,
the alternate member shall possess all the powers and responsibilities of the member of
the Board he or she is replacing; and all the provisions of the Village Law relating of
Planning Board member attendance, conflict of interest, compensation, eligibility,
vacancy in office, removal and service on other boards shall also apply to alternate
members. When a designation is made by the Chairperson of the Planning Board, it shall
be entered into the minutes of the initial Planning Board meeting at which the substitution
is made.
Terms of members.
Members first appointed. The terms of members of the Planning Board first appointed
shall be so fixed that the term of one member shall expire at the end of the Village official
year in which such members were initially appointed. The terms of the remaining
members first appointed shall be so fixed so that one term shall expire at the end of each
official year thereafter. At the expiration of the term of each member first appointed, his or
her successor shall be appointed for a five-year term.
Members now in office. Members now holding office for terms which do not expire at the
end of the Village official years shall, upon the expiration of their term, hold office until the
end of the Village official year, and their successors shall then be appointed for a fiveyear
term.
Rules and regulations. The Planning Board may recommend to the Village Board of Trustees
regulations relating to any subject matter over which the Planning Board has jurisdiction under this
article or any other statute or under any local law of the Village. Adoption of any such
recommendations by the Village Board of Trustees shall be by local law.
Meetings.
Meetings of the Planning Board shall be held at the call of the Chairperson or, in his or her
absence, the Vice Chairpersons, if any, or on the request of any two members. Such
meetings shall be held on notice to the members, advisors, secretary, counsel, and the public
in accordance with applicable legal requirements.
Open to public. All regular and special meetings shall be open to the public (excluding
executive sessions authorized by law), and notice thereof shall be given in accordance with
the requirements of the Open Meetings Law.[1]
Editor's Note: See Public Officers Law § 101 et seq.
Actions at meetings and quorum. No action except adjournment shall be taken at any meeting
of the Planning Board without a quorum being present. A quorum shall consist of three
members of the Planning Board. No action shall be taken unless three members concur.
Minutes. The Planning Board shall keep minutes of every regular meeting or special meeting
and shall include the names of the persons appearing and addressing the Planning Board
and the persons appearing by attorney, the action by the agency, the findings, if any, made by
it and the reasons therefor. The minutes shall thereafter be made available for public
inspection during normal business hours at the office of the Village Clerk.
Recordings of proceedings; transcripts. For site plan review or subdivision public hearings,
the Planning Board may provide for the verbatim recording of the proceedings by
stenographic, mechanical or electronic means.
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 320/441
(1)
(2)
F.
G.
A.
B.
Report on referred matters; general reports.
The Village Board of Trustees may, by resolution, refer any matter or class of matters to the
Planning Board before final action is taken thereon by the Village Board of Trustees or other
office or officer of Rockville Centre having final authority over said matter. The Village Board
of Trustees may further stipulate that final action thereon shall not be taken until the Planning
Board has submitted its report thereon, or has had a reasonable time, to be fixed by the
Village Board of Trustees in said resolution, to submit the report.
The Planning Board may review and make recommendations on a proposed Village
comprehensive plan or amendment thereto. In addition, the Planning Board shall have the full
power and authority to make investigations, maps, reports, and recommendations in
connection therewith relating to the planning and development of the Village as it seems
desirable, provided that the total expenditures of said Board shall not exceed the
appropriation provided therefor.
Appropriation for Planning Board. The Village Board of Trustees is hereby authorized and
empowered to make such appropriation as it may see fit for Planning Board expenses. The Board
of Trustees shall have the power and authority to employ experts, clerks, a secretary, and counsel
for site plan and exterior design review and subdivision proceedings and to pay for their services,
and to provide for such other expenses as may be necessary and proper.
Article II. Site Plan and Exterior Design Review
§ 330-2. General purpose.
Site plan review. The purpose of this article is to promote the health, safety, morals and general
welfare of the Village of Rockville Centre through site plan review. Toward this end, site plan
review shall include, but shall not be limited to, vehicular and pedestrian traffic and circulation;
adequacy of utility, drainage and garbage facilities; preservation of trees; and appropriate
screening through landscaping. This development and design evaluation procedure will allow the
Village to review the arrangement, layout, use interrelationships and neighborhood impacts of
sites intended for development or redevelopment.
Exterior design review. The purpose of this article is to preserve and promote the character and
appearance of the Village of Rockville Centre through exterior design review. The Board of
Trustees hereby finds and determines that construction, reconstruction and alteration of buildings
and structures that are visually offensive or inappropriate due to poor exterior design quality mar
the appearance of the Village, impair the use, enjoyment and desirability and reduce the values of
properties and are undesirable. The Board of Trustees further finds and determines that such
buildings and structures are detrimental to the character of the neighborhoods and prevent the
most appropriate development and utilization of land. Because such buildings and structures
adversely affect the functioning, economic stability, prosperity, health, safety and general welfare
of the entire community, exterior design review of such buildings and structures is appropriate in
order to mitigate such adverse effects and to ensure that the aesthetic quality of design of such
buildings and structures conforms to the character of the neighborhood in which they are
proposed.
[Amended 2-4-2015 by L.L. No. 4-2015]
§ 330-3. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
ARCHITECTURAL OR EXTERIOR DESIGN CONSULTANT
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 321/441
(a)
(b)
(c)
[1]
[2]
(d)
[1]
[2]
(e)
(1)
A.
An architect licensed by the State of New York, or a person with expertise in site development and
landscape design to act as a landscape consultant, who has been appointed by the Board of
Trustees to serve as a panel to assist the Board of Trustees in its review of plans submitted in
accordance with this article.
EXTERIOR DESIGN
The appearance of a building or structure, including the facade, the arrangement of doors,
windows, porticos, supports or columns, porches or garages, including height, width and length,
exterior materials and treatments, roof structures and landscaping.
SITE PLAN
A rendering, drawing or sketch prepared to specifications contained in this article. The site plan
shall show the arrangement, layout and design of the proposed use of a single parcel of land.
Plats showing lots, blocks, or sites that are subject to subdivision review as single-family or twofamily
homes shall continue to be subject to such review and shall not be subject to review as site
plans under this article.
[Amended 11-29-2004 by L.L. No. 9-2004]
§ 330-4. Uses and actions subject to review.
[Amended 9-30-2002 by L.L. No. 13-2002]
Uses and actions subject to site plan approval and exterior design review.
In all districts, the Planning Board shall conduct site plan review and exterior design review for
the following:
The new construction or exterior renovation of any nonresidential building or structure, or
any multifamily building or structure, when the building or structure has a footprint of
10,000 square feet or more or has an aggregate square footage of 20,000 square feet or
more.
[Amended 4-11-2005 by L.L. No. 2-2005]
A change in any use of any nonresidential or multifamily building or structure that affects
a footprint of 10,000 square feet or more or that affects an aggregate square footage of
20,000 square feet or more.
All proposed nonresidential or multifamily use of undeveloped open land or space,
including open land created by demolition of structures, where the structure will have a
footprint of 10,000 square feet or more or has an aggregate square footage of 20,000
square feet or more.
The new construction of a not-for-profit nonpublic school:
In a residential district;
In a nonresidential district where such not-for-profit nonpublic school results in such
a school having an aggregate square footage of 3,000 square feet or more or an
enrollment of 100 students or more.
An expansion of a not-for-profit nonpublic school:
In a residential district: when an expansion results in an increase of 15% or more of
the aggregate square footage.
In a nonresidential district:
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 322/441
[a]
[b]
[c]
[d]
(f)
(2)
(a)
[1]
[2]
(b)
(c)
(1)
(2)
B.
(1)
(2)
C.
D.
When an expansion results in an increase of 15% or more of the aggregate
square footage for such a school that:
Is already 3,000 aggregate square feet or more; or
Has an enrollment of 100 students or more; or
When an expansion of such an existing school that is currently less than an
aggregate square footage of 3,000 square feet or has an enrollment of less than
100 students would result in such a school measuring an aggregate square
footage of 3,000 square feet or more or would result in an enrollment of 100
students or more.
Amendment of a previously approved site plan.
Site plan review is not required for customary and incidental repairs.
Uses and actions subject to exterior design review.
In all districts, the Board of Trustees shall conduct exterior design review for the following:
[Amended 4-11-2005 by L.L. No. 2-2005; 1-29-2007 by L.L. No. 1-2007; 2-4-2015 by L.L. No.
4-2015]
The new construction of single-family dwellings or two-family dwellings.
Alterations or renovations of single-family dwellings or two-family dwellings that:
Have an estimated construction cost in excess of $300,000 or such other threshold
amount as may be determined by the Board of Trustees from time to time by
resolution; or
Result in an increase of more than 1,000 square feet of new living space.
The new construction of any nonresidential building or structure, or multifamily building or
structure that has a footprint of less than 10,000 square feet, or the alteration or
renovation of the exterior of any nonresidential building or structure, or multifamily
building or structure that costs $25,000 or more.
Exterior design review shall not be required for minor exterior renovations that do not result in
any modification or rearrangement of building, coverage or floor area.
[Amended 4-11-2005 by L.L. No. 2-2005]
Where site plan or exterior design approval is required.
No building, structure or outdoor use of land shall be used, constructed, enlarged, altered or
moved in any zoning district until a site plan meeting the requirements of this article has been
approved.
No building permit, certificate of occupancy or certificate of completion shall be issued by the
Superintendent of Buildings except upon authorization of, and in conformity with, the site plan
approval.
In all cases where a variance or special exception is required, the applicant shall first obtain a
variance or special exception from the Zoning Board of Appeals before proceeding with site plan
review or exterior design review.
§ 330-5. General standards for action on site plans.
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 323/441
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
(11)
(12)
A.
B.
C.
A.
B.
General standards as basis for action on site plans:
Relationship of proposed development to any adopted Village comprehensive plan and to the
Village overall.
Relationship of and compatibility with the proposed development of the site and to existing
buildings in the adjoining area.
Landscaping and site treatment to create visual and noise deferring buffers, with particular
attention to proposed development that abuts residential property, so as to protect the quiet
enjoyment of residential property.
Ecological considerations, including the adequacy of water supply, electrical power and
preservation of trees.
Adequacy of storm drainage facilities, waste disposal facilities and utility services.
Traffic impact on surrounding streets and on the Village overall to ensure adequate access,
visibility and safety.
Adequacy of on-site circulation, including but not limited to the arrangement of vehicular
traffic, ingress and egress, driveway connections to public streets, intersections, road widths
and traffic control.
On-site pedestrian and bicyclist circulation, including but not limited to the separation of
pedestrian traffic from vehicular traffic, and locations of walkways and intersections.
Protection of adjoining properties from noise and odors.
Location and arrangement of on-site lighting to protect adjoining properties.
Adequacy of access of fire vehicles to the site.
[Added 11-29-2004 by L.L. No. 9-2004]
Location of all outdoor storage and refuse collection facilities.
[Added 11-29-2004 by L.L. No. 9-2004]
In approving any application, the Board may impose appropriate conditions and safeguards
designed to prevent harmful effects. These conditions and safeguards must be met prior to the
issuance of a building permit, unless the Superintendent of Buildings provides a written
determination that the conditions cannot be met until the construction is underway or complete. In
that event, the building permit shall include this determination and shall state that a certificate of
occupancy shall not be issued until the conditions and safeguards set by the Planning Board have
been met.
[Amended 4-11-2005 by L.L. No. 2-2005]
The Board may disapprove any site plan application, provided that the Board has afforded the
applicant an opportunity to confer upon suggestions for change of the plan.
§ 330-6. Application procedure for site plan review.
Presubmission. Prior to a formal submission, the applicant should meet in person with a
representative of the Building Department to discuss the proposed site plan.
Formal submission. A site plan shall be prepared by a New York State registered or licensed
professional, which includes an architect, landscape architect, land surveyor, engineer or
professional planner. The site plan shall be submitted to the Building Department.
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 324/441
(1)
[1]
(2)
C.
A.
B.
(1)
(2)
(a)
(b)
(3)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)
(4)
C.
Fees.
All submissions for site plan approval shall be accompanied by a fee as established by the
Board of Trustees to pay for the costs of planning, design and engineering review.
Such fees do not cover the cost of an environmental assessment form or an environmental
impact statement. The applicant shall be responsible for the total cost of environmental
reviews that are determined to be necessary to meet the requirements of the State
Environmental Quality Review Act.[1]
Editor's Note: See Environmental Conservation Law § 8-0101 et seq.
§ 330-7. Required submissions for site plan review.
Required submissions. All applications for approval of a site plan shall be submitted on a form
provided by or approved by the Building Department and shall not be accepted by the Building
Department unless it is complete. All maps submitted must be at a scale of not less than 30 feet to
the inch.
Completeness. No application shall be deemed complete unless it meets the information
requirements listed in this section and unless it is accompanied by an environmental assessment
form (EAF), or is shown to be exempt from environmental review, in accordance with SEQRA
regulations and § 7-725(A)(10) of New York State Village Law.
The following information must be submitted with an application for site plan approval, unless
waived, in writing, by the Superintendent of Buildings:
Completed building permit application.
Filing fee.
Two sets of complete plans with architect or engineer's seal.
Eight sets of front, rear, right, and left side elevations, two of which are sealed by the
architect.
Two sets of landscape plans, floor plans, front, rear, right and left side elevations reduced
to 11 inches by 17 inches.
Eight plot plans by a licensed surveyor, engineer, or architect, which will show the following.
(If subject parcel is located on a county road, eight original copies are required.)
Proposed setback from street line, proposed side yards, proposed rear yard.
Proposed and existing elevations of the four corners of the subject property and elevation
of adjacent properties.
Proposed elevation of garage floor; proposed elevation of first floor.
Proposed finished grade at four corners of the building.
Location of driveways and curb cuts.
Location and size of all required dry wells.
Location and size of all existing trees.
Location of light poles, fire hydrants, etc.
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 325/441
(i)
(j)
(5)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(6)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
(11)
Computation of area covered by all structures to be shown on the plot plan.
Certified survey that has been prepared no more than one year prior to submission.
Eight plot plans with a detailed landscape plan indicating the location, type and size of all new
plantings, existing trees, and shrubs which will remain.
Eight copies of a radius map, which will include the following information:
Radius map from tax maps showing all lots within a radius of 200 feet from all corners of
the property in question, designating section, block, lot(s), street addresses, size of lot
and name of owner of each parcel within said radius.
Existing school, zoning and special district boundaries.
Setback from the street line of all dwellings on the same side of the street within the
same block of the proposed dwelling; computation to include a drawing of the average
setback of all dwellings on the same side of the street within the same block.
Reservations, easement and areas dedicated to public use, if any.
Names; notices; proof of notice:
Names and addresses of owners, using the section, block, and lot(s) from required radius
maps at the Village Tax Office; names and addresses on Form BR-3, to be submitted to
the Secretary of the Planning Board.
Proof of notice, on Form BR-2, by certified mail, return receipt requested, to all owners
within the required radius, at least seven days before the scheduled meeting date. Notice
must state the nature of the application, Index number, date of hearing, location, and
address of the property.
One copy of Form BR-4, both sides completed, to the Secretary of Planning Board, as an
affidavit of service, which must be notarized and state the mailing date.
Certified mail receipts shall be given to the Secretary of the Planning Board no later than
two days before the date of the meeting.
The name and address of the applicant and licensed professionals engaged to work on the
project shall be shown. Where the applicant or owner is a corporation, the Planning Board
may require the names and addresses of all officers, directors and principal stockholders of
said corporation. In addition, the applicant must provide a list of all witnesses that shall
appear at the public hearing to the Secretary of the Planning Board no less that 10 business
days prior to the scheduled meeting date.
[Amended 11-29-2004 by L.L. No. 9-2004]
Existing site conditions. The location of existing buildings and, if applicable, water bodies,
floodplains, and floodplain boundaries as determined by the Federal Emergency Management
Agency, watercourses, marshes, rock outcrops, wooded areas, existing vegetative cover,
single trees with a diameter of eight inches or more measured three feet above the base of
the trunk and other significant existing features on the site.
If this building plot is a split-off from an existing plot with dwelling, submit eight surveys of the
existing dwelling and all structures showing side yards, front yard, rear yard, and area of land
covered.
Pictures of all buildings on the same side of the street within 100 feet each side of the subject
parcel and on the opposite side of the street for the same distance, with the address of the
building on each photo of the building.
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 326/441
(12)
(13)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
(11)
(12)
(13)
D.
A professionally prepared color rendering and eight sets of eleven-inch-by-fourteen-inch color
photographic reductions of the rendering and site plan, and each of any other building plans
submitted in connection with this application.
Any other information that may be required by the Superintendent of Buildings or Village
Engineer.
The following development data shall also be submitted:
Title of development, date, North point, scale, name and address of the record owner and of
the engineer, architect, land planner or surveyor preparing the site development plan.
All means of vehicular access and egress, including fire department vehicles, to and from the
site onto public streets, and all provisions for pedestrian access and circulation and, if
required by the Superintendent of Buildings, all proposed streets.
[Amended 11-29-2004 by L.L. No. 9-2004]
The location and layout of any off-street parking or loading areas, and traffic circulation areas,
including pedestrian walkways.
One set of preliminary plans, elevations and sections of proposed structures and roads
showing the proposed location, use, design and height of all buildings and structures,
including any proposed division of buildings into units of separate occupancy and location of
drives thereto and showing the proposed location of all roads, pedestrian walkways and fire
lanes.
The location of all proposed waterlines, valves and hydrants and sewer lines or of alternative
means of water supply and sewage disposal and treatment, if any, as well as the location of
existing water mains, culverts and drains of the property, with pipe sizes, grades and
directions of flow.
The proposed location, direction, power and timing of proposed outdoor lighting within the site
and at the site's boundaries, if adjacent to residential development or within 100 feet from
residential development.
The extent and amount of cut and fill for all disturbed areas, including before-and-after profiles
and cross section of typical development areas, parking lots and roads, and including any
erosion and sedimentation control plan, if applicable.
Proposed stormwater drainage system, including location, supporting design data and copies
of computation used as a basis for the design capacities and performance of storm water
management facilities.
The proposed location, size, color and illumination of proposed signs.
The location of all existing and proposed site improvements, including drains, culverts,
retaining walls and fences.
The location of any outdoor storage for equipment and materials, if any, and the location, type
and design of all solid-waste-related facilities, including dumpsters and recycling bins.
Detailed breakdowns of all proposed floor space by type use.
In an industrial district, specific uses proposed, number of employees for which buildings are
designed, type of power to be used for any manufacturing process, type of wastes or byproducts
to be produced by any manufacturing process, and the proposed method of disposal
of such wastes or by-products shall also be shown.
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 327/441
(14)
(15)
(16)
(17)
(18)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
E.
A.
B.
Location and design of all energy distribution facilities, including electrical or solar energy, if
applicable.
Lines and dimensions of all property offered, or to be offered, for dedication for public use,
indicating the purpose of all property that is proposed to be served by deed covenant for the
common use of the property owners of the development.
Estimated project construction schedule and completion date.
Identification of any federal, state or county permits required for project execution.
Record of application for approval status of all necessary permits from federal, state and
county officials.
In addition, and where due to special conditions peculiar to a site or the size, nature or complexity
of the proposed use or development of land or buildings, the Planning Board may require such
additional information as it may deem necessary for a complete assessment of the project
pursuant to this article, including but not limited to the following:
A survey of the subject property having an error of closure not in excess of one in 10,000 and
indicating all lengths in feet and decimals of a foot and all angles to the nearest 10 seconds,
or closer if deemed necessary by the surveyor.
A copy of any covenants or deed restrictions that are intended to cover all or any part of the
tract.
Existing contours with intervals of two feet or less, referred to Village of Rockville Centre
datum and showing at least one bench mark.
The location of existing water mains, culverts and drains on the property, with pipe sizes,
grades and direction of flow.
All proposed lots, easements and public and community areas; all proposed streets with
profiles indicating grading and cross sections showing width of roadway, location and width of
sidewalk and location and size of utility lines according to the standards and specifications
established or approved by the Village Engineer of the Village of Rockville Centre.
Scale modeling and computer-assisted design (CAD) depictions of proposed development set
in the surrounding neighborhood.
§ 330-8. Public hearing, referral and action.
Every application for site plan review shall be accompanied by a statement by the Superintendent
of Buildings and the Village Engineer that the site plan application is complete because it contains
all the required submissions and that any Village department head designated by the Village
Engineer has evaluated the submissions and rendered a report to the Secretary of the Planning
Board. No application shall be deemed complete and no application shall be referred to the
Planning Board until all required department head reports have been submitted, reviewed and
deemed complete by the Village Engineer.
[Amended 11-29-2004 by L.L. No. 9-2004]
Upon the Superintendent of Building's determination that the required submissions, as set forth in
§ 330-7, have been received by the Secretary of the Planning Board, and the site plan application
is complete in accordance with § 330-8A, the application shall be scheduled for a public hearing,
which shall be held in accordance with § 7-725-a.8 of the New York State Village Law.
[Amended 11-29-2004 by L.L. No. 9-2004]
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 328/441
(1)
(2)
C.
(1)
(2)
(3)
D.
E.
[1]
F.
(1)
(2)
(3)
A.
Required referrals, decisions, notice of decisions, and filing of decisions shall also conform to § 7-
725-a of the New York State Village Law.
[Amended 11-29-2004 by L.L. No. 9-2004]
The Planning Board shall comply with the provisions of the State Environmental Quality
Review Act (SEQRA) under Article 8 of the Environmental Conservation Law and 6 NYCRR
617 and shall not make a final decision to approve or disapprove an application that has been
the subject of an environmental assessment form (EAF) or an environmental impact
statement (EIS) until it has issued a written SEQRA statement of findings.
The Planning Board shall not make a final decision to approve or disapprove an application
until the Nassau County Planning Commission has issued its report on any required referral,
in accordance with § 239-m of the General Municipal Law.
Action by resolution.
The Planning Board shall act by resolution to either approve or disapprove or approve with
modifications the site plan application. A resolution of either approval or approval with
modifications shall include authorization to the Planning Board to stamp and sign the site plan
upon the applicant's compliance with the submission requirements stated therein.
If the Planning Board's resolution includes a requirement that modifications be incorporated in
the site plan, conformance with the modifications shall be considered a condition of approval
and shall be satisfied prior to signing of the site plan.
If the site plan is disapproved, the Planning Board's resolution shall state specific reasons for
such decision.
Upon approval or approval with modifications, the Planning Board shall endorse a copy of the site
plan and give it to the Superintendent of Buildings, who shall then issue the appropriate permit if
the project conforms to all other applicable requirements.
Upon disapproval, the Planning Board shall inform the Superintendent of Buildings, in writing, who
shall not issue a building permit for the proposed use or action.[1]
Editor's Note: Former Subsection G, regarding failure of the Planning Board to act, which
immediately followed this subsection, was repealed 11-29-2004 by L.L. No. 9-2004.
§ 330-9. Stamping of site plan.
Submission requirements for stamping. After receiving site plan approval from the Planning Board,
with or without modifications, the applicant shall, within six calendar months, submit prints of the
site plan to the Planning Board for stamping and signature by the Planning Board Chair. The site
plan submitted for stamping shall conform strictly to the site plan approved by the Planning Board,
except that it shall further incorporate any revisions or other modifications required by the Planning
Board's resolution. In addition, the site plan shall be accompanied by the following additional
information:
A record of application for and approval status of all necessary permits from federal, state and
county officials and agencies.
Detailed sizing and final material specification of all required improvements.
An estimated project construction schedule and, if a performance guaranty is to be provided
by the applicant for all or some portion or the work, a detailed cost estimate for the installation
and inspection of site improvements.
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 329/441
B.
(1)
(2)
(3)
A.
B.
A.
B.
C.
D.
Effect of stamping by the Planning Board. Upon stamping and signature by the Planning Board
Chair, the Planning Board shall forward a copy of the approved site plan to the Superintendent of
Buildings and the applicant. A building permit or certificate of occupancy, as applicable, may then
be issued if the project conforms to all other applicable requirements, including the applicant's
presentation of documentation that all necessary permits and approvals from federal, state and
county officials and agencies have been issued.
§ 330-10. Expiration of approval; requests for extension of time.
Planning Board approval of a site plan shall expire if any of the following circumstances occurs:
The site plan is not submitted for stamping and signature within six calendar months of the
Board's resolution of site plan approval, with or without modifications.
A complete application for either a building permit or certificate of occupancy is not submitted
within one calendar year of the stamping and signing of the site plan.
Work authorized under a building permit is not commenced and diligently pursued through the
completion of substantial construction within 24 months of the stamping and signing of the
site plan, unless the Planning Board extends the time.
Requests for extensions of time must be in writing and must be submitted no less than 30 days
prior to the expiration of the time.
§ 330-11. Performance bond, assurances or other security.
A statement shall be placed on all site plans approved by the Planning Board to the effect that the
owner agrees to comply with the plan and all conditions noted thereon. The installation of required
site improvements (all roads, paved areas, drainage, utilities, outdoor lighting, open space and
recreation, landscaping and screening, including planting) that affect public property and are an
integral part of the approved plan may be guaranteed by cash, performance bond or other
acceptable guaranty approved by the Board of Trustees and the Village Attorney. In the event that
a satisfactory guaranty is not provided within 90 calendar days of the date of the resolution, the
site plan shall be null and void. A guaranty of the improvements shall be for 100% of the cost of
improvements. The cash, performance bond or other acceptable guaranty shall be conditioned on
the property owner's or developer's completing the work as set forth on the approved site plan in a
manner satisfactory to the Planning Board and upon the proper functioning of the improvements
for a period of one calendar year from their completion.
In case of default, the guaranty shall be forfeited and the Village shall use the amount to complete
any incomplete portion of the said work or to make sure repairs are undertaken as are necessary
to assure the proper functioning of the improvements. If any amount of money remains after the
Village has completed the work, any excess money will be returned to the surety or the person
putting up the required deposit. The installation of all improvements shall be under the direct
supervision of a New York State registered or licensed professional.
To obtain a building permit, an applicant shall provide to the Superintendent of Buildings proof of
acceptance of the guaranty by the Village Board. No part of the guaranty shall be released until all
of the requirements of site plan approval have been met, including the construction and
completion of all site improvements, and their inspection and approval by the Village.
The site improvements shall be fully completed in accordance with the approved plan before any
new building, structure or outdoor use shown on the approved site plan is occupied or used, or
any existing building shown on the approved site plan is occupied with a new use. No certificate of
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 330/441
A.
(1)
(2)
(3)
B.
C.
occupancy shall be issued until all improvements shown on the approved site plan are installed
and an as-built drawing submitted to the Building Superintendent.
§ 330-12. Consultation with other agencies, departments and
consultants.
In its review of an application for site plan approval, the Planning Board may consult with or require the
applicant to consult with other Village officials, agencies and designated private consultants, and with
representatives of county, state and federal agencies, including but not limited to the State Department
of Transportation, the State Health Department, the Department of Environmental Conservation and
the Army Corps of Engineers, as needed.
§ 330-13. Compliance with State Environmental Quality Review
Act.
The Planning Board shall comply with the provisions of the State Environmental Quality Review Act
under Article 8 of the Environmental Conservation Law and 6 NYCRR 617.
§ 330-14. Fees for site plan review; payment or reimbursement of
certain costs; inspections.
[Amended 11-29-2004 by L.L. No. 9-2004; 10-27-2008 by L.L. No. 11-2008]
The fee for site plan applications to the Planning Board shall include payment or reimbursement of
reasonable costs incurred by the Planning Board for private engineering, environmental, planning
and/or architectural consultants, or other private consulting services reasonably deemed
necessary by the Planning Board, and other extraordinary expenses in connection with the review
of a proposed site plan. Such reimbursable costs shall be in addition to any other fees required.
The applicant shall be required to provide an escrow deposit account at any time on or after the
receipt of the application, in an amount sufficient to cover the anticipated costs for such consultant
review and other expenses.
The fees to be paid by the applicant shall also include payment or reimbursement of the following
costs:
Publication of legal notices for public hearings, or other required legal notices;
Stenographic minutes and transcription of meetings and hearings;
Any fees or costs for environmental review conducted pursuant to the State Environmental
Quality Review Act or the regulations adopted pursuant thereto.
Inspection of improvements. The Superintendent of Buildings shall be responsible for the overall
inspection of site improvements, including coordination with the Village Engineer and other local
officials and agencies as may be appropriate. Reasonable expenses incurred by the Village for
inspections by the designated Village Engineer or other appropriate professionals shall, in addition
to fees and costs associated with site plan review, be reimbursed to the Village by the applicant in
accordance with the fee schedule established by the Board of Trustees.
§ 330-14.1. Reservation of parkland on site plans containing
residential units.
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 331/441
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
A.
[Amended 11-29-2004 by L.L. No. 9-2004]
Legislative intent. The Village of Rockville Centre (Village) finds that the provision of parkland and
recreation facilities in conjunction with the development of multifamily uses is necessary to meet
the needs of its residents. Where it is not practical for a particular development to provide parkland
and recreational facilities, it is in the best interest of the Village and its residents to require funds to
be paid to the Village exclusively for parks, playgrounds or recreation facilities, including the
acquisition of property.
Before the Planning Board may approve a site plan containing residential units, such site plan
shall also show, when required by such Board, a park or parks suitably located for playground or
other recreational facilities.
Land for park, playground or other recreational facilities may not be required until the Planning
Board has made a finding that a proper case exists for requiring that a park or parks be suitably
located for playgrounds or other recreation facilities within the Village. Such findings shall include
an evaluation of the present and anticipated future needs for park and recreation facilities in the
Village based on projected population growth to which the particular site plan will contribute.
In the event the Planning Board makes a finding pursuant to § 330-14.1C that the proposed site
plan presents a proper case for requiring a park or parks suitably located for playgrounds or other
recreation purposes, but that a suitable park or parks of adequate size cannot be properly located
on such site plan, the Planning Board may require a sum of money in lieu thereof, to be
established by the Village Board of Trustees. In making such determination of suitability, the
Planning Board shall assess the size and suitability of land shown on the site plan which could be
possible locations for park or recreational facilities, as well as practical factors, including whether
there is a need for additional facilities in the immediate neighborhood or a need for improvements
to or the acquisition of parks, playgrounds or other recreation facilities or purposes that may be
used by the population of the particular site plan. Any fee required by the Planning Board in lieu of
land for park, playground or other recreation purposes or facilities pursuant to this section shall be
deposited into a trust fund to be used by the Village exclusively for park, playground and other
recreational purposes, including the acquisition of property.
Notwithstanding § 330-14.1A through D, if the land included in a site plan under review is a portion
of a subdivision that has been reviewed and approved, the Planning Board shall credit the
applicant for any land set aside or money donated in lieu thereof under that subdivision approval.
In the event of resubdivision of such plat, nothing shall preclude the additional reservation of
parkland or money donated in lieu thereof.
§ 330-15. General standards for action on exterior design review.
General standards as basis for action on exterior design review:
Enhancement of natural features of site and surroundings, including location of plantings and
screening devices.
Exterior lighting, to minimize the impact upon public and adjacent properties.
Comparison with the exterior design and appearances of existing structures.
Harmony with the character of the district in terms of color, materials and appearance of
structures.
Ability to maintain the property values of the surrounding existing structures.
Size and arrangement of doors, windows, porticos, porches or garages or other openings,
breaks or extensions in the facade.
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 332/441
(7)
B.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
A.
B.
(1)
(2)
C.
D.
Heights, widths and lengths of elements of design, exterior materials and treatments, roof
structures, exposed mechanical equipment, service and storage areas, retaining walls,
landscaping, signs, light posts, parking area and fences, service and loading areas.
Conditions. In approving any application for exterior design review, the Planning Board, for § 330-
4A uses and actions, and the Board of Trustees, for § 330-4B uses and actions, may impose
appropriate conditions and safeguards designed to prevent the harmful effects.
§ 330-16. Exterior design review application procedure.
At the request of the Planning Board for § 330-4A uses and actions, and at the request of the
Board of Trustees for § 330-4B uses and actions, a panel of exterior design consultants will review
exterior design approval applications and make recommendations to the Board.
No exterior design consultant shall review his or her own submissions. An alternate consultant
shall be appointed in such an instance.
The reviewing board shall act by resolution to either approve or disapprove or approve with
modifications the exterior design application. A resolution of either approval or approval with
modifications shall include authorization to issue a building permit, provided that any other
approval has been obtained.
If the reviewing board's resolution includes a requirement that modifications be incorporated in the
exterior design plan, conformance with the modifications shall be considered a condition of
approval. If the exterior design plan is disapproved, the reviewing board's resolution shall state
specific reasons for such decision.
Upon approval or approval with modifications, the reviewing board shall endorse a copy of the
exterior design plan and give it to the Superintendent of Buildings, who shall then issue the
appropriate permit if the project conforms to all other applicable requirements.
Upon disapproval, the reviewing board shall inform the Superintendent of Buildings, in writing, who
shall not issue a building permit or certificate of occupancy.
Failure on the part of the reviewing board to act upon an application determined to be complete by
the Superintendent of Buildings within 62 days shall be deemed to constitute approval, unless the
time limit is extended by stipulation with the applicant.
§ 330-17. Required submissions for exterior design review.
Required submissions for exterior design review are:
Completed building permit application.
Filing fee.
Two sets of complete plans with architect or engineer's seal.
Eight sets of front, rear, right and left side elevations, two of which are sealed by the architect.
Two sets of landscape plan(s), floor plans, front, rear, right and left side elevations reduced to
11 inches by 17 inches.
Eight plot plans by a licensed surveyor, engineer or architect, which will show the following. (If
subject parcel is located on a county road, eight original copies are required.)
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 333/441
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
E.
(1)
(2)
F.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
G.
H.
I.
J.
Proposed setback from street line, proposed side yards, proposed rear yard.
Proposed and existing elevations of the four corners of the subject property and elevation of
adjacent properties.
Proposed elevation of garage floor; proposed elevation of first floor.
Proposed finished grade at four corners of the building.
Location of driveway and curb cut.
Location and size of all required dry wells.
Locate and plot all existing trees; also indicate size of trees.
Locate and plot light poles, fire hydrants, etc.
Computation of area covered by all structures to be shown on the plot plan.
Eight plot plans with a detailed landscape plan indicating the location, type and size of all new
plantings, existing trees, and shrubs which will remain.
Eight copies of a radius map, which will include the following information:
Radius map from tax maps showing all lots within a radius of 200 feet from all corners of the
property in question, designating section, block, lot(s), street addresses, size of lot and name
of the owner of each parcel within said radius.
Setback from street line of all dwellings on the same side of the street within the same block
of the proposed dwelling. Computation shall include a drawing of the average setback of all
dwellings on the same side of the street within the same block.
Names; notices; proof of notice:
Names and addresses of owners, using the section, block, and lot(s) from required radius
maps at the Village Tax Office; names and addresses on Form BR-3, to be submitted to the
Secretary of the reviewing board.
Proof of notice on Form BR-2, by certified mail, return receipt requested, to all owners within
the required radius, at least seven days before the scheduled meeting date. Notice must state
the nature of the application, Index Number, date of hearing, location, and address of
property.
One copy of Form BR-4, both sides completed, to the Secretary of the reviewing board, as an
affidavit of service; with mailing date, and notarization.
Certified mail receipts shall be given to the Secretary of the reviewing board no later than two
days before the date of the meeting.
If this building plot is a split-off from an existing plot with dwelling, submit eight surveys of the
existing dwelling and all structures showing side yards, front yard, rear yard, and area of land
covered.
Pictures of all buildings on the same side of the street within 100 feet each side of the subject
parcel and on the opposite side of the street for the same distance, with address of the building on
each photo of the building.
A professionally prepared color rendering will be required and eight sets of eleven-inch-byfourteen-
inch color photographic reductions of the rendering and site plan, and each of any other
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 334/441
K.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
building plans submitted in connection with this application.
Any other information that may be required by the Superintendent of Buildings or Village Engineer.
Article III. Subdivision Review
§ 330-18. General purpose.
The purpose of subdivision review is to protect the Village through ensuring the adequacy of the
streets, sewers, water supply and other essential services. Toward this end, subdivision review shall
include, but need not be limited to, the public health, safety and welfare; street width and grade;
adequacy of light and air; facilitation of fire protection and access of fire-fighting equipment to
buildings; vehicular and pedestrian traffic and circulation; adequacy of utility, drainage and garbage
facilities; and appropriate screening through landscaping.
§ 330-19. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
CUL-DE-SAC
A local street with only one outlet that terminates in a vehicular turnaround and having an
appropriate terminal for the safe and convenient reversal of traffic movement.
FINAL SUBDIVISION PLAT
The map of a subdivision to be recorded after approval by the Planning Board.
MINOR SUBDIVISION
The adjustment, relocation, alteration or change of one or more existing property lot lines,
provided that such adjustment, relocation, alteration or change does not involve or result in:
[Added 9-22-2003 by L.L. No. 9-2003; amended 5-1-2014 by L.L. No. 4-2014]
Any new street or road;
Creation of any new lot or result in a number of lots greater than the number of lots which
lawfully exist prior to the proposed relocation, alteration or change;
The creation of any lot which does not conform to the requirements of the zoning district in
which it is located;
Any increase in the degree or extent of any existing nonconformity of or on any existing lot;
Creation of any circumstance which would constitute a violation of any applicable zoning
regulation;
The extension of municipal water or sewer facilities; or
The installation of drainage improvements through one or more lots to serve one or more
other lots.
PLANNING BOARD
The Planning Board of the Incorporated Village of Rockville Centre.
PRELIMINARY PLAT
The preliminary drawing or drawings prepared in a manner prescribed by this article that shows
the layout of a proposed subdivision, including, but not restricted to, road and lot layout and
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 335/441
A.
B.
C.
D.
(1)
(2)
(3)
E.
A.
approximate dimensions, key plan, topography and drainage, all proposed facilities, including
preliminary plans and profiles, at suitable scale and in such detail as required by this article.
SUBDIVISION
The division of any parcel of land into three or more lots, blocks or sites, with or without streets or
highways, for the purpose of a sale, transfer of ownership, or development, or the division of any
parcel of land into two lots, blocks or sites when that division would result in a new street or road,
or the extension of water or sewer municipal facilities, or the installation of drainage improvements
through one or more lots to serve one or more other lots. A transfer of property between adjacent
property owners that does not create an additional lot and does not reduce the size of any existing
lot area, dimension or setback below the minimum requirement for the zoning district in which the
property is located shall not be considered a subdivision within the meaning of this chapter.
[Amended 9-22-2003 by L.L. No. 9-2003]
§ 330-20. Planning Board approval required for subdivisions.
[Amended 9-22-2003 by L.L. No. 9-2003; 6-2-2014 by L.L. No. 6-2014]
No land may be subdivided without the approval of the Planning Board, in accordance with the
provisions of this article. The Planning Board may waive required submissions, as set forth in this
article, when the Superintendent of Buildings and the Village Engineer determine that compliance
is unnecessary for the comprehensive review of the proposed subdivision. In addition, the
Planning Board may require additional information that it determines to be necessary to its review.
Where subdivision review is required, no building permit or certificate of occupancy shall be issued
by the Superintendent of Buildings, except upon authorization of and in conformity with the
subdivision approval.
In all cases where a variance or special exception or special use permit is required, the applicant
shall first obtain a variance from the Zoning Board of Appeals, or a special use permit from the
appropriate reviewing board, before proceeding with subdivision review.
Planning Board approval is not required when the Building Department has issued a written
determination that the proposed development is a minor subdivision, as defined in § 330-19.
Where authorized to do so pursuant to New York Real Property Law § 334-a, the Planning Board
may, but shall not be required to, exercise its discretion to grant a waiver as provided in that
statute.
The Planning Board shall not grant any such waiver unless notice of any meeting where such
waiver application is considered or acted upon has been given as required by law, and has
been posted on the Village's website. Such notice shall include information sufficient to advise
the public that such waiver application is to be considered and shall identify the street address
of the subject property.
Nothing in this Subsection E shall be construed as requiring the Planning Board to grant any
such waiver application where it determines that the application does not conform to the legal
requirements to qualify for such waiver, or where it determines that the waiver or the
proposed subdivision would be inappropriate, improper, or not in the public interest.
The Board of Trustees may from time to time in its discretion, by resolution, establish or
amend a schedule of fees for applications for waiver.
§ 330-21. General procedures.
Administrative review by the Superintendent of Buildings and Village Engineer.
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 336/441
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(1)
(2)
B.
(1)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(2)
C.
(1)
(2)
D.
Presubmission of a sketch plan to the Building Department. Prior to a formal submission to
the Building Department, the applicant shall meet with a representative of the Building
Department to review a sketch plan of the proposed subdivision. The sketch plan will show
the following:
General layout of roads, blocks and lots.
Areas of land reservations or open space.
Proposed street improvements and utilities, including sewerage, drainage, electricity, and
fire protection.
Availability of existing services, including schools.
The Superintendent of Buildings will refer the sketch plan to the Village Engineer, who will
address all engineering issues, and also refer the plan for comment to any Village department
head that is relevant to the review of the sketch plan.
Approval by the Nassau County Planning Commission. Prior to submitting its application to the
Building Department, the proposed subdivision must be approved by Nassau County, unless the
applicant provides the Building Department with a no-jurisdiction letter from the Nassau County
Planning Commission.
Formal submission.
Preliminary plat. A preliminary plat, as defined in § 330-19, will be prepared by a New York
State registered or licensed professional, which includes an architect, engineer or
professional planner. The preliminary plan shall be submitted to the Superintendent of
Buildings and the Village Engineer, who will review the plan and prepare recommendations on
all engineering issues including, but not limited to, streets and cul-de-sac dimensions,
sewage, water, drainage, electric, traffic, circulation and fire protection access that are
included in or affected by the plan. In addition, the Village Engineer will refer the proposal to
any Village department heads relevant to the review of the submission for recommendations
on all subdivision issues included in or affected by the plan.
Final plat. When required by the Planning Board, the final plat will be submitted to the
Planning Board for its approval at the completion of a public hearing. The submission of the
final plat shall include the following:
Approvals by any relevant health authorities and utility authorities.
A full set of all subdivision and construction plans.
Irrevocable offers of dedication and development agreements.
Performance bonds, as determined to be necessary by the Superintendent of Buildings.
Fees.
All submissions for subdivision approval shall be accompanied by a fee, as established by the
Board of Trustees, to compensate the Village for its costs of planning, design, environmental
and engineering review.
Such fees do not cover the cost of the Village's review of an environmental assessment form
(EAF) or an environmental impact statement (EIS), if an EIS is determined to be necessary.
The applicant shall be responsible for the total cost of any environmental review that is
determined by the Superintendent of Buildings, the Village Engineer or the Planning Board to
be necessary to meet the requirements of the State Environmental Quality Review Act
(SEQRA).[1]
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 337/441
[1]
(1)
(2)
[1]
[2]
[3]
[a]
[b]
[c]
[d]
[e]
[f]
[g]
[h]
[i]
[4]
[5]
[a]
[6]
(a)
(3)
E.
Editor's Note: See Environmental Conservation Law § 8-0101 et seq.
Required submissions for subdivision review. Required submissions to be provided, prior to
referring an application to the Planning Board for a public hearing:
An application for subdivision review shall not be accepted by the Village and shall not be
referred to the Planning Board for a public hearing until the Superintendent of Buildings
determines it to be complete, in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
Completeness. No application shall be deemed complete unless it meets the information
requirements listed in this section, and unless it is accompanied by an environmental
assessment form (EAF).
Required information.
The following information must be submitted with an application for subdivision review:
Subdivision review application on a form provided by or approved by the Building
Department.
The name and address of the applicant and licensed professionals engaged to work
on the project shall be shown. Where the applicant or owner is a corporation, this
shall include the names and addresses of all officers, directors and principal
stockholders.
Filing fee, as determined by the Board of Trustees.
Eight plot plans prepared by a licensed surveyor, engineer, or architect, which will
show the following:
For each lot, proposed setback from street line, proposed side yards, proposed
rear yard.
Proposed and existing elevations of the four corners of the subject property and
elevation of adjacent properties.
Location of driveways, curb cuts, roads and pedestrian walkways.
All means of vehicular access and egress to and from the subdivision onto
public streets, and all provisions for pedestrian access and circulation.
Any proposed streets and culs-de-sac, including the width and grade.
Location and size of any required dry well.
Location and size of all existing trees.
Location of light poles, fire hydrants, etc.
Computation of area covered by all structures to be shown on the plot plan.
Certified survey of the property to be subdivided that has been prepared no more
than one year prior to submission.
Eight copies of a radius map, which will include the following information:
Radius map from tax maps showing all lots within a radius of 200 feet from all
corners of the property in question, designating section, block, lot(s), street
addresses, size of lot and name of the owner of each parcel within said radius.
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 338/441
[b]
[7]
[8]
[9]
[10]
[11]
[12]
[13]
[14]
[15]
[16]
[17]
[18]
[19]
[20]
[21]
Existing school, zoning and special district boundaries.
If applicable, setback from the street line of all dwellings on the same side of the
street within the same block of the proposed dwelling, computation to include a
drawing of the average setback of all dwellings on the same side of the street within
the same block.
Reservations, easements and areas to be dedicated to public use, if any.
Existing site conditions, which will include the location of existing buildings and, if
applicable, water bodies, floodplains, and floodplain boundaries as determined by
the Federal Emergency Management Agency, watercourses, marshes, rock
outcrops, wooded areas, existing vegetative cover, single trees with a diameter of
eight inches or more measured three feet above the base of the trunk, and other
significant existing features on the site. This submission shall include a report on any
trees in excess of eight inches that have been removed within a twelve-month period
prior to the subdivision application, along with a tree replacement plan that conforms
to Village Engineer requirements.
If this building plot is a split-off from an existing plot with dwelling, submit eight
surveys of the existing dwelling and all structures showing side yards, front yard,
rear yard, and area of land covered.
The extent and amount of cut and fill for all disturbed areas, including before-andafter
profiles and cross section of typical development areas, parking lots and roads,
and including any erosion and sedimentation control plan, if applicable.
Lines and dimensions of all property offered, or to be offered, for dedication for
public use, indicating the purpose of all property that is proposed to be served by
deed covenant for the common use of the property owners of the development.
Any park to be developed for a playground or other recreational purpose.
Estimated project construction schedule and completion date, after all requisite
approvals have been obtained.
Identification of any federal, state or county permits required for project execution.
Record of application for approval status of all necessary permits from federal, state
and county officials.
A copy of any covenants or deed restrictions that are intended to cover all or any
part of the tract.
Existing contours with intervals of two feet or less, referred to Village of Rockville
Centre datum and showing at least one bench mark.
The location of existing water mains, culverts and drains on the property, with pipe
sizes, grades and direction of flow.
All proposed lots, easements and public and community areas; all proposed streets
with profiles indicating grading and cross sections showing width of roadway,
location and width of sidewalk and location and size of utility lines according to the
standards and specifications established or approved by the Village Engineer of the
Village of Rockville Centre.
A traffic study, if required by the Superintendent of Buildings or the Village Engineer.
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 339/441
(b)
A.
(1)
(2)
B.
C.
(1)
(2)
(3)
D.
A.
B.
Any other information that may be required by the Superintendent of Buildings or Village
Engineer.
§ 330-22. Public hearing.
Report on completed application. Every referral by the Superintendent of Buildings to the Planning
Board for action on an application for subdivision review shall be accompanied by a report
prepared by the Superintendent of Buildings, the Village Engineer and any Village department
head who has reviewed the formal submission. The report will state that the application is
complete, in accordance with the requirements of § 330-17, and shall include requirements and
recommendations with regard to the proposed plat plans, subdivision development and SEQRA
that address the information included in the required submissions set forth in § 330-21E(3).
[Amended 11-29-2004 by L.L. No. 9-2004]
Scheduling of public hearing.
Upon the provision of the report to the Planning Board, the application shall be scheduled for
a public hearing, in accordance with New York State Village Law § 7-728. The public hearing
will be scheduled to review the preliminary plat plan, in accordance with § 7-728(5).
At the conclusion of the public hearing, the Planning Board has the option to either convert
the preliminary plat plan into a final plat plan or to direct the developer to prepare a final plat
plan, for review at an additional public hearing, in accordance with § 7-728(6). Prior to
exercising its option to convert the preliminary plat plan into a final plan, the Planning Board
shall take into consideration any comments from the public and the Superintendent of
Buildings and the Village Engineer in making this determination.
Compliance with State Environmental Quality Review Act (SEQRA). For its review of any
subdivision, the Planning Board shall comply with the provisions of the State Environmental
Quality Review Act under of the Environmental Conservation Law and its implementing
regulations and shall conduct and complete its SEQRA review in coordination with commencing
the public hearing on the review of the plats, and in accordance with New York State Village Law.
[Amended 11-29-2004 by L.L. No. 9-2004]
Notice to property owners within the required radius. The public hearing will not commence unless
the applicant has provided the Secretary of the Planning Board with the following:
Names and addresses of owners, using the section, block, and lot(s) from required radius
maps at the Village Tax Office.
Proof that notice, by certified mail, return receipt requested, has been provided to all owners
within the required two-hundred-foot radius at least 10 days before the scheduled meeting
date. The notice to the owners must state the nature of the application, date of hearing,
location, and address of the property, to the satisfaction of the Building Department.
Certified mail receipts given to the Secretary of the Planning Board no later than two days
before the date of the meeting.
§ 330-23. General standards for Planning Board review.
In reviewing an application for subdivision approval, the Planning Board shall consider the
requirements and recommendations submitted by the Superintendent of Buildings and the Village
Engineer, as well as requirements and recommendations of any other Village department head.
The requirements and recommendations shall address the following issues:
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 340/441
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
(11)
(12)
(13)
(14)
A.
B.
Relationship of and compatibility with the proposed development to the surrounding
neighborhood.
Ecological considerations, including the adequacy of water supply, electrical power,
preservation of trees, preservation of topography, preservation of environmentally sensitive
land, natural resources, and tree replacement.
Adequacy of proposed sidewalks, streets and culs-de-sac, including length, width and
suitable grade, and the ability of proposed streets to facilitate and provide access, ingress,
egress and maneuverability of fire-fighting equipment and waste collection vehicles.
Adequacy of proposed streets to create a safe vehicular and pedestrian traffic system to
mitigate the impact to adjacent properties and to minimize the impact of off-site properties
from traffic generated by the development.
Adequacy of proposed streets to complement adjacent street systems.
Adequacy of proposed design of streets to ensure that they are of sufficient width and suitable
grade and suitably located to accommodate the prospective traffic.
Adequacy of storm drainage facilities, sanitary sewers systems, waste disposal facilities,
utility services, and water mains, as determined by the Village Engineer or a New York State
licensed professional acceptable to the Planning Board, to ensure that the lots that result from
the subdivision can be adequately drained without damaging neighboring properties.
Traffic impact on surrounding streets and on the Village overall to ensure adequate access,
visibility and safety.
Adequacy of on-site circulation, including but not limited to the arrangement of vehicular
traffic, ingress and egress, driveway connections to public streets, intersections, road widths
and traffic control, with satisfactory access for emergency vehicles and maintenance
equipment.
On-site pedestrian and bicyclist circulation, including but not limited to the separation of
pedestrian traffic from vehicular traffic, and locations of walkways and intersections.
Provision of parkland or recreation area.
Conformance to local comprehensive plan, local zoning and land use controls.
Compliance with County Department of Health and Department of Public Works
requirements.
Compliance with New York State Department of Transportation requirements, where
applicable.
§ 330-24. Action by resolution.
Required referrals, decisions, notice of decision, and filing of decision will be made in accordance
with New York State Village Law § 7-728(7), (9) and (11), and will include findings of fact
pertaining to the general standards set forth in § 330-23B(1) through (14).
The Planning Board shall act by written resolution to approve, disapprove, or approve with
modifications the subdivision plans. A resolution of either approval or approval with modifications
shall include Planning Board authorization to the Planning Board Chair to stamp and sign the site
plan upon the applicant's compliance with the submission requirements stated therein.
[Amended 11-29-2004 by L.L. No. 9-2004]
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 341/441
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
A.
B.
A.
B.
C.
If the Planning Board's resolution includes a requirement that modifications be incorporated in the
subdivision plan, conformance with the modifications shall be considered a condition of approval
and shall be satisfied prior to signing of the subdivision.
If the subdivision is disapproved, the Planning Board's resolution shall state specific reasons for
such decision. The reasons must be based upon professional standards and may not be based
upon generalized community opposition to a particular project.
Upon approval or approval with modifications, the Superintendent of Buildings shall issue the
appropriate permit if the project conforms to all other applicable requirements.
Upon disapproval, the Planning Board shall inform the Superintendent of Buildings, in writing, who
shall not issue a building permit for the proposed use or action.
Failure on the part of the Planning Board to act within the time limits set forth in New York State
Village Law § 7-728(6) and (7) shall be deemed to constitute approval, unless the time limit is
extended by stipulation with the applicant.
§ 330-25. Stamping of subdivision.
Submission requirements for stamping. After receiving approval from the Planning Board, with or
without modifications, the applicant shall, within six calendar months, submit prints of the
approved subdivision plan to the Planning Board for stamping and signature by the Planning
Board Chair. The subdivision plan submitted for stamping shall conform strictly to the subdivision
plan approved by the Planning Board, except that it shall further incorporate any revisions or other
modifications required by the Planning Board's resolution.
Effect of stamping by the Planning Board. Upon stamping and signature by the Planning Board
Chair, the Planning Board shall forward a copy of the approved subdivision plan to the
Superintendent of Buildings and the applicant.
§ 330-26. Performance bond, assurances or other security.
A statement shall be placed on all subdivisions approved by the Planning Board to the effect that
the owner agrees to comply with the plan and all conditions noted thereon. The installation of
required site improvements (all roads, paved areas, drainage, utilities, outdoor lighting, open
space and recreation, landscaping and screening, including planting) that affect public property
and are an integral part of the approved plan may be guaranteed by cash, performance bond or
other acceptable guaranty approved by the Board of Trustees and the Village Attorney. In the
event that a satisfactory guaranty is not provided within 90 calendar days of the date of the
resolution, the subdivision approval will be null and void. A guaranty of the improvements shall be
for 100% of the cost of improvements. The cash, performance bond or other acceptable guaranty
shall be conditioned on the property owner's or developer's completing the work as set forth on the
approved subdivision in a manner satisfactory to the Planning Board, and upon the proper
functioning of the improvements for a period of one calendar year from their completion.
In case of default, the guaranty shall be forfeited. The Village shall use the amount to complete
any incomplete portion of the said work or to make sure repairs are undertaken as are necessary
to assure the proper functioning of the improvements. If any amount of money remains after the
Village has completed the work, any excess money will be returned to the surety or the person
putting up the required deposit. The installation of all improvements shall be under the direct
supervision of a New York State registered or licensed professional.
To obtain a building permit, an applicant shall provide to the Superintendent of Buildings proof of
acceptance of the guaranty by the Village Board. No part of the guaranty shall be released until all
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 342/441
A.
B.
C.
D.
A.
B.
of the requirements of subdivision approval have been met, including the construction and
completion of all site improvements, and their inspection and approval by the Village.
§ 330-27. Reservation of parkland on subdivision plats containing
residential units.
[Amended 11-29-2004 by L.L. No. 9-2004]
Legislative intent. The Village of Rockville Centre (Village) finds that the provision of parkland and
recreation facilities in conjunction with the development of multifamily uses or new homes is
necessary to meet the needs of its residents. Where it is not practical for a particular development
to provide parkland and recreational facilities, it is in the best interest of the Village and its
residents to require funds to be paid to the Village to be used exclusively for parks, playgrounds or
recreation facilities, including the acquisition of property.
Before the Planning Board may approve a subdivision, the subdivision plan shall also show, when
required by such Board, a park or parks suitably located for playground or other recreational
facilities.
Land for park, playground or other recreational facilities may not be required until the Planning
Board has made a finding that a proper case exists for requiring that a park or parks be suitably
located for playgrounds or other recreation facilities within the Village. Such findings shall include
an evaluation of the present and anticipated future needs for park and recreation facilities in the
Village based on projected population growth to which the particular subdivision will contribute.
In the event the Planning Board makes a finding pursuant to § 330-27C that the proposed
subdivision presents a proper case for requiring a park or parks suitably located for playgrounds or
other recreation purposes, but that a suitable park or parks of adequate size cannot be properly
located on such subdivision, the Planning Board may require a sum of money in lieu thereof, to be
established by the Village Board of Trustees. In making such determination of suitability, the
Planning Board shall assess the size and suitability of land shown on the subdivision that could be
possible locations for park or recreational facilities, as well as practical factors, including whether
there is a need for additional facilities in the immediate neighborhood or a need for improvements
to or the acquisition of parks, playgrounds or other recreational purposes that may be used by the
population of the particular subdivision. Any fee required by the Planning Board in lieu of land for
park, playground or other recreation purposes or facilities pursuant to this section shall be
deposited into a trust fund to be used by the Village exclusively for park, playground and other
recreational purposes, including the acquisition of property.
§ 330-28. Fees; payment or reimbursement of certain costs;
inspections.
[Amended 11-29-2004 by L.L. No. 9-2004; 10-27-2008 by L.L. No. 11-2008]
The fee for any subdivision application to the Planning Board pursuant to the provisions of this
chapter shall be at the level fixed from time to time by resolution of the Board of Trustees of the
Village of Rockville Centre.
In addition to any fees established pursuant to Subsection A hereof, the fee for subdivision
applications to the Planning Board also shall include payment or reimbursement of reasonable
costs incurred by the Planning Board for private engineering, environmental, planning and/or
architectural consultants, or other private consulting services reasonably deemed necessary by
the Planning Board, and other extraordinary expenses in connection with the review of a proposed
subdivision. Such reimbursable costs shall be in addition to any other fees required. The applicant
shall be required to provide an escrow deposit account at any time on or after the receipt of the
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 343/441
(1)
(2)
(3)
C.
D.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
A.
application, in an amount sufficient to cover the anticipated costs for such consultant review and
other expenses.
The fees to be paid by the applicant shall also include payment or reimbursement of the following
costs:
Publication of legal notices for public hearings, or other required legal notices;
Stenographic minutes and transcription of meetings and hearings;
Any fees or costs for environmental review conducted pursuant to the State Environmental
Quality Review Act or the regulations adopted pursuant thereto.
Inspection of improvements. The Superintendent of Buildings shall be responsible for the overall
inspection of site improvements, including coordination with the Village Engineer and other local
officials and agencies as may be appropriate. Reasonable expenses incurred by the Village for
inspections by the designated Village Engineer or other appropriate professionals shall, in addition
to fees and costs associated with subdivision review, be reimbursed to the Village by the applicant
in accordance with the fee schedule established by the Board of Trustees.
Article IV. Special Permits
[Added 4-28-2008 by L.L. No. 3-2008]
§ 330-29. Special permits.
Wherever the Planning Board is vested with authority to issue a special permit pursuant to this Code,
the procedures and general standards for review of such applications shall be the same as those
provided in this chapter with respect to subdivision review, except where the Planning Board may
determine otherwise for good cause and upon resolution stating the reasons for such exceptions.
§ 330-30. Special permits for multifamily uses in the Business C
or C2 Districts.
Unless otherwise determined by the Planning Board as provided in Subsection B of this section,
any multifamily use in the Business C or C2 Districts for which a special permit is granted shall
conform to the following conditions:
There shall not be more than four dwelling units in any one building;
No off-street parking on the site shall be located in the front or side yard setback areas, nor in
or underneath any building or portion of a building used for residential occupancy;
All off-street parking on the site shall be located behind the front building lines;
No building shall be located within a distance of 10 feet of any other building;
There shall be a minimum of two parking spaces on site for each residential unit;
On-site parking may be outdoors or enclosed, but any enclosed off-street parking shall be in a
structure detached from any residential structure;
Each residential building shall be served by its own driveway, and the site plan shall include
landscaping and planting buffers between driveways and on the nondriveway side of the
property, as approved by the Planning Board;
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 344/441
(8)
B.
A.
B.
All front entrances to residential buildings shall face the street, and the Building Department
shall determine which street the entrances are required to face in the event of any dispute.
In a proper case, and for good cause shown, the Planning Board may waive one or more of the
requirements of Subsection A of this section, provided that any such determination by the
Planning Board shall state the reasons for such action, in written form.
Chapter 335. Signs and Posting Bills
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Trustees of the Village of Rockville Centre as indicated in article
histories. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Awnings — See Ch. 96.
Building code — See Ch. 112.
Businesses — See Ch. 138.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 287.
Zoning — See Ch. 340.
Article I. Signs
[Adopted 12-13-1982 by L.L. No. 5-1982]
§ 335-1. Legislative intent.
The purpose of this article is to promote and protect the public health, welfare and safety by
regulating existing and proposed outdoor advertising signs, outdoor signs of all types and interior
window signs. It is intended to protect property values, create a more attractive economic and
business climate, enhance and protect the physical appearance of the community, preserve the
scenic and natural beauty and provide a more enjoyable and pleasing community. It is further
intended to reduce sign clutter or advertising distractions and obstructions that may contribute to
traffic accidents, reduce hazards that may be caused by signs overhanging or projecting over
public rights-of-way, provide more open space and curb the deterioration of natural beauty and
community environment.
The provisions of this article shall govern the construction, erection, alteration, repair and
maintenance of all signs together with their appurtenant and auxiliary devices.
§ 335-2. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following words and phrases shall have the following meanings:
ACCESSORY SIGN
Any sign related to a business or profession conducted upon or to a commodity or service sold or
offered upon or from the premises where such sign is located.
ANIMATED SIGN
Any sign which is designed and constructed to give its message through a sequence of
progressive changes of parts (including sequins or similar devices) or lights or degree of reflection
or lighting, excluding time and temperature signs.
APPLICANT
A person making an application for a permit for a sign or signs.
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 345/441
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
AWNING
A roof-like retractable covering of fabric, cloth or other material with or without a frame and
attached to or supported from a building.
BANNER
A piece of fabric, cloth or other material bearing an advertisement, design, motto, greeting or
slogan hung with no other backing, and used for the purpose of attracting attention or as part of an
advertising display.
BILLBOARD
Any sign unrelated to a business or profession conducted, or to a commodity or service sold or
offered, upon or from the premises where such sign is located; or bearing a noncommercial
message of an owner who does not conduct a business or profession at the location of said sign.
BUSINESS DISTRICTS
Areas located wholly or partly within the following use districts, as defined in Chapter 340 of this
Code:
Business AAA.
Business AA.
Business A.
Business B.
Urban Renewal Commercial or Light Manufacturing A.
Urban Renewal Recreational and Limited Commercial.
ERECT
To build, construct, alter, display, relocate, attach, hang, place, suspend or affix any sign.
FREESTANDING SIGN
A sign supported by uprights or braces in or upon the ground and not attached to any part of a
building.
FACE OF BUILDING
The outer surface of a building which is visible from any private or public street, highway or public
parking field.
ILLUMINATED SIGN
Any sign illuminated by electricity, gas or other man-made light, including reflective or
phosphorescent light.
INTERIOR SIGN
Any sign located on the inside of a window or within three feet of the inside of a display window or
other opening in a building or other enclosed structure which is visible from the exterior through
such window or other opening intended to attract the attention of the public. This term does not
include merchandise located in a window.
LIGHTING DEVICE
Any light, string of lights or group of lights located or arranged so as to cast illumination on a sign.
MANSARD ROOF
A roof having two slopes on all sides, the lower one being steeper than the upper one.
MARQUEE SIGN
A sign attached to a marquee, canopy or other covering structure (other than an awning)
projecting from and supported by the building.
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 346/441
A.
B.
OWNER
Person that owns the sign or signs.
PENNANT
Any long, narrow, usually triangular flag, fabric, streamer cloth or other material. As used in this
definition, the word "pennant" shall include any materials commonly known as "pennants" used in
association with automobile dealerships.
[Added 1-21-1985 by L.L. No. 3-1985]
PERSON
Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company, institution or organization of any
kind.
PORTABLE SIGN
A sign not attached to the ground or to any permanent structure. This includes A-frame- and
sandwich-board-type signs.
POLITICAL SIGN
Any sign which indicates the name, cause or affiliation of anyone seeking public office, or which
indicates any issue for which a public election is scheduled to be held.
POLE SIGN
A freestanding sign supported by a single pole without guys, braces or other supporting
framework.
PROJECTING SIGN
A sign designed to project beyond any face of a building and perpendicular to it.
RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
Areas not within a business district as defined herein.
ROOF SIGN
A sign which is erected, constructed or maintained on, above or as part of the roof of any building.
This includes signs on any portion of a mansard roof but shall not include wall signs attached to a
parapet.
SIGN
Any message attached to any structure or part thereof or painted or represented thereon, which
shall display or include any letter, word, model, banner, flag, pennant, insignia, device or
representation used as or which is in the nature of an announcement, direction or advertisement.
The word "sign" includes the words billboard, freestanding sign, interior sign, as well as any
message, neon tube or string, group or arrangement of lights, or other device, material hung,
outlining, painted upon or attached to part of a building or lot, but does not include flag, pennant or
insignia of any nation, state, city or other governmental unit.
SIGN AREA
The area of a sign to be measured as follows:
Where such sign is on a plate, within a frame or is outlined, all of the area of such plate or
area within such frame or outline shall be included.
Where the sign consists of individual letters, designs, figures or symbols engraved, painted or
in any way placed, affixed or attached to any part of the exterior of a building or structure or
any part thereof, the area shall be considered to be that of the smallest geometric shape
which encompasses all of the letters, designs, figures or symbols.
SUPERINTENDENT
Superintendent of Buildings of the Village of Rockville Centre.
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 347/441
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
SURFBOARD SIGN
A structure or combination of materials which constitutes a sign pursuant to the definition of "sign"
in this Code, from which any materials or structure other than a permitted support structure extend
or protrude from the principal plane of the sign more than 12 inches.
[Added 12-3-2012 by L.L. No. 6-2012]
TEMPORARY SIGN
A sign which is designed to advertise or announce a particular event or series of events, to solicit
political support or to announce the availability for sale of a particular item or items or the offer of
services which will be available for a limited period.
TRAILER SIGN
Any sign mounted on a vehicle normally licensed by the State of New York or other state as a
trailer and used for advertising or promotional purposes.
WALL SIGN
A sign which is placed, affixed or attached to a building and is parallel to the face of the building
and does not extend higher than the lowest elevation of the roof; provided, however, that wall
signs attached to a parapet may extend not more than four feet higher than the lowest elevation of
the roof.
§ 335-3. Exemptions.
The following signs shall be exempt from the provisions of this chapter except as may be expressly
regulated elsewhere in this article:
Construction signs. One construction sign per construction project not exceeding eight square feet
in sign area in residential districts or 32 square feet in business districts, provided that such signs
shall be erected no more than 30 days prior to the beginning of construction for which a building
permit has been issued, shall be confined to the site of construction, and shall be removed within
30 days after completion of construction and prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy.
Home improvement contractor signs limited to a maximum of six square feet on any individual
property, provided that the sign is displayed only during the actual project.
Directional or instructional signs. Signs which provide direction or instruction and are located
entirely on the property to which they pertain and do not exceed four square feet in area; signs
identifying rest rooms, public telephones, walkways, or signs providing direction, such as parking
lot entrances and exits and those of a similar nature, provided that there is no advertising on said
sign.
The flags, emblems or insignia of any nation, governmental subdivision, religious or fraternal
organization or corporation.
Governmental signs for control of traffic and other regulatory purposes, street signs, danger signs,
railroad crossing signs, and signs of public service companies indicating danger and aids to
service or safety which are erected by or on the order of a public officer in the performance of his
public duty.
Holiday decoration signs of a primarily decorative nature, clearly incidental and customary and
commonly associated with any national, local or religious holidays. Said signs shall not be erected
more than 90 days prior to the holiday and shall be removed within 30 days after the holiday.
Residential name plates.
Professional identification sign.
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 348/441
I.
J.
K.
L.
M.
N.
O.
P.
Q.
R.
S.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
Signs located within the interior of any building or within an enclosed lobby or court of any
building, and signs for and located within the inner or outer lobby, court or entrance of any theater
not intended for view from outside the structure. Such signs shall comply with the structural,
electrical and material specifications as set forth in this article.
Memorial signs or tablets, names of buildings and date of erection when cut into any masonry
surface or inlaid so as to be part of the building or when constructed of bronze or other
incombustible material.
Notice bulletin boards not over 32 square feet in area for public, charitable, religious or nonprofit
medical or educational institutions where the same are located on the premises of said institution.
Plaques or nameplate signs not more than four square feet in area which are fastened directly to
the building.
Official notices posted by public officers or employees in the performance of the duties, including
any notice or advertisement required by law in any legal proceeding.
Real estate signs. Said signs shall not be illuminated and shall be removed within seven days
after sale, rental or lease has been effectuated.
Symbols or insignia. Religious symbols, commemorative plaques of recognized historical agencies
or identification emblems of religious organizations, fraternal organizations or historical agencies.
Signs warning the public of the existence of danger to be removed upon the elimination of the
danger. Said signs shall not contain any advertising material but may contain information
identifying the person who erected said sign.
Barber pole limited to eight feet in height from the ground.
Sign indicating hours of business, not exceeding three square feet may be posted on the window
surface on a permanent basis and shall not be counted toward maximum permitted signage.
Time and temperature signs limited to 12 square feet per side and containing no advertising
material.
§ 335-4. Prohibitions.
[Amended 1-21-1985 by L.L. No. 3-1985; 5-5-1986 by L.L. No. 3-1986; 12-3-2012 by L.L. No. 6-2012;
2-4-2015 by L.L. No. 3-2015]
Notwithstanding any other provisions of this article, the following signs are prohibited:
A-frame signs, sandwich-board sidewalk or curb signs which create sidewalk obstruction, or
similar signs worn or borne by any person.
Trailer signs.
Signs painted directly on a wall.
Animated and moving signs, except for time and temperature signs.
Banners, except as provided in § 335-7D.
Billboards.
Pennants, provided, however, that pennants shall be permitted under the following conditions:
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 349/441
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
H.
(1)
(2)
A.
(1)
(2)
B.
The pennants are confined within the lot lines of the premises or business they are
advertising or promoting.
The exterior or perimeter poles to which the pennants are affixed or strung are a minimum of
35 feet apart.
The pennants may only be affixed or strung between the exterior or perimeter poles and a
center or interior pole.
The pennants shall not be affixed or strung between exterior or perimeter poles.
The pennants shall be properly maintained.
Pennants were in exterior use on the premises within the period of one year prior to the
effective date of this article.
All pennants shall be prohibited two years from the effective date of this article.
Surfboard signs.
§ 335-5. Business districts.
General size and area.
No sign or combination of signs for any single use on or in a structure in a business district
shall exceed an area equal to three square feet for each foot of linear length of the street
frontage of the structure in which such use is located or a maximum of 75 square feet,
whichever is less. No such sign shall have a height greater than three feet. In computing the
permitted sign area for a premises the area of permanent interior signs greater than 10
square feet shall be added to the area of any exterior signs in computing the permitted square
footage of signs for a building. Where a single use occupies a building with a street frontage
greater than 75 feet, the permitted sign area shall be increased one square foot for each
linear foot of frontage over 75 feet up to a maximum of 110 square feet of permitted sign area.
Where there are two or more occupants occupying a portion of the first floor frontage of a
building, each such occupant shall be entitled to a sign based upon that portion of the
frontage so occupied.
Where multiple occupants share a common sign, the maximum sign area shall be limited as if
there were a single occupant of the building or portion of the building occupied by those
sharing the sign. Where a building has a rear entrance open to the public on a public way or
municipal parking field or private parking area that is available for public use, one wall sign
shall be permitted on said rear wall. The permitted area of said sign shall be computed in the
same manner as signs on the primary frontage. Where a building is on a corner and a single
use occupies both frontages, signs may be permitted on each frontage in accordance with the
amount of signage permitted for each frontage.
Wall signs.
Wall signs shall be attached to the face of the building in a plane parallel to such face, and
shall not extend nor project more than 12 inches over the sidewalk, street or highway, and
shall not extend higher than the parapet in the case of a one-story building. In the case of
buildings higher than one story, wall signs shall not extend above the sill of any windows of
the second story or more than 15 feet above the outside grade, whichever is lower, except as
provided for herein.
Wall signs shall be permitted on floors above the first story of a building, provided that:
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 350/441
(a)
(b)
(a)
(b)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
C.
(1)
(2)
D.
E.
(1)
(2)
(3)
F.
The business displaying the sign is not on the ground floor.
Sign area shall not exceed 24 square feet and a maximum height of two feet.
Signage on upper floors above the second floor shall be permitted, provided that:
Said sign shall be inside a window.
Said sign shall not cover more than 20% of the window area.
Wall signs shall not cover any part of a wall opening, including doors, fire escapes and
windows, nor project or extend beyond any end of the wall to which it is attached.
One wall sign not exceeding 30 square feet for each street frontage shall be permitted on
manufacturing or other uses not selling to or serving retail customers.
A wall sign shall not be placed or constructed on the same face of a building as a fixed
awning sign, per § 96-5D of this Code.
[Added 5-20-1991 by L.L. No. 4-1991]
Marquee signs. Theaters, playhouses and other culturally oriented performing arts establishments
shall be permitted one marquee, the length of which shall not be longer than the front of the
building in which such establishment is located. Said marquee shall not extend out from the
building line further than a point two feet back of the street curbline in front of the building and the
maximum height shall not exceed five feet. No sign shall be permitted on any marquee, other than
signs built into and forming a part of the structure of the marquee which signs shall not exceed the
height of four feet and shall not extend beyond the edge of the marquee. Changeable sign copy
may be included as part of the built-in signage permit on the marquee. The area of any sign on a
marquee shall not be considered in computing permitted sign for the entire structure.
Permanent interior signs.
In no case shall a permanent interior sign cover more than 30% of the window area, provided
that if there are more than 150 square feet of window area, said interior sign shall be limited
to no more than 15% of the window area.
Eighty percent of permanent interior signage exceeding 10 square feet in area shall be
counted as part of the maximum sign area permitted for a particular use.
Freestanding signs. Freestanding signs shall be permitted only in business districts (except as
indicated in § 335-8C), provided that the building or use served by the sign is set back at least 10
feet from the front property line. Only one such sign shall be permitted for any building and shall
be set back so that no part of such sign extends beyond the property line of the lot on which the
building is located. The top of such sign shall be no higher than 15 feet from the ground. Such sign
may have two faces, each of which may contain advertising. Such sign shall not contain more than
24 square feet per face. The location and illumination of such sign shall not block the view of or
otherwise interfere with official traffic signs and signals.
Roof signs. Roof signs shall be permitted only on those buildings within business districts in
accordance with the following conditions:
Only one such sign shall be permitted on any building, provided that such sign may contain
two faces.
The top of such sign shall not be more than 12 feet above the lowest elevation of the roof.
The area of such sign shall not exceed 32 square feet per sign face.
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 351/441
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
G.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
H.
Such signs shall be set back a minimum of three feet from the exterior wall of the building on
which the sign is located. Where roof parapets exist, a roof sign shall be set back a minimum
of three feet from the rear of all roof parapet walls.
Roof signs shall have a clear space of a minimum of three feet and a maximum of five feet
between the bottom of the sign and the roof below the sign or the top of the parapet wall,
whichever is higher. In no event shall the top of such sign be more than 12 feet above the
lowest elevation of the roof.
All such roof signs shall be designed to withstand a minimum horizontal wind pressure as
shown in the following table, applied to the projected specified area, allowing for wind from
any direction.
Height From Ground to Top of
Sign
(feet)
Wind Pressure
(pounds per square feet)
Solid Signs Open Signs
Up to 30 25 15
31 through 50 35 25
51 through 99 42 30
100 through 199 49 35
All roof signs shall be designed according to general accepted engineering practice to
withstand wind pressure as specified in Subsection E(6). The loads shall be distributed to the
structural members of the building in such a way that these members will not be overstressed.
The seal and certification of a professional engineer or registered architect licensed by the
State of New York must be affixed to design specifications for each roof sign submitted with
the application. The sign shall be recertified by a licensed professional engineer or registered
architect every 10 years.
Awning signs. Signs not exceeding six inches in height, painted, applied, affixed or attached to the
front valance of a retractable awning facing a public street shall be permitted. Such sign shall not
be counted as part of the maximum permitted sign area. It shall not be necessary to affix a sign
permit number to an awning sign. No sign may be hung from an awning.
Projecting signs. Projecting signs shall be permitted, provided that:
[Amended 2-4-2015 by L.L. No. 3-2015]
Such sign does not overhang or extend beyond the property line of a building lot.
The surface area of such sign may not exceed nine square feet or a maximum of 20% of the
permitted sign area of a building, whichever is less.
The height from the ground level to the bottom of the sign shall be not less than seven feet,
and the sign may not project more than 40 inches from the building.
Projecting signs may be illuminated or lighted, provided that the light source is not visible, and
all electric wiring is concealed, unless the Superintendent determines otherwise. The
Superintendent may permit external lighting if the source of light is not part of the sign.
Internally lit signs shall not be permitted. Flashing or intermittent lighting shall not be
permitted. Only white lighting shall be permitted.
Projecting signs may be double faced.
The sign area of a projecting sign shall be counted as part of the permitted sign area.
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 352/441
(7)
(8)
(9)
A.
B.
C.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
A.
B.
C.
(1)
D.
Projecting signs shall not interfere with the view of any adjacent signs.
Projecting signs shall not extend above the roofline or parapet, whichever is higher.
Projecting signs, supports and brackets shall comply with all applicable design codes and
standards in effect at any time the sign is maintained.
§ 335-6. Residential districts.
Dwellings for four or more families may have displayed nonilluminated signs identifying the
premises, having an aggregate total face area of not more than 12 square feet and located so that
no portion of the sign overhangs or extends beyond the property line of the dwelling.
Nonresidential uses permitted pursuant to Chapter 340 of this Code may have displayed
nonilluminated signs pertaining to the use of property.
Political signs are permitted, provided that they are removed within 10 days after the election to
which they pertain.
§ 335-7. Temporary signs and banners.
The Superintendent may grant permission for the maintenance of one or more temporary signs to
a charitable, political or nonprofit organization for a period not to exceed 75 days. Any such
permitted signs shall be installed in accordance with the following provisions:
Such sign shall not be erected earlier than 75 days prior to the event of which it gives notice
and shall be removed within 10 days after such event.
Such sign shall not exceed 32 square feet in area or four feet in height.
Such sign shall not be located on trees, fences, utility poles or light standards.
Such sign shall not be a roof sign.
Only one such sign shall be permitted on a lot.
Such signs shall be permitted only in business districts.
In the event that any such sign is not removed within the allowed time period, the
Superintendent shall cause to be removed those signs which remain. The applicant will be
charged the cost of such removal.
A temporary sign announcing anticipated occupancy of a building site shall be permitted for a
period not to exceed three months without the Superintendent's review, provided that such sign
shall not exceed 16 square feet if it is freestanding and shall not exceed the maximum permitted
sign area for a building if it is affixed to a building.
A temporary interior sign or combination of temporary interior signs shall not cover more than 50%
of each window through or upon which it is affixed, displayed or painted. Such percentage of
window coverage shall be reduced by the percentage of window coverage of any permanent
interior sign. (See § 335-5D.) Permitted temporary interior signs are allowed without permit.
Banners shall be allowed in any district without permit in accordance with the following:
A banner shall be removed within two weeks of its erection or hanging.
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 353/441
(2)
E.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
A.
(1)
B.
In business districts, banners shall comply with § 335-8A of this chapter.
No sign prohibited pursuant to § 335-4 of this Code may be permitted as a temporary sign.
[Added 12-3-2012 by L.L. No. 6-2012]
§ 335-8. Provisions applicable to all districts.
[Amended 2-4-2015 by L.L. No. 3-2015]
No sign shall contain information regarding a business, product or service not conducted at or
available from the premises at which the sign is located; provided, however, that nothing herein
shall be construed as limiting an owner of a sign or premises from displaying upon said sign any
noncommercial message whether or not said noncommercial message bears any relationship to
any business, product or service conducted or available at the premises.
Every illuminated sign or lighting device shall employ only lights emitting a light of constant
intensity, and no sign shall be illuminated by or contain flashing, intermittent, rotating or moving
light or lights. Permanent signs illuminated from outside the boundaries of the sign shall not be
permitted unless the direct beam or glare is not visible from any abutting right-of-way or any
adjacent property. In no event shall an illuminated sign or lighting device be so placed or directed
so as to permit the beams and illumination therefrom to be directed or beamed upon a public
street, highway, sidewalk or adjacent premises so as to cause glare or reflection that may
constitute a traffic hazard or nuisance.
A freestanding sign to identify the occupants of a medical or professional office building or
religious institution shall be allowed in any district at the property where such uses are permitted
under Chapter 340 of this Code. Said sign may be erected with two poles, provided that all other
requirements of this section are satisfied.
A sign shall not utilize more than four colors. Black and white shall be considered as colors.
A sign shall not be placed in a position that will obstruct or impair vision or interfere with
pedestrian or vehicular traffic or in any manner create a hazard or disturbance to health, safety or
welfare of the public.
A sign shall not utilize the colors red, yellow or green where, in the judgment of the Commissioner
of Police and/or the Superintendent of Buildings of the Village of Rockville Centre, a potential
safety hazard would be created due to confusion or a conflict with traffic control devices.
§ 335-9. Permit procedure.
Except for signs covered in §§ 335-7B, C and D, 335-6C and 335-3 herein, it shall be unlawful for
any person to erect, alter, paint with a new message, redesign, relocate, reconstruct or maintain,
or cause to be erected, altered, painted with a new message, redesigned, relocated, reconstructed
and maintained any sign, without first having obtained a permit therefor from the Superintendent.
The fee for said permit shall be at the level fixed from time to time by resolution of the Board of
Trustees.
The following two operations shall not require a sign permit:
Replacing copy. The changing of the advertising or message on an approved sign which is
specifically designed for the use of replaceable copy, provided that the sign refers to the same
use or activity in accordance with this article and that the letters are legible in the particular
circumstances.
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 354/441
(2)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
(11)
(12)
C.
D.
E.
A.
Maintenance. Painting, repainting, cleaning and other normal maintenance and repair of a
sign or a sign structure unless a structural change is made.
An application for a sign permit shall be made on a form provided by the Superintendent, which
application shall include and be accompanied by:
Name, home and business address and telephone numbers of the applicant.
Name, business address, telephone number and certificate of insurance of the sign installer in
an amount to be determined by the Superintendent.
Verified certification from the sign installer that the sign will be properly secured to the building
or structure in a safe manner.
Location of building, structure or land to which or upon which the sign is to be erected.
Exact dimensions of the sign.
The specific details of the construction of the sign showing the lettering and/or pictorial matter
composing the sign, the position of lighting or other extraneous devices on the sign and a
detailed sketch of the location of the sign showing the position in relation to buildings or
structures within 100 feet of the sign and to any private or public road or highway.
Sketches drawn to scale and supporting information indicating the location of the sign on the
building, colors, types of lettering or other graphic representation and materials to be used,
electrical or other mechanical equipment, and details of its attachment and hanging. Samples
of materials shall accompany the application when required by the Superintendent.
The written consent of the owner of the property upon which such sign is to be erected and
maintained.
An agreement on the part of the applicant and the owner of the premises that such applicant
and owner shall hold harmless the Village from any liability for or by reason of any injury to
person or property as a result of negligence or other cause or otherwise on the part of the
Village, applicant, owner or any of them in connection with said sign, and authorizing and
permitting the Village to remove the sign in case it shall be abandoned or become unsafe.
The permit fee as set by resolution of the Board of Trustees.
A certificate of liability insurance of the sign installer, covering the applicant in an amount as
determined by the Superintendent.
Such other pertinent information as the Superintendent may reasonably require.
Every sign requiring a permit shall bear the Village of Rockville Centre permit number in letters of
no less than 1 1/4 inches on the lower left corner of the sign (e.g., RVC No. 4567).
Sign permits shall be renewed every two years.
§ 335-10. Compliance and enforcement.
If any sign regulated herein is unsafe or insecure or is a menace to the public or has been erected
in violation of the provisions of this article as determined by the Superintendent, the
Superintendent shall give written notice to the permittee to either conform or remove the sign. If
the permittee fails to remove or alter the sign so as to comply with the standards herein set forth
within 14 days after such notice, the permit for such sign shall be withdrawn and such sign may be
removed by the Superintendent or his authorized agent at the expense of the permittee or owner
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 355/441
B.
C.
(1)
(2)
D.
(1)
(2)
E.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(1)
(2)
F.
of the property on which it is located. The Superintendent shall cause any sign which is an
immediate peril to persons or property to be removed summarily and without notice.
Any sign, sign structure or portion thereof now or hereafter existing which no longer advertises a
bona fide business conducted or a product available for purchase by the public on the premises
shall be removed by the owner, agent or person having the beneficial use of the building or
structure upon which such sign may be found within 30 days after written notification from the
Superintendent, and, upon failure to comply with such notice within the time specified in such
order, the Superintendent is hereby authorized to cause removal of such sign, and the expense of
said removal when certified by said Superintendent to the Village Board, shall be paid by the
Village, and such amount shall thereupon be and become a lien upon the premises in question
and shall be levied, corrected, enforced and collected in the same manner and under the same
penalties as an assessment for a public improvement. In the case where an existing contract
between an owner of a sign and owner of the land shall have restricted or limited the responsibility
of the landowner for removal of the sign the owner or stockholder of any corporation that owns the
sign shall not be eligible for any future permit until said lien is satisfied.
All signs shall be maintained in their original and approved condition in terms of structural integrity
and quality of appearance. The Superintendent shall withdraw the permit for any sign that is not
properly maintained, causing such sign to become nonconforming.
After the enactment of this article, the Superintendent shall, as soon as practicable, survey the
Village for signs which do not conform to the requirements of this article. Upon determination that
a sign is nonconforming, the Superintendent shall use reasonable efforts to so notify either
personally or in writing the user or owner of the property on which the sign is located of the
following:
The classification of a sign as nonconforming and the basis thereof.
Whether the sign is eligible for characterization as legally nonconforming.
Any sign within the Village limits on the date of adoption of this article which does not conform with
the provisions of this article shall be considered a legal nonconforming sign, provided that it meets
the following requirements:
The sign was covered by a sign permit or variance on the date of adoption of this article if one
was required under applicable law; or
If no sign permit was required under applicable laws for the sign in question, the sign was in
all respects in compliance with applicable law on the date of adoption of this article.
Abandonment or termination of legal nonconforming status.
[Amended 11-18-1991 by L.L. No. 8-1991; 11-27-1995 by L.L. No. 11-1995]
The legal nonconforming status of a sign shall considered abandoned if:
The sign is altered in any way in structure, including size, shape or dimensions.
The sign is relocated to a position not in compliance with the requirements of this
chapter.
The sign is replaced.
Fifteen years have elapsed from the adoption of this article.
In the event of Subsection F(1)(a), (b), (c) or (d), the sign shall be immediately brought into
compliance with this article with a new permit secured therefore, or shall be removed. If not
removed, such sign shall be deemed to be an abandoned sign and shall be disposed of in
accordance with the provisions of § 335-10B of this article.
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 356/441
G.
[1]
H.
I.
Nothing in this section shall relieve the owner or user of a legal nonconforming sign or owner of
the property on which the legal nonconforming sign is located from the provisions of this article
regarding safety, maintenance and repair of signs; provided, however, that any repainting,
cleaning and any other normal maintenance or repair of the sign or sign structure shall not modify
the sign structure in any way.
Failure to comply with any of the provisions of this article shall be deemed a violation, and the
violator shall be liable to a fine in accordance with general penalty provisions of the Rockville
Centre Code,[1] and each day such violation continues shall constitute a separate violation.
Editor's Note: See Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I, § 1-2.
Any surfboard sign lawfully in existence on the effective date of this legislation shall be permitted
to continue as a legal nonconforming use, except that such legal nonconforming status shall
terminate by amortization on June 1, 2013, and shall be removed. Any person who shall cause or
permit the maintenance of any such surfboard sign on or after June 1, 2013, shall be guilty of a
violation of this section.
[Added 12-3-2012 by L.L. No. 6-2012]
Article II. Posting Bills
[Adopted 2-22-1971 by L.L. No. 1-1971 as Ch. 104, Art. II, of the 1971 Code]
§ 335-11. Prohibition.
No person or persons shall placard with show bills, handbills, posters or any printed or written notice or
notices or advertisement of any kind whatsoever or attach anything whatsoever of such character to
any tree, pump, hydrant, telegraph, telephone or electric light pole within the Village, except legal
notices and notices and rules made, adopted or enacted by the Board of Trustees of said Village and
posted by order of said Board.
§ 335-12. Penalties for offenses.
Any person or persons violating this article shall be liable for and forfeit and pay a penalty of $10 for
each violation thereof, for the use of said Village. Any violation of this article or any part thereof shall
constitute disorderly conduct, and any person violating this article or any part thereof shall be and is
hereby declared a disorderly person.
Article III. Real Estate Signs
[Adopted 1-23-1989 by L.L. No. 2-1989]
§ 335-13. Legislative intent.
The Board of Trustees of the Village of Rockville Centre declares and finds it to be in the public interest
and for the public good to preserve the property values and residential districts and for other aesthetic
considerations to provide for the regulation of the installation of real estate signs within the residential
districts of the Village of Rockville Centre.
§ 335-14. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following words and phrases shall have the following meanings:
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 357/441
A.
B.
C.
D.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
REAL ESTATE SIGN
A sign which is used to announce or indicate that the property upon which it is located, rests, sets,
or is attached is available for sale, lease or rent. Notwithstanding any other provision of this
chapter, one real estate sign used for one or more of the foregoing purposes, located on the
property which is available for sale, lease or rent only during a period of time, not to exceed eight
consecutive hours, during which that property is open for public viewing, and which displays only
the words “Open House” and/or a directional arrow, shall be allowed without complying with the
permit requirements of this chapter.
[Amended 12-4-2006 by L.L. No. 14-2006]
RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
Areas located wholly or in part within the following use districts, as defined in Chapter 340, Zoning,
of this Code:
Residence A
Residence B
Residence C
Residence A-M
SIGN
A publicly displayed board or placard displaying information.
§ 335-15. Permit required.
No real estate sign shall be placed or maintained in public view within the residential districts until
a permit has been duly issued upon application therefor.
No more than one real estate sign permit may be in effect at any one time for a single piece of
property.
The Building Department shall require that the application for a permit indicate the proposed
location of the real estate sign, which shall in no case be further than four feet from the dwelling or
building.
The Building Department shall require that the real estate sign contain only the words "FOR
SALE" or "FOR LEASE" or "FOR RENT" and, at the option of the applicant, the word "owner" or
"broker" and a telephone number.
Permits shall expire 60 days following the date of issuance but may be renewed upon application
to the Building Official. The duration of all real sign permits may be changed from time to time by
resolution of the Board of Trustees.
§ 335-16. Fee.
The fee for a permit for the placement of a real estate sign upon property within the residential districts
shall be at a level fixed from time to time by resolution of the Board of Trustees. Said fee shall be
submitted by applicant at the time the application is presented to the Building Department.
§ 335-17. Size of real estate signs.
No real estate sign that is larger than three square feet in area may be placed in a residential district.
The Building Official may order the immediate removal of any real estate sign that exceeds three
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 358/441
A.
B.
square feet in area.
§ 335-18. Removal of real estate signs.
Real estate signs must be removed from property in the residential districts within 24 hours of the
transfer of the title to the property or the giving of possession of the property, whichever event first
occurs.
Any real estate sign which is not in conformity with Village Code § 335-17, above, may be
removed by the Building Official without notice to the property owner or owner of the real estate
sign.
§ 335-19. Penalties for offenses.
For each and every failure to comply with the provisions of this article, the owner of the real property
on which the real estate sign is placed and the person or persons who placed or assisted in the
placement of the real estate sign on that property in a manner that is not in compliance with this article
shall be guilty of a violation against this article, which violation shall be punishable by a fine not to
exceed $250 or imprisonment for a period not to exceed 15 days, or both. Each day's continued
violation shall constitute a separate and distinct additional violation.
§ 335-20. Enforcement.
It shall be the duty of the Building Official, and he is hereby given the power and authority to enforce
the provisions of this article.
Chapter 340. Zoning
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Trustees of the Village of Rockville Centre 2-22-1971 by L.L. No.
1-1971 as Ch. 134 of the 1971 Code.[2] Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
General definitions — See Ch. 1, Art. I.
Appearance tickets — See Ch. 4.
Awnings — See Ch. 96.
Building code — See Ch. 112.
Building code administration — See Ch. 115.
Dangerous and unsafe buildings — See Ch. 122.
Moving of buildings — See Ch. 126.
Numbering of buildings — See Ch. 129.
Rehabilitation of buildings — See Ch. 132.
Environmental quality review — See Ch. 166.
Fences — See Ch. 175.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 188.
Freshwater wetlands — See Ch. 197.
Licenses — See Ch. 222.
Lodging and boarding houses — See Ch. 225.
Excavations — See Ch. 287, Art. X.
Swimming pools — See Ch. 291.
Trees, shrubs and hedges — See Ch. 303.
Planning Board; site plan review; subdivision of land — See Ch. 330.
Signs and posting bills — See Ch. 335.
ATTACHMENTS
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 359/441
[1]
[2]
A.
Attachment 1 - Chart I
Attachment 2 - Chart II
Attachment 3 - Chart III
Attachment 4 - Chart IV
Attachment 5 - Chart V
Attachment 6 - Chart VI
Attachment 7 - Chart VII
Attachment 8 - Chart VIII
Attachment 9 - Table of Area and Bulk Controls
Editor's Note: The Board of Trustees of the Village of Rockville Centre enacted the Zoning Ordinance,
the purposes for which reads as follows:
This ordinance is designed (a) to regulate and restrict the height, number of stories and size of
buildings and other structures, the percentage of lot that may be occupied, the size of yards, courts and
other open spaces, the density of population and the location and use of buildings, structures and land
for trade, residence or other purposes; (b) for such purposes, to divide the Village of Rockville Centre
into districts of such number, shape and area as may be deemed best suited to carry out such
purposes; (c) to regulate and restrict the erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, repair or use
of buildings, structures or land within such districts, such regulations and restrictions being made in
accordance with a Comprehensive Plan and designed to lessen congestion in the streets; (d) to secure
safety from fire and other dangers; (e) to promote health and the general welfare; (f) to provide
adequate light and air; (g) to prevent the overcrowding of land and to avoid undue concentration of
population; (h) to facilitate adequate provisions for transportation, water, sewerage, schools, parks and
other public improvements. This ordinance is further designed to give consideration to the character of
designated districts and their peculiar suitability for particular uses with a view to conserving the value
of buildings and encouraging the most appropriate use of land throughout the Village.
Editor's Note: This chapter was originally adopted by the Board of Trustees of the Village of Rockville
Centre 4-24-1963.
Article I. Districts
§ 340-1. Division of districts designated.
[Amended 7-9-1976 by L.L. No. 3-1976; 1-24-1983 by L.L. No. 3-1983; 10-25-2004 by L.L. No. 2-2004]
For the purpose of regulating and restricting the height, number of stories and size of buildings
and other structures, the percentage of lot that may be occupied, the size of yards, courts and
other open spaces, the density of population, and the location and the use of buildings, structures
and land for trade, residence and other purposes, the Village of Rockville Centre, Nassau County,
New York, is hereby divided into the following classes of districts, namely:
[Amended 5-1-2017 by L.L. No. 2-2017]
Residence A District
Residence B District
Residence C District
Residence A-M District
Business AAA District
Business AA District
Business A District
Business A-1 District
Business B District
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 360/441
[2]
[3]
B.
C.
D.
(1)
(2)
E.
[1]
Business C District[2]
Business C2 District[3]
Urban Renewal Multiple Dwelling B (R) District
Urban Renewal Multiple Dwelling B (S) District
Urban Renewal Multiple Dwelling B (RC) District
Urban Renewal Multiple Dwelling B (SC) District
Urban Renewal Multiple Dwelling B Low Rise (SC) District
Urban Renewal Multiple Dwelling C District
Urban Renewal Commercial or Light Manufacturing A District as hereinafter described and as
shown on the Use District Map which accompanies this chapter and which is hereby declared to
form a part of this chapter, said map being entitled: "Amended Building Zone Map of the Village
of Rockville Centre, Nassau County, New York, dated December 14, 1962 and as amended April
24, 1963" to include Urban Renewal Building Zone Map, dated January 1963
Urban Renewal Recreational and Limited Commercial District
Editor's note: District regulations are set forth in Chart VII, included as an attachment to this
chapter.
Editor's note: District regulations are set forth in Chart VIII, included as an attachment to this
chapter.
Where shown by dimension, district boundary lines on said Use District Map do not necessarily
follow filed property map lot lines. Said dimensions, where measured from a highway boundary
line, shall automatically be decreased in the event of a road widening and increased in the event
of a road narrowing. The linear depth of said increase or decrease shall be commensurate with
the change in the highway boundary line at the point in question.
Where not shown by dimension, district boundary lines on said Use District Map are contiguous
with adjacent boundary lines of highways, streets, roads, waterways, lakes, ponds, rivers and/or
creeks, railroad rights-of-way, municipal parking fields, aqueducts and Village boundary lines.
The use districts designated on said map are hereby established and such designations are
hereby declared to be a part thereof. No building or premises shall be erected or used for any
purpose other than a purpose permitted in the use district in which such building or premises is
located.
Adoption of revised Zoning Map.
[Added 10-25-2004 by L.L. No. 6-2004]
Purpose and findings: The purpose of the adoption of the revised Zoning Map is to meet the
objectives of the Board of Trustees of the Village of Rockville Centre in rezoning a portion of
the Business A District with the creation of two new districts, Business C and Business C2,
and with the expansion of an existing district, Residence B. In adopting the revised Zoning
Map, the Board of Trustees finds that the rezoning of this section of the Village is in
accordance with its recodification project. The Board of Trustees further finds that the existing
uses in the designated areas of zone change shall remain legal. The Board of Trustees
further finds that any use for which a building permit has been issued as of the date of the
adoption and filing of this legislation shall remain legal. The Board of Trustees further finds
that any change or modification to existing uses must be in conformity with the regulations of
the new zones, as reflected in the amendments to the Code and in the revised Zoning Map.
The Board of Trustees adopts the revised Zoning Map, as indicated in its amendment to the
list of zoning districts set forth in § 340-1, and as indicated in Charts VII and VIII of Chapter
340, and determines to file the revised Zoning Map with the Village Clerk.
Editor's note: The Use District Map, and any amendments made thereto, is on file in the Village offices.
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 361/441
A.
B.
C.
Article II. Definitions
§ 340-2. Definitions and word usage.
Words in this chapter are defined for the purpose thereof as follows: words used in the present tense
include the future; the singular number includes the plural, and the plural the singular; the word "lot"
includes the word "plot"; the word "building" includes the word "structure"; the word "shall" is always
mandatory.
ACCESSORY BUILDING
A building subordinate to the main building on a lot and used for purposes customarily incidental
to those of the main building.
ACCESSORY USE
A use customarily incidental and subordinate to the principal use or building and located on the
same lot with such principal use or building.
APARTMENT HOUSE or MULTIPLE DWELLING
A building of any kind which is designed for and is used or intended to be used or occupied as a
residence by three or more families or households living independently of each other.
[Amended 1-13-2003 by L.L. No. 1-2003]
ATTACHED DWELLING
A building consisting of a series of noncommunicating one- or two-family sections having a
common wall between each two adjacent sections.
AUTOMOBILE SERVICE STATION or GAS STATION
A building and premises where the business carried on is the sale of gasoline, oil and accessories
for automobiles, the servicing or washing of automobiles and including only minor and incidental
repair work.
BASEMENT
The portion of a building that is partly or completely below grade plane. A basement shall be
considered as a story above grade plane where the finished surface of the floor above the
basement is:
[Amended 1-13-2003 by L.L. No. 1-2003]
More than six feet (1,829 mm) above grade plane;
More than six feet (1,829 mm) above the finished ground level for more than 50% of the total
building perimeter; or
More than 12 feet (3,658 mm) above the finished ground level at any point.
BOARDINGHOUSE
A dwelling, dwelling unit, facility, or part thereof, in which, for compensation, lodging and meals are
provided and personal, financial or other services may be offered. The term "boardinghouse" shall
not include a hotel or motel, hospital, nursing home, skilled nursing facility, senior-care housing
facility or dormitory otherwise permitted pursuant to this chapter.
[Added 6-24-2013 by L.L. No. 3-2013]
BUILDING
Any structure occupied or intended for supporting or sheltering any occupancy that either stands
alone or is completely separated from adjoining structures or firewalls.
[Added 1-13-2003 by L.L. No. 1-2003; amended 10-27-2003 by L.L. No. 10-2003]
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 362/441
A.
B.
BUILDING AREA
The total of areas taken on a horizontal plane at the main grade level of the principal building, and
all accessory buildings, exclusive of uncovered porches, terraces and steps.
BUILDING, FREESTANDING
Any structure occupied or intended for supporting or sheltering any occupancy that stands alone
on a single and separately owned tax lot or lots, and where all four sides are not contiguous to any
adjoining building or buildings.
[Added 10-27-2003 by L.L. No. 10-2003]
BUILDING HEIGHT
The vertical distance measured from the mean natural grade at the base elevation of the structure
to the highest point of the roof for flat roofs, to the deckline of mansard roofs, and to the highest
point of the roof for gable, hip and gambrel roofs. In buildings with flat roofs, parapet walls shall
not exceed three feet in overall height above the highest point of the flat roof. Where an
ornamental parapet in a building with a flat roof is proposed, the maximum distance from the
highest point of the roof deck to the top of the ornamental parapet shall not exceed three feet. The
ornamental parapet shall not constitute an extension of the roof or be considered to be part of the
height of the building. Ornamental details and design elements, not exceeding a total of 10% of
the linear footage of the parapet, may extend not more than five feet above the flat roof, but the
architectural detail allowed on any one side of the roofline may not exceed 20% of the total linear
footage of that side of the roofline.
[Amended 1-13-2003 by L.L. No. 1-2003; 10-27-2003 by L.L. No. 10-2003; 11-14-2005 by L.L. No.
7-2005; 3-1-2011 by L.L. No. 5-2011[1]; 4-4-2016 by L.L. No. 3-2016]
Chimneys, exterior fire exits, mechanical equipment, antennas, bulkheads and similar
construction-enclosing equipment and stairs, and similar appurtenances are excluded from
roof height calculations. The reviewing board, in connection with site plan or exterior design
review, may impose restrictions for the architectural appearance of these appurtenances
and/or ornamental designs, in accordance with § 330-15A(7) of Chapter 330 of the Code of
the Village of Rockville Centre.
Definitions of terms in "building height"” definition:
GABLE — A double sloping roof that forms a gable at each end.
GAMBREL ROOF — A two-sided roof with a double slope on each side, the lower
slope having a steeper pitch.
HIP — A gable roof with ends brought together at the same pitch as the
rest of the roof.
MANSARD — A roof having two slopes on all sides, with the lower slope
steeper than the upper.
CABARET
Any commercial room, place or space wherein musical entertainment, singing, dancing in a
designated area or other form of amusement or entertainment is permitted in conjunction with the
sale or service of food or drink. The term "cabaret" does not include a theater, or establishments
providing musical entertainment by mechanical means without dancing or by live performance
and/or not more than three musical instruments without any means of electrical or electronic
amplification connected directly thereto. The term "cabaret" may include a nightclub. In
distinguishing between a restaurant and cabaret, as defined in this chapter, such factors as the
extent to which food is served on the premises, the extent to which there is dancing or
entertainment on the premises, and whether an admission, minimum or cover fee is charged shall
be considered.
[Added 7-9-2007 by L.L. No. 2-2007]
COIN-OPERATED DEVICE
[Added 8-11-1980 by L.L. No. 7-1980]
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 363/441
A.
B.
C.
A.
B.
C.
D.
Any game involving an element of skill or chance which is caused to operate or may be
operated as a result of the insertion of any piece of money or coin or the insertion of any
object for which a fee, charge or other consideration is imposed directly or indirectly.
Any machine or apparatus, whether manually, mechanically, electrically or otherwise
operated, and whether or not affixed or attached to or installed in any premises or place, in or
upon which machine or apparatus a game involving any element of chance, skill or
knowledge may be played by one or more persons, singly or collectively, upon the payment of
a fee, charge or other consideration directly or indirectly.
Any machine or apparatus of the type, design, class or construction commonly known as "cue
ball," "Skee-Ball," "game of knowledge" or other similar games which are played upon
payment of a fee, charge or other consideration directly or indirectly.
CURB LEVEL
The officially established grade of the top of the curb in front of the midpoint of the lot. Where a lot
faces on more than one street, the curb level is the average of the levels of the curbs at the center
of each front.
DEPTH OF LOT
The mean distance from the street line of a lot to the rear line measured in the general direction of
the side lines of the lot.
FAMILY
[Amended 8-29-1994 by L.L. No. 11-1994; 9-22-2008 by L.L. No. 10-2008[2]]
A family consists of one or more persons, whether or not related to each other by blood,
marriage or adoption, all of whom live and cohabit together as a single, stable and bona fide
housekeeping unit, provided that such persons together occupy and own, lease or rent the
whole of the building or dwelling unit (and, if such exists, a separate accessory building or
dwelling unit) in a family-like living arrangement as the functional and factual equivalent of a
natural family and use all rooms and housekeeping facilities in common.
Any number of persons shall not be deemed to constitute a "family" if any one of such
persons may not have lawful access to all parts of the principal building or separate building
or dwelling unit or if any one or more of such persons lease or rent any portion of such
principal building and/or separate accessorial building or dwelling unit from any other person.
It shall be presumed that a separate building or dwelling unit does not constitute a single
household if (i) it is occupied by four or more persons who are not related by blood, marriage
or legal adoption, or (ii) any two or more of the following features may be found to exist by the
Superintendent of the Building Department or other person designated by the Mayor and
Board of Trustees to enforce this chapter: more than one mailbox, mail slot or post office
address; more than one doorbell or doorway at the same location; more than one electric
meter; more than one gas meter; separate entrances for particular portions of the separate
building or dwelling unit or residents thereof; separate or segregated partitions or locked
internal doors barring access between portions of the separate building or dwelling unit,
including bedrooms; separate written leases, oral rental agreements or the payment of rent or
the absence of a certificate of occupancy for portions of the separate building or dwelling unit
by or between residents of the separate building or dwelling unit; or two or more kitchens
containing a range or oven, refrigerator and sink. The aforesaid presumption shall not prevail
if it is otherwise proven by evidence presented to the Superintendent that the separate
building or dwelling unit is an integral part of a single household; further, a determination may
be made by said Superintendent, based on facts other than those set forth above, that the
separate building or dwelling unit does not constitute part of a single household.
After consideration of the following factors, the Superintendent may also conclude that four or
more persons unrelated by blood, marriage or adoption do not constitute a "family" as defined
in this section:
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 364/441
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
(11)
(12)
(13)
E.
Whether the household has permanency and stability akin to that of a traditional family
structure;
The length of stay together among the occupants in the current dwelling unit or other
dwelling units;
The presence of minor, dependent children regularly residing in the household;
The presence of one individual acting as head of household;
Proof of sharing expenses for food, rent or ownership costs, utilities and other household
expenses;
Common ownership of furniture and appliances among the members of the household;
Whether the household is a temporary living arrangement or a framework for transient
living;
Whether the composition of the household changes from year to year, or within the year,
or in relation to the seasons or the academic year of any academic institution;
The length of time for which the household has legally authorized occupancy, and
whether prior or subsequent occupancies have legal authorization for similar dates or
lengths of time;
The frequency with which persons join or depart as members of the household;
The extent to which members of the household resided together in a single household
prior to commencing residency at this location, and the likelihood that members of the
household will continue to reside together after terminating residency at this location;
Whether members of the household have the same address for purposes of voter
registrations, motor vehicle operator licenses, motor vehicle registrations, and/or filing of
tax returns;
Any other factor reasonably related to whether or not the group of persons is the
functional equivalent of a family.
The Superintendent of the Building Department or other person designated by the Mayor and
Board of Trustees to enforce this chapter shall make the primary determination as to the
application of this definition of household for the purposes of compliance with any provisions
of this chapter, or of Chapters 225 and/or 340 of the Code of the Village, or the New York
State Building Code or the Multiple Dwelling Law, based upon inspection of the premises and
information received from the residents thereof or any other persons or documentary or other
written evidence as to the condition of the premises or the relationship of the residents of the
separate building or dwelling unit and their living arrangements. Such determination shall be
presumed to be correct and final subject to review of or appeal to the Board of Appeals and
judicial review as provided by law, and it is further provided that if any one or more of the
foregoing provisions shall be determined to be unconstitutional, it shall not affect the
constitutionality of the remaining provisions.
FAST-FOOD ESTABLISHMENT
An eating establishment, excluding bakeries and delicatessens, that provides quickly prepared or
prepared foods without table service by waiters/waitresses for consumption on the premises or for
takeout. A fast-food establishment shall not be construed to mean an establishment that primarily
dispenses alcoholic beverages.
[Added 6-23-1997 by L.L. No. 2-1997]
FLOOR AREA RATIO
Floor area ratio is the ratio of the total floor area of all buildings on a lot or parcel to the total lot
area of the lot or parcel on which such buildings are situated. Attics, cellars, attached or detached
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 365/441
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
A.
B.
garages and other accessory structures shall not be included in the calculation of total floor area.
[Added 3-1-2011 by L.L. No. 5-2011; amended 6-7-2011 by L.L. No. 10-2011]
FREESTANDING BUILDING
Any structure occupied or intended for supporting or sheltering any occupancy that stands alone
on a single and separately owned tax lot or lots.
[Added 1-13-2003 by L.L. No. 1-2003]
FRONT YARD
An open, unoccupied space on the same lot and extending from the street wall of the building to
the street line of the lot for the full width of the lot. Where an interior lot faces two streets, a front
yard shall be maintained on each street frontage.
GAME ROOM
All or any part of any building, structure, room or place of assembly, within which is located more
than three pinball machines or coin-operated devices as described in this article.
[Added 8-11-1980 by L.L. No. 7-1980]
GROUND LEVEL, NONSTRUCTURE PARKING LOT AREA
An open lot or open area which serves in whole or part as a parking area for buildings or uses not
on the same lot or which serves as a parking area for the general public and is not specifically
related to any particular building or use.
[Added 10-25-2004 by L.L. No. 7-2004]
GUEST ROOM
The sleeping unit provided by a hotel or motel. Within the sleeping unit, there may also be a living
and/or kitchenette space.
[Added 12-2-1998 by L.L. No. 4-1998]
HALF-STORY
A story under a gable, hip or gambrel roof, the wall plates of which on at least two opposite
exterior walls are not more than two feet above the floor of such story.
[Amended 10-27-2003 by L.L. No. 10-2003]
HOSPITAL
An institution designed for the diagnosis, treatment and care of human illness or infirmity and
providing health services, primarily for inpatients, and including as related facilities laboratories,
outpatient departments, training facilities and staff offices.
[Amended 10-27-2003 by L.L. No. 10-2003]
HOTEL
[Amended 12-2-1998 by L.L. No. 4-1998[3]]
A commercial facility in which all of the following are present:
Guest rooms are used for transient occupancy on a daily or short-term basis.
One or more common entrances serving the guest rooms.
Provision of twenty-four-hour desk service.
Provision of one or more of the following services: housekeeping, telephone or bellhop
service, or the furnishing or laundering of linens.
Permitted accessory uses include, but are not limited to restaurants or other public dining
facilities, bars or lounges, banquet halls, ballrooms, convention areas and meeting rooms.
Such nonsleeping area uses will require certificates of occupancy.
IMPERVIOUS COVER; IMPERVIOUS AREA
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 366/441
(1)
(2)
(3)
A.
B.
Those surfaces, improvements and structures through which rainfall, snowmelt and water cannot
effectively infiltrate. Examples of impervious cover or impervious area include, but the terms are
not limited to, building rooftops, pavement, driveways and patios.
[Added 3-1-2011 by L.L. No. 5-2011]
LIGHT MANUFACTURING
The making, fabrication or processing of materials, whether they are raw or in a processed or
partially processed state, by hand, art or machine, or a combination thereof, of finished parts or
products; the process or operation of making wares or any material products by hand, art or
machinery, or by a combination thereof, or by another agency, whether by division of labor and aid
of machinery or otherwise, involving the application of labor and skill to materials that exist in their
natural state or to materials which have been processed from their natural state to give them a
new quality or characteristic or adapt them to new uses.
[Added 10-15-1973 by L.L. No. 3-1973]
LODGING HOUSE
A facility in which rental sleeping accommodations are provided and in which meals also may be
supplied as part of the rent. See "boardinghouse."
[Added 6-24-2013 by L.L. No. 3-2013]
LOT or PLOT
A parcel of land occupied or designed or intended to be occupied by a building and the accessory
buildings or uses qualifiedly incident to it, including such open spaces as are required to be used
in connection with such building. A lot may be or may not be the land shown as a lot on a duly filed
plat.
MOBILE UNIT
A unit for any dwelling, office or commercial use which is factory built and factory assembled,
designed for convenience after fabrication for movement on streets and highways, on its own
wheels or on flatbed or other trailer, and arriving at the site where it is to be occupied as a unit,
complete and ready for occupancy, except for minor and incidental unpacking and assembly
operations, such as locating on jacks or wheels or other foundation or connection to utilities. A
prefabricated structure shall not be included in the aforesaid definition. Such definition shall not be
deemed to include a mobile unit which is temporarily used in connection with construction work
within the Village.
[Added 7-19-1976 by L.L. No. 5-1976]
MOTEL
[Amended 12-2-1998 by L.L. No. 4-1998[4]]
A commercial facility in which all of the following are present:
Guest rooms used for transient occupancy on a daily basis.
Each guest room having direct access to the outside without the necessity of passing
through a main lobby or common entrance.
Provision of one or more of the following services: housekeeping, telephone or bellhop
service, or the furnishing or laundering of linens.
Permitted accessory uses are a restaurant or other public dining facility. Such nonsleeping
area uses will require certificates of occupancy.
MULTIFAMILY USE
Use of a building or structure for lawful residential occupancies containing sleeping units for more
than two dwelling units where the occupants are permanent in nature, including apartment
buildings. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the term "multifamily use" shall not include a
boardinghouse, rooming house or lodging house.
[Added 1-13-2003 by L.L. No. 1-2003; amended 6-24-2013 by L.L. No. 3-2013]
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 367/441
A.
(1)
(2)
B.
NIGHTCLUB
A commercial establishment, usually opened to the public in the late evening or early morning
hours, where alcoholic beverages are sold and consumed on the premises and where live
entertainment and/or centrally controlled recorded performances take place, and which may
contain a stage, staging area and/or dance floor.
[Added 7-9-2007 by L.L. No. 2-2007]
NONCONFORMING USE
A structure or land lawfully occupied for a use that does not conform to the regulations of the
district in which the premises are situated. The word "use" does not include area, setback or
building height regulations.
NONSLEEPING AREAS
The public occupancy areas provided by a hotel or motel. These may include, but are not limited
to, restaurants or other dining facilities, bars or lounges, banquet halls, ballrooms, convention
areas, meeting rooms, gymnasiums, health clubs, swimming pools, beauty salons and
barbershops. Nonsleeping areas are used by the public on a fee or other paid basis. Users may or
may not stay in the hotel or motel guest rooms. Each nonsleeping area will be required to obtain a
maximum occupancy permit limiting the number of allowed seats.
[Added 12-2-1998 by L.L. No. 4-1998]
NOT-FOR-PROFIT NONPUBLIC SCHOOL
An institution or place for learning, operating pursuant to and with an exemption provided by
Section 501(C)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code, limited to nursery school or prekindergarten
through Grade 12, other than a public school, but furnishing a comprehensive curriculum of
academic instruction either similar to that of a public school or otherwise meeting the compulsory
educational requirements of the State of New York where teaching is by New York State qualified
teachers at a site or location deemed safe and healthful for this use by the Superintendent of the
Rockville Centre Building Department and the Nassau County Fire Inspector, and whose
curriculum shall be a progressive learning experience culminating at regularly scheduled intervals
with advancements to the next level of study or receipt of a diploma upon graduation. This shall
not include a college, day camp, professional school or a school giving special or limited
instruction in areas of learning such as business, art, music, dance, riding, hobbies, technology,
trades, games, sports or like subjects.
[Added 9-30-2002 by L.L. No. 10-2002]
OFF-STREET PARKING AREA
The entire area used for the parking of automobiles, including the necessary ingress, egress,
driveway and aisles.
OFF-STREET PARKING SPACE
Space available for parking an automobile other than on a public street, exclusive of ingress,
egress, driveway and aisles.
[Amended 7-13-1992 by L.L. No. 4-1992]
Where the total number of parking spaces required to be provided does not exceed 20, all
parking spaces shall be a minimum of 20 feet by 9 feet, with driveways and aisles as per the
standards and dimensions of Charts I, II and III below.[5]
Where the total number of parking spaces required to be provided exceeds 20, parking
spaces for both large cars and for small cars may be utilized to achieve the required spaces.
The number of parking spaces designated by the appropriate marking of spaces and
placement of informational signage for the parking of small cars shall not exceed 30% of the
number of required spaces above 20 spaces.
Each large-car parking space shall be a minimum of 17 feet by 8 1/2 feet.
Each small-car parking space shall be a minimum of 15 feet by 8 feet.
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 368/441
(3)
A.
B.
C.
Driveways and aisles are to be as per the standards and dimensions of Charts I, II and III
below.[6]
PINBALL MACHINE
Any electrically operated machine upon which any game or contest of skill, chance or amusement
may be played upon payment of a fee, charge or other consideration directly or indirectly,
including but not limited to any shooting game device in which no firearm ammunition is used and
any game, machine, apparatus, paraphernalia or device of the type, design, class or construction
commonly known as "pinball" or "bagatelle."
[Added 8-11-1980 by L.L. No. 7-1980]
PRIVATE GARAGE
A structure used by the owner or tenant of the premise for the storage of one or more automobiles
and in which nothing of any kind is sold and no service or repair work is done for hire.
PROFESSIONAL MEDICAL BUILDING
A building occupied and used exclusively as offices for practitioners licensed to practice and
engage in the professions of medicine and dentistry, and as offices for laboratories that are
concomitant and coincident with the practice of such professions.
PUBLIC ASSEMBLY
Places of public assembly shall include:
A theater.
A motion-picture house.
An assembly hall maintained or leased, whether for pecuniary gain or not, where 100 or more
persons may be assembled for amusement or recreation.
PUBLIC GARAGE
A structure and/or premises where a general automobile business is carried on, including the
display or sale of automobiles or accessories, general repair and service work on automobiles or
the leasing of storage space for automobiles, but not including the leasing of storage space for
new automobiles pending the sale thereof.
[Amended 11-3-1975 by L.L. No. 6-1975]
PUBLIC SCHOOL
An institution or place for learning, limited to prekindergarten through Grade 12, operated by a
public school district under the laws of the State of New York. This shall not include a college, day
camp, professional school or a school giving special or limited instruction in areas of learning such
as business, art, music, dance, riding, hobbies, technology, trades, games, sports or like subjects.
[Added 9-30-2002 by L.L. No. 10-2002]
REAR YARD DEPTH
The mean distance between the rear line of the building and the rear line of the lot.
RESTAURANT
A commercial establishment with table service, where food and drink are prepared and served
from suitable kitchen facilities connected therewith, and consumed primarily on the premises. A
restaurant may have limited forms of musical entertainment to accompany the dining experience.
However, establishments which provide dancing and/or stage shows, and/or other music or similar
forms of entertainment, in conjunction with dining, and/or in which the dining is accessory to the
entertainment, are not restaurants and shall be considered nightclubs or cabarets.
[Added 6-23-1997 by L.L. No. 2-1997; amended 7-9-2007 by L.L. No. 2-2007]
ROOMING HOUSE
See "boardinghouse."
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 369/441
A.
B.
[Added 6-24-2013 by L.L. No. 3-2013]
SENIOR CARE HOUSING
One of the following residence or institution types:
[Added 3-29-1999 by L.L. No. 3-1999]
CONGREGATE CARE FACILITY
A residential facility for persons aged 55 and older with individual dwelling units, common
areas for social interaction, recreation and meals and hospitality services. Hospitality services
will comprise meals in a common dining area, and may comprise recreation and social
activities, and transportation services. The individual dwelling units may or may not have
conventional kitchens. The facility may provide some or all of the following elements to
persons aged 55 and older who may be unrelated to the operator: long-term residence,
nutrition, housekeeping, personal care, recreation or social activities and supervision.
ASSISTED LIVING FACILITY
A residential facility that provides a combination of housing, supportive services and
personalized assistance for persons aged 55 and older needing help with activities of daily
living. Such activities may include bathing, grooming and medical reminders. Meals are
provided in a central location on site. The housing component may have individual dwelling
units, which may or may not have conventional kitchens. The facility may provide some or all
of the following elements to persons aged 55 and older who may be unrelated to the operator:
long-term residence, nutrition, housekeeping, personal care, recreation or social activities and
supervision.
SETBACK OF BUILDINGS and SIZE OF YARDS
Unless otherwise specified herein, the setback of buildings and size of yards shall be the distance
between the lot line and the nearest exterior finished wall of the principal building, which shall
include the foundation or wall of any attached garage, open or enclosed porch, and all other
projections except window wells, chimneys, unenclosed entrance steps, or platforms. In no event
shall window wells or the platforms of unenclosed entrance steps extend more than four feet from
the principal building; unenclosed entrance steps, as measured to the face of the lowest riser,
shall not extend more than seven feet from the principal building.
[Amended 10-27-2003 by L.L. No. 10-2003; 3-1-2011 by L.L. No. 6-2011; 12-3-2012 by L.L. No. 3-
2012]
SIDE YARD
An open, unoccupied space on the same lot between the building and the side lot line and
extending for the full depth of the building.
SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLING
A detached dwelling unit with kitchen and sleeping facilities, designed for occupancy by one
family.
[Amended 10-27-2003 by L.L. No. 10-2003]
SKILLED NURSING FACILITY
An institution or part of an institution that provides licensed, skilled, full-time nursing care and
related services for patients who require medical, nursing and/or rehabilitative services.
[Added 3-29-1999 by L.L. No. 3-1999]
STORY
That portion of a building included between the upper surface of any floor and the upper surface of
the floor next above, except that the topmost story shall be that portion of a building included
between the upper surface of the topmost floor and the ceiling or roof above. If the finished floor
level directly above a usable or unused underfloor space is more than six feet above grade as
defined herein for more than 50% of the total perimeter or is more than 12 feet above grade as
defined herein at any point, such usable or unused underfloor space shall be considered as a
story.
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 370/441
[1]
[2]
[3]
[4]
[5]
[6]
[Amended 10-27-2003 by L.L. No. 10-2003]
STORY HEIGHT
The vertical distance from top to top of the two successive finished floor surfaces, and, for the
topmost story, from the top of the floor finish to the top of the ceiling joists or, where there is not a
ceiling, to the top of the roof rafters.
[Added 1-13-2003 by L.L. No. 1-2003]
STREET
Wherever the term "street" is used in this chapter for the purposes of establishing required
dimensions or parameters of street frontage of a lot, use, building or structure, it shall be deemed
to mean and refer to a public road or street.
[Added 1-4-2016 by L.L. No. 1-2016]
STREET LINE
The dividing line between a public street and a lot.
STREET WALL
The main foundation wall of a building or part of a building which is enclosed and nearest to the
street line, except bay windows, vestibules and other minor projections.
SWIMMING POOL
A structure designed and intended for wading, bathing or swimming purposes, having a depth or
height of more than 24 inches, made of concrete, masonry, metal or other impervious material,
located outdoors.
[Added 1-24-1983 by L.L. No. 3-1983]
TWO-FAMILY DETACHED DWELLING
A building designed for and occupied by only two families, with one family over the other or side
by side, and surrounded on all sides above the ground by open space.
YARD, REAR
A yard extending across the full width of the lot, the depth of which is the minimum horizontal
distance between the rear lot line or ordinary high-water line and a line parallel thereto.
[Amended 10-27-2003 by L.L. No. 10-2003]
Editor’s Note: This local law also provided that it take effect upon adoption and filing; provided, however
that the amendments effectuated by it not be applicable with respect to any substantially completed
building permit application filed with the Village Building Department on or before 3-4-2011, and
provided further that such application not thereafter be amended in any manner which would cause the
construction or development to exceed the parameters or limitations enacted by this law to any degree
greater than proposed in such application as of 3-4-2011.
Editor’s Note: This local law also provided that it shall take effect immediately upon adoption; any use
or occupancy which is lawful and in existence on the effective date of this law, but which would not be
lawful pursuant to the provisions enacted in this law, or which would require a permit or approval from
the Board of Appeals pursuant to such provisions, may continue for not more than 180 days after such
effective date, and such use or occupancy thereafter shall be unlawful and shall terminate unless such
use or occupancy shall obtain legal status as may be permitted by law.
Editor's Note: This local law also provided for the repeal of the former definition of "hotel and/or motel."
Editor's Note: This local law also provided for the repeal of the former definition of "hotel and/or motel."
Editor's Note: Charts I, II and III are included at the end of this chapter.
Editor's Note: Charts I, II and III are included at the end of this chapter.
Article III. Nonconforming Use
§ 340-3. Nonconforming use: existing buildings and premises.
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 371/441
A.
B.
C.
D.
A.
(1)
(2)
[1]
(3)
B.
Any lawful uses existing in any buildings and/or premises at the time of the passage of this
chapter and/or amendments thereto and not conforming to the regulations of the use district in
which they are maintained may be continued therein.
A nonconforming use shall not be changed or extended, nor shall any building be constructed or
enlarged to continue or extend a nonconforming use, except by the consent of the Board of
Appeals.
No nonconforming use, if changed to a conforming use, shall thereafter be changed back to a
nonconforming use. Whenever a nonconforming use has been discontinued for a period of six
months, such nonconforming use shall not thereafter be resumed, and the future use shall be in
conformity with the zone in which the property is located. In case a building devoted to a
nonconforming use shall be more than 50% destroyed by fire or other cause, the same shall not
be restored for a nonconforming use, and the use of the premises shall thereafter be in conformity
with the zone in which the property is located, unless the Board of Appeals shall grant special
consent for such restoration for the nonconforming use.
[Amended 4-28-2008 by L.L. No.2-2008]
On premises devoted to a nonconforming use, a sign of reasonable size and location may be
erected, provided that the permit of the Board of Appeals shall be obtained, which permit shall
specify the size and location of the proposed sign, and provided also that such sign shall also
conform with all other ordinances of the Village as to construction and material.
Article IV. Residence A District
§ 340-4. Uses.
[Amended 1-11-1988 by L.L. No. 1-1988]
The purpose of the Residence A District is to provide for areas of relatively open character for
single-family detached dwellings, to provide for additional residential units that are consistent with
the residential environment and to provide for facilities and uses which serve residents of these
areas and which are benefited by a stable residential environment.
In the Residence A District, no building or premises shall be used and no building shall be erected
or altered which is arranged, intended or designed to be used except for one or more of the
following uses:
Single-family detached dwellings, which shall have a roof other than one of the character or
description known as a "flat roof."
The office of a doctor, artist, lawyer, dentist, architect or a professional engineer, when not
located outside of the building in which he resides, provided that there is no display other than
the ordinary professional nameplate not larger than eight inches by 15 inches, and provided
that, where the plot is an interior plot, the entrance to such office shall be approximately at the
front building setback line and, where the plot is a corner plot, the entrance shall be
approximately at the building setback line of either street frontage, and provided, always, that
such use shall not be so conducted as to be an annoyance or nuisance to the neighborhood.
Accessory uses customarily incident to the above uses. The term "accessory use," however,
shall not include a business or any building or use not located on the same lot with the
building to which it is accessory.[1][2]
Editor's Note: Former Subsection B(4), regarding real estate signs, which immediately
followed this subsection, was repealed 1-23-1989 by L.L. No. 3-1989. See now Ch. 335, Art.
III, Real Estate Signs.
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 372/441
[2]
[3]
C.
[1]
A.
[2]
B.
A.
B.
Editor's Note: Former Subsection B(5), regarding two-family detached dwellings, which
followed this subsection, was repealed 7-11-1994 by L.L. No. 1-1994.
If, prior to the effective date of this local law, a one-family or a two-family dwelling was constructed
on a lot having a street frontage or a total area less than that described in § 340-5, such dwelling
shall be deemed conforming for the purposes of this article. Should such dwelling be destroyed or
demolished, a one-family dwelling may be reconstructed with the consent of the Board of Appeals
upon a showing that such dwelling will comply with all the conditions of this article other than
§ 340-5.[3]
[Amended 7-11-1994 by L.L. No. 2-1994]
Editor's Note: Former Subsection D, regarding two-family dwellings, which immediately followed
this subsection, was repealed 7-11-1994 by L.L. No. 3-1994.
§ 340-5. Lot size.
[Amended 1-11-1988 by L.L. No. 2-1988]
The lot for each single-family dwelling shall have a street frontage of not less than 80 feet on each
street on which the lot abuts and have a total area of not less than 8,000 square feet; provided,
however, that the provisions of this subsection shall not be applicable to any lot having a street
frontage of not less than 60 feet nor less than a total area of 6,000 square feet shown on a plat
filed with the Planning Board of the Village, whether or not the same has been approved by the
Planning Board prior to the effective date of this local law.[1]
Editor's Note: Former Subsection B, regarding two-family dwellings, which immediately followed
this subsection, was repealed 7-11-1994 by L.L. No. 4-1994.
Notwithstanding the provisions of Subsection A above, subject to the prior approval of the Board
of Appeals, a one-family house on a lot with less than said frontage or area may be permitted if
the Board, in specific cases, after public notice and hearing, and subject to appropriate conditions
and safeguards, determines to vary the street frontage and area requirements, in harmony with
the purposes enumerated in the Village Law of the State of New York and the purpose and intent
of this local law, on lots having a street frontage and area size consistent with the area in which
such lot is located.
[Amended 7-11-1994 by L.L. No. 5-1994[2]]
Editor's Note: This local law also provided for the renumbering of former Subsection C as
Subsection B.
§ 340-6. Building area and lot coverage; floor area ratio.
[Amended 3-1-2011 by L.L. No. 5-2011[1]]
For lots with an area of 8,000 square feet or more, the principal building area shall not exceed
25%, and the total building area, including accessory buildings, shall not exceed 30%. For lots
with an area less than 8,000 square feet, the total building area, including accessory buildings,
shall not exceed 30%. The impervious surface area of any lot shall not exceed 40%; provided,
however, that sidewalks, swimming pools and entrance pathways that lead to a front door shall not
be included in the calculation of impervious surface area for the purposes of this section.
Notwithstanding the provisions of this subsection, impervious surface coverage may exceed 40%,
but shall not exceed 45%, where it is established to the reasonable satisfaction of the
Superintendent of Buildings that the disposition of rainfall and other surface water will comply with
standard engineering practices/calculations of water percolation, or that the property will provide
dry wells with sufficient capacity to retain and dispose of rainfall and surface water on site.)
[Amended 1-5-2015 by L.L. No. 2-2015]
The floor area ratio on any lot or premises shall not exceed the following maximum amounts:
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 373/441
(1)
(2)
[1]
(1)
(2)
A.
B.
C.
D.
[Amended 11-21-2011 by L.L. No. 13-2011]
Lots having an area of 7,200 square feet or less: 50.0% floor area ratio;
Lots having area more than 7,200 square feet: 42.0% floor area ratio.
Editor's Note: This local law also provided that it take effect upon adoption and filing; provided, however
that the amendments effectuated by it not be applicable with respect to any substantially completed
building permit application filed with the Village Building Department on or before 3-4-2011, and
provided further that such application not thereafter be amended in any manner which would cause the
construction or development to exceed the parameters or limitations enacted by this law to any degree
greater than proposed in such application as of 3-4-2011.
§ 340-7. Building height.
[Amended 3-1-2011 by L.L. No. 5-2011; 6-7-2011 by L.L. No. 10-2011]
No building shall be greater in height than 32 feet. For the main roof area of all dwellings, the slope
shall be not less than six vertical over 12 horizontal. For gambrel or other main roof profiles composed
of two or more segments of differing slope, the average slope of all segments shall be no less than six
vertical over 12 horizontal. The slope ratio requirement shall not be applicable to dormers, one-story
wings on multistory buildings, or secondary roof area.
§ 340-8. Front yard.
No dwelling shall be erected or altered so that the front yard setback shall be less than the average
setback distance of the dwellings on the same side of the street within the same block, but need not be
more than 30 feet. In no event shall the front yard setback be less than 25 feet.
§ 340-9. Side yards.
[Amended 11-21-1983 by L.L. No. 11-1983; 12-11-1989 by L.L. No. 5-1989; 3-1-2011 by L.L. No. 6-
2011; 6-7-2011 by L.L. No. 10-2011]
There shall be two side yards, one on each side of the main building (See table below.):
Where the average lot width of a parcel is less than 80 feet, the aggregate widths of the side
yards shall be equal to at least 20% of the average lot width, and no side yard shall be less
than eight feet wide.
Where the average lot width of a parcel is 80 feet or greater, the aggregate widths of the side
yards shall be equal to at least 25% of the average lot width, and no side yard shall be less
than 10 feet wide.
No projections shall extend nearer to the lot lines than the limits herein set forth.
Table:
Average
Lot Width Aggregate Widths of Side Yards Minimum Width of Side Yard
80 feet and greater 25% 10 feet
Less than 80 feet 20% 8 feet
No projections shall extend nearer to the lot lines than the limits herein set forth.
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 374/441
A.
B.
[1]
[1]
A.
B.
C.
A.
§ 340-10. Rear yards.
A rear yard shall be required on every lot. The depth of a rear yard shall be at least 25 feet.
[Amended 3-1-2011 by L.L. No. 6-2011]
No projections shall extend nearer to the lot lines than the limits herein set forth.
§ 340-11. Corner plots.
[Amended 3-1-2011 by L.L. No. 6-2011[1]]
On corner plots only, the main foundation wall of any house shall not exceed, on the side having the
shortest street frontage, beyond the setback line established for the fronts of houses on the same side
of the street within the same block; but no foundation wall of a house need set back more than 30 feet,
nor shall the setback be less than 25 feet. On the side having the longest street frontage, the setback
of the house shall be at least 20% of the average width of the lot on the shortest street frontage, but in
no case less than 20 feet. The yard opposite the greatest setback shall be not less than 20 feet in
depth and the remaining yard not less than 10 feet in width.
Editor’s Note: This local law also provided that it take effect upon adoption and filing; provided, however
that the amendments effectuated by it not be applicable with respect to any substantially completed
building permit application filed with the Village Building Department on or before 3-4-2011, and
provided further that such application not thereafter be amended in any manner which would cause the
construction or development to exceed the parameters or limitations enacted by this law to any degree
greater than proposed in such application as of 3-4-2011.
§ 340-12. Parking and garage requirements.
[Amended 1-11-1988 by L.L. No. 3-1988; 1-9-1989 by L.L. No. 1-1989; 7-13-1992 by L.L. No. 5-1992;
7-11-1994 by L.L. No. 6-1994; 6-10-2002 by L.L. No. 5-2002]
Parking space and garage requirements are set forth in Chart IV of the Rockville Centre Zoning
Code. Chart IV is entitled "Schedule of Minimum Required Off-Street Parking."[1]
Editor's Note: Chart IV is included at the end of this chapter.
Commercial vehicles, school buses and vehicles seating 14 passengers or fewer bearing school,
car or taxi license plates and used to transport pupils to and from school shall not be parked or left
standing on any out-of-doors off-street parking area between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00
a.m.
New single-family dwellings shall have a garage, detached from or attached to the main dwelling,
such garage to be sufficiently large to accommodate at least one automobile.
Article V. Residence B District
§ 340-13. Uses.
[Amended 2-9-1978 by L.L. No. 2-1978; 7-11-1994 by L.L. No. 7-1994; 7-11-1994 by L.L. No. 8-1994;
10-25-2004 by L.L. No. 3-2004]
In the Residence B District, no buildings or premises shall be used, and no building shall be erected or
altered, for other than one or more of the following uses:
Any use permitted in the Residence A District and subject to the same limitations and
requirements as are contained in Article IV.
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 375/441
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
B.
C.
[1]
D.
Two-family detached dwellings, which shall have a roof other than one of the character or
description known as the "flat roof," subject to the prior approval of the Board of Appeals, which
may, in specific cases, after public notice and hearing, and subject to appropriate conditions and
safeguards, determine and vary the application of the provisions herein established, in harmony
with the purposes enumerated in the Village Law of the State of New York and the general
purpose and intent of this chapter, by granting permission to erect or alter a building for use as a
two-family detached house in the Residence B District, when said Board finds as a fact:
A two-family dwelling will not tend to depreciate the value of existing dwellings in the
neighborhood.
A two-family dwelling will not conflict with the type and character of existing dwellings or of
dwellings under construction or reconstruction in a neighborhood.
A two-family dwelling is not prohibited by covenant or restriction contained in a deed or other
instrument affecting the premises.
The applicant has consented, as a condition for the issuance of a permit to construct a new
dwelling or to alter an existing building, to construct the same in accordance with plans and
specifications to be approved by both the Board of Appeals and the Board of Architectural
Review so that it will harmonize with the neighboring dwellings both as to appearance and
utility.
Such construction, alterations and improvements, among other things, will provide suitable
safeguards against fire hazards and provide for the construction of but one front entrance to
the building.
The applicant has consented to comply with and abide by all requirements of the municipal
departments having jurisdiction.
A minimum of four off-street spaces shall be provided.
The Board shall take into consideration the lot sizes and parking requirements of existing
properties within 500 feet of the lot on which permission is sought to construct a two-family
house.
Multifamily uses. No multifamily dwelling shall contain more than 18 units per acre. No more than
10% of the units shall contain three or more bedrooms. A den that is separated from a living room
shall be counted as a bedroom.
[Amended 5-22-2006 by L.L. No. 9-2006; 10-16-2007 by L.L. No. 6-2007]
(Repealed)[1]
[Amended 4-10-2006 by L.L. No. 2-2006]
Editor's Note: Former Subsection D, regarding private parking fields, was repealed 4-10-2006 by
L.L. No. 2-2006. The Board of Trustees has determined that the elimination of the permitted use
formerly set forth in § 340-13D establishes the existing lots in the Residence B District as
nonconforming. As such, the existing lots are governed by § 340-3 of the Code of the Village of
Rockville Centre. In addition, the existing lots must continue to adhere to the requirements and
restrictions of § 340-13D, including those that pertain to surfacing, landscaping, fencing, and
lighting. In addition, the limitations with regard to the uses and the prohibition of uses of the lots
shall remain applicable to these nonconforming lots. In pertinent part, § 340-13D had provided as
follows: "Parking fields shall be surfaced and constructed in accordance with the rules and
regulations governing the construction of new residential streets within the Village of Rockville
Centre. The space contained in the setback areas shall be adequately landscaped and, in addition
thereto, the entire area shall be fenced in except where such field may abut a public highway or
business-zoned property. No lighting of such area shall be permitted, except that minimum
security-type lighting may be installed upon approval of the Chief Engineer. Such parking fields
shall be used only for private parking of vehicles of an owner, employee or customer of a business
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 376/441
A.
B.
C.
D.
operated in the adjoining Business A, Business AA, Business AAA or Residence C District. Under
no conditions shall these parking fields be used by trucks or commercial vehicles for either parking,
loading or unloading or ingress or egress from any highways or any adjoining property zoned
either residential or business. The use or installation of any mechanical device or structure
designed to raise, lift or otherwise support a vehicle with the intent of increasing on-site vehicle
storage or parking in a private parking field is prohibited in Residence B."
§ 340-14. Lot size.
The lot for each such dwelling shall have a street frontage of not less than 50 feet on each street on
which the lot abuts, and a total area of not less than 5,000 square feet for one- or two-family dwelling
houses. For an apartment house a frontage of 100 feet and a plot area of 15,000 square feet shall be
the minimum requirement.
§ 340-15. Building area.
[Amended 10-25-2004 by L.L. No. 3-2004]
The building area, including all accessory buildings, shall not exceed 40% of the lot area.
§ 340-16. Building height.
[Amended 10-25-2004 by L.L. No. 3-2004]
No building except a church or school shall be raised, altered or erected greater in height than two
stories, which height shall not exceed an aggregate of 30 feet, including false peaks or gables.
§ 340-17. Front yards.
[Amended 10-25-2004 by L.L. No. 3-2004]
No one-family, two-family or multifamily use shall be erected or altered so that the front yard setback
shall be less than 20 feet.
§ 340-18. Side yards.
[Amended 10-25-2004 by L.L. No. 3-2004]
A side yard is required along each side of the main building.
In the case of all buildings other than multifamily uses, the side yard setback requirements shall be
the same as specified in the Residence A District.
On all plots developed for multifamily uses, each side yard shall be not less than 20 feet in width,
except where such plot adjoins a plot in the Residence A District, in which case the side yard
adjoining a Residence A District plot shall be not less than 30 feet in width.
In all classes of dwellings, no part of any projection, including an open porch, shall extend nearer
to the lot line than the limits herein set forth.
§ 340-19. Rear yards.
[Amended 10-25-2004 by L.L. No. 3-2004]
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 377/441
A.
B.
[1]
A.
B.
C.
A.
B.
A rear yard is required on every lot. The depth of a rear yard shall be at least 20 feet, except that on all
plots developed for multifamily uses where such plots adjoins a plot in a Residence A District, such
rear yard shall be not less than 30 feet in depth.
§ 340-20. Corner plots.
[Amended 10-25-2004 by L.L. No. 3-2004]
On corner plots, the setback of any buildings other than multifamily uses shall be the same as
specified in the Residence A District, but need not exceed 20 feet.
In the case of multifamily uses, the setback of the dwelling shall not be less than 20 feet to any
street line or municipal parking field line upon which the plot adjoins, and shall not be less than 20
feet to the property line where such plot adjoins privately owned property in other than a
Residence A District, and 30 feet where such plot adjoins privately owned property in a Residence
A District.
§ 340-21. Parking regulations.
[Amended 7-19-1976 by L.L. No. 4-1976; 2-9-1978 by L.L. No. 3-1978; 6-10-2002 by L.L. No. 5-2002;
10-25-2004 by L.L. No. 3-2004]
Parking space and garage requirements are set forth in Chart IV of the Rockville Centre Zoning
Code. Chart IV is entitled "Schedule of Minimum Required Off-Street Parking."[1]
Editor's Note: Chart IV is included at the end of this chapter.
In the Residence B District, no premises, except multifamily uses and the uses permitted by
§ 340-13D, shall provide space for more than four motor vehicles. Not more than one commercial
vehicle shall be allowed on premises developed for a one- or two-family house, and the capacity
of such commercial vehicle shall be limited to 3/4 ton or limited to a cubical capacity, including the
driving compartment, not in excess of 160 cubic feet. On premises developed for multifamily uses,
no commercial vehicle shall be allowed.
Whenever a multifamily use shall be erected or altered for the purpose of housing three or more
families, provision shall be made on the same or an adjacent plot for off-street parking space for
private passenger automobiles in a number equal to 150% of the number of housekeeping or
professional apartments in such dwelling. All outdoor parking shall be within the area to the rear of
the front or side street building lines, and such outdoor parking area shall be set back a minimum
distance of four feet from all property lines of the plot, and there shall be a minimum distance of
eight feet between such parking area and the multifamily use for which said parking area is used.
Article VI. Residence C District
§ 340-22. Uses.
[Amended 10-27-2003 by L.L. No. 11-2003]
In the Residence C District, no building or structure shall be used, and no building or structure shall be
erected or structurally altered which is arranged, intended or designed to be used, for other than one or
more of the following uses:
Any use permitted in Residence A or B Districts.
Office buildings, including professional and medical office buildings.
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 378/441
C.
D.
[1]
A.
B.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
Hospitals, other than for the mentally ill or for alcoholics or drug addicts.
College or university.
§ 340-23. Other regulations.
[Amended 5-22-2006 by L.L. No. 10-2006]
Single- , two-family and multifamily uses shall comply with the regulations set forth in this chapter in
Article V, Residence B District, with respect to front yard, side yard, rear yard and corner plot setbacks,
building heights and density. Office buildings, including professional and medical office buildings,
hospital and medical buildings shall comply with the same front yard, side yard, rear yard and corner
plot setbacks and building heights as multifamily uses.
§ 340-24. Parking requirements.
[Amended 6-10-2002 by L.L. No. 5-2002]
Parking space requirements are set forth in Chart IV of the Rockville Centre Zoning Code. Chart
IV is entitled "Schedule of Minimum Required Off-Street Parking."[1]
Editor's Note: Chart IV is included at the end of this chapter.
Upon premises used for professional medical buildings or hospitals, parking spaces shall be
maintained upon the same plot.
Article VII. Residence A-M District
[Added 1-24-1983 by L.L. No. 3-1983]
§ 340-25. Permitted uses.
In the Residence A-M District, no building or structure shall be used, and no building or structure shall
be erected or structurally altered which is arranged, intended or designed to be used, for other than
one or more of the following uses:
Any use permitted in a Residence A District.
Hospitals, other than for the insane or feebleminded or for alcoholics or drug addicts.
College or university.
Skilled nursing facility when utilized in connection with a hospital permitted under this chapter.
[Amended 3-24-1999 by L.L. No. 4-1999]
Professional medical building.
§ 340-26. Other regulations.
Single- and two-family houses shall comply with the regulations set forth in this chapter in Article IV,
Residence A District, with respect to lot size, front yard, side yard, rear yard and corner plot setbacks,
and building height and area. Hospitals, colleges, universities, professional medical buildings and
nursing homes shall comply with the same lot size, front yard, side yard, rear yard and corner lot
setbacks and building height and area regulations as required for apartment houses as set forth in
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 379/441
[1]
A.
Article V, Residence B District. In addition to the setback requirements as contained herein for any use
other than those uses permitted in a Residence A District, a forty-foot buffer zone shall be provided
and maintained in its natural state, between such usage and any adjoining Residence A District.
§ 340-27. Parking requirements.
[Amended 6-10-2002 by L.L. No. 5-2002]
Parking space requirements are set forth in Chart IV of the Rockville Centre Zoning Code. Chart IV is
entitled "Schedule of Minimum Required Off-Street Parking."[1]
Editor's Note: Chart IV is included at the end of this chapter.
Article VIII. Urban Renewal Multiple Dwelling B (R) District
§ 340-28. Uses.
In Urban Renewal Multiple Dwelling B (R) District, no building or premises shall be used, and no
building shall be erected or altered, for other than one or more of the following uses:
Any use permitted in Residence B District.
§ 340-29. Lot size.
Same as Residence B District.
§ 340-30. Building area.
Same as Residence B District.
§ 340-31. Building height.
Same as Residence B District.
§ 340-32. Front yards.
Same as Residence B District.
§ 340-33. Side yards.
Same as Residence B District.
§ 340-34. Rear yards.
Same as Residence B District.
§ 340-35. Corner plots.
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 380/441
[1]
A.
B.
C.
A.
B.
Same as Residence B District.
§ 340-35.1. Density for multifamily uses.
[Added 5-22-2006 by L.L. No. 11-2006]
Same as Residence B District.
§ 340-36. Parking regulations.
[Amended 6-10-2002 by L.L. No. 5-2002]
Parking space requirements are set forth in Chart IV of the Rockville Centre Zoning Code. Chart
IV is entitled "Schedule of Minimum Required Off-Street Parking."[1]
Editor's Note: Chart IV is included at the end of this chapter.
In the Urban Renewal Multiple Dwelling B (R) District, no premises except multiple dwellings shall
provide space for more than four motor vehicles. Not more than one commercial vehicle shall be
allowed on premises developed for a one- or two-family house; the capacity of such commercial
vehicle shall be limited to 3/4 of a ton or limited to a cubical capacity, including the driving
compartment, not in excess of 160 cubic feet. On premises developed for multiple dwellings, no
commercial vehicle shall be allowed.
In no event shall any parking area be less than eight feet from any multiple dwelling.
Article IX. Urban Renewal Multiple Dwelling B (S) District
§ 340-37. Uses.
In Urban Renewal Multiple Dwelling B (S) District, no building or premises shall be used, and no
building shall be erected or altered, for other than one or more of the following uses:
Any use permitted in Urban Renewal Multiple Dwelling B (R) District, such uses being subject to
all regulations pertaining to said Urban Renewal Multiple Dwelling B (R) District (Article VIII,
§§ 340-28 through 340-36).
Single- or two-family attached dwellings, subject to the specific regulations as listed herein
(§§ 340-38 through 340-45, this article).
§ 340-38. Lot size.
The lot for each dwelling shall have a total area of not less than 1,800 square feet.
§ 340-39. Building area.
The building area, including accessory buildings, shall not exceed 40% of the lot area.
§ 340-40. Building height.
Same as Residence A District.
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 381/441
[1]
A.
B.
A.
B.
§ 340-41. Front yard.
Same as Residence A District.
§ 340-42. Side yards.
Same as Residence A District.
§ 340-43. Rear yards.
Same as Residence A District.
§ 340-44. Corner plots.
Same as Residence A District.
§ 340-44.1. Density for multifamily uses.
[Added 5-22-2006 by L.L. No. 11-2006]
Same as Residence B District.
§ 340-45. Parking requirements.
[Amended 6-10-2002 by L.L. No. 5-2002]
Parking space requirements are set forth in Chart IV of the Rockville Centre Zoning Code. Chart
IV is entitled "Schedule of Minimum Required Off-Street Parking."[1]
Editor's Note: Chart IV is included at the end of this chapter.
No premises shall provide space for more than three motor vehicles, and commercial vehicles are
expressly forbidden.
Article X. Urban Renewal Multiple Dwelling B (RC) District
§ 340-46. Uses.
In Urban Renewal Multiple Dwelling B (RC) District, no building or premises shall be used, and no
building shall be erected or altered, for other than one or more of the following uses:
Any use permitted in Urban Renewal Multiple Dwelling B (S) District, such uses being subject to
all regulations pertaining to said Urban Renewal Multiple Dwelling B (S) District (Article IX, §§ 340-
37 through 340-45).
Residence club for permanent guests only, excluding transient guests but including facilities and
services primarily for serving its occupants; all subject to the specific regulations as listed herein
(§§ 340-47 through 340-54, this article).
§ 340-47. Lot size.
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 382/441
[1]
[1]
The lot for each such residence club shall have an area of not less than 15,000 square feet.
§ 340-48. Building area.
The building area, including all accessory buildings, shall not exceed 40% of the lot area.
§ 340-49. Building height.
No building shall be greater in height than 2 1/2 stories, which height shall not exceed 30 feet,
excluding elevator and fire exit penthouses.
§ 340-50. Front yard.
No building shall be erected or altered so that the front yard setback shall be less than 20 feet.
§ 340-51. Side yards.
No building shall be erected or altered so that the side yard setback shall be less than 20 feet.
§ 340-52. Rear yards.
A rear yard is required on every lot, and the depth of such rear yard shall be not less than 20 feet.
§ 340-53. Corner plots.
On corner plots the setback of any building to any street line shall be not less than 20 feet.
§ 340-53.1. Density.
[Added 5-22-2006 by L.L. No. 11-2006; amended 10-16-2007 by L.L. No. 6-2007]
No multifamily dwelling shall contain more than 18 units per acre. No more than 10% of the units shall
contain three or more bedrooms. A den that is separated from a living room shall be counted as a
bedroom.
§ 340-54. Parking requirements.
[Amended 6-10-2002 by L.L. No. 5-2002]
Parking space requirements are set forth in Chart IV of the Rockville Centre Zoning Code. Chart IV is
entitled "Schedule of Minimum Required Off-Street Parking."[1]
Editor's Note: Chart IV is included at the end of this chapter.
Article XI. Urban Renewal Multiple Dwelling B (SC) District
[Amended 11-4-1974 by L.L. No. 1-1974; 9-8-1975 by L.L. No. 3-1975[1]]
Editor's Note: This local law repealed L.L. No. 1-1974. Article XI has been reinstated as it appeared
prior to the adoption of L.L. No. 1-1974.
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 383/441
A.
B.
A.
B.
C.
§ 340-55. Uses.
In Urban Renewal Multiple Dwelling B (SC) District, no building or premises shall be used, and no
building shall be erected or altered, for other than one or more of the following uses:
Any use permitted in Urban Renewal Multiple Dwelling B (RC) District, such uses being subject to
all regulations pertaining to said Urban Renewal Multiple Dwelling B (RC) District (Article X,
§§ 340-46 through 340-54).
Multifamily use designed primarily to accommodate senior citizens, in which not more than 10% of
the apartments shall contain more than one bedroom, and subject to the specific regulations as
listed herein. No multifamily dwelling shall contain more than 18 units per acre.
[Amended 5-22-2006 by L.L. No. 11-2006; 10-16-2007 by L.L. No. 6-2007]
§ 340-56. Lot size.
Lot size requirements shall be the same as for the Residence B District.
§ 340-57. Building area.
The building area for buildings greater than 40 feet in height shall not exceed 25% of the lot area.
The building area for buildings greater than 30 feet in height but less than 40 feet in height shall
not exceed 35% of the lot area.
The building area for buildings less than 30 feet in height shall not exceed 40% of the lot area.
§ 340-58. Building height.
[Amended 5-22-2006 by L.L. No. 11-2006]
No building shall be raised, altered or erected greater in height than 48 feet from the average elevation
of the land adjacent to the foundation walls to the top of the roof beams. Where basement or ground
floor parking is provided, this height may be increased by 10 feet.
§ 340-59. Front yards.
Front yard requirements shall be the same as for the Residence B District.
§ 340-60. Side yards.
Side yard requirements shall be the same as for the Residence B District.
§ 340-61. Rear yards.
Rear yard requirements shall be the same as for the Residence B District.
§ 340-62. Corner plots.
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 384/441
[1]
A.
B.
A.
A.
B.
Corner plot requirements shall be the same as for the Residence B District.
§ 340-63. Parking requirements.
[Amended 6-10-2002 by L.L. No. 5-2002]
Parking space requirements are set forth in Chart IV of the Rockville Centre Zoning Code. Chart
IV is entitled "Schedule of Minimum Required Off-Street Parking."[1]
Editor's Note: Chart IV is included at the end of this chapter.
All parking shall be not less than eight feet from any multiple dwelling. The parking of commercial
vehicles shall not be allowed.
Article XII. Urban Renewal Multiple Dwelling B Low-Rise
(SC) District
[Added 7-19-1976 by L.L. No. 3-1976]
§ 340-64. Uses.
In the Urban Renewal Multiple Dwelling B Low-Rise (SC) District, no building or premises shall be
used, and no building shall be erected or altered, for other than the following uses:
Multifamily use designed primarily to accommodate senior citizens, in which not more than 10% of
the apartments shall contain more than one bedroom and subject to the specific regulations as
listed herein. No multifamily dwelling shall contain more than 18 units per acre.
[Amended 5-22-2006 by L.L. No. 11-2006; 10-16-2007 by L.L. No. 6-2007]
§ 340-65. Lot size.
The minimum lot area shall be one acre.
§ 340-66. Building area.
The building area for three-story buildings shall not exceed 30% of the lot area.
The building area for one- and two-story buildings shall not exceed 40%.
§ 340-67. Building height.
No building shall be raised, altered or erected which is greater in height than three stories.
§ 340-68. Yard requirements.
The requirements for all yards shall be the height of the building plus five feet, with the minimum yard
requirement being 25 feet.
§ 340-69. Parking requirements.
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 385/441
[1]
A.
[1]
A.
[1]
B.
(1)
C.
[Amended 6-10-2002 by L.L. No. 5-2002]
Parking space requirements are set forth in Chart IV of the Rockville Centre Zoning Code. Chart IV is
entitled "Schedule of Minimum Required Off-Street Parking."[1] All parking shall be not less than eight
feet from any multiple dwelling. The parking of commercial vehicles shall not be allowed.
Editor's Note: Chart IV is included at the end of this chapter.
Article XIII. Urban Renewal Multiple Dwelling C District
§ 340-70. Uses.
In the Urban Renewal Multiple Dwelling C District, no building or premises shall be used, and no
building shall be erected or altered, for other than one or more of the following uses:
Any use permitted in the Urban Renewal Multiple Dwelling B (RC) District and, in addition thereto,
nursing homes. Such uses shall be governed by all regulations pertaining to said Urban Renewal
Multiple Dwelling B (RC) District (Article X, §§ 340-46 through 340-54).
§ 340-71. Parking requirements.
[Amended 6-10-2002 by L.L. No. 5-2002]
Parking space requirements are set forth in Chart IV of the Rockville Centre Zoning Code. Chart IV is
entitled "Schedule of Minimum Required Off-Street Parking."[1]
Editor's Note: Chart IV is included at the end of this chapter.
Article XIV. Business AA District
§ 340-72. Uses.
[Amended 9-19-1977 by L.L. No. 5-1977; 1-11-1988 by L.L. No. 6-1988; 7-11-1988 by L.L. No. 11-
1988; 3-16-1992 by L.L. No. 1-1992; 6-23-1997 by L.L. No. 2-1997; 12-2-1998 by L.L. No. 3-1998; 6-
10-2002 by L.L. No. 5-2002]
In the Business AA District, no building or premises shall be used and no building shall be erected or
altered for other than one or more of the following uses:
Any use permitted in the Business A District and subject to all limitations and restrictions
contained therein, except that no building or buildings, other than an office building or buildings,
shall be erected, altered or enlarged for any permitted use in said Business AA District unless
there is provided and continuously maintained upon the same plot off-street parking for motor
vehicles, which off-street parking area shall adjoin the building in which the permitted use is
conducted. The parking area required shall be in accordance with the provision of Subsection B
below. All such parking areas shall be located outside of the required front yard setback areas or
street-widening lines.
Required parking spaces. Parking regulations and requirements are set forth in Chart IV of the
Rockville Centre Zoning Code. Chart IV is entitled "Schedule of Minimum Required Off-Street
Parking."[1]
Editor's Note: Chart IV is included at the end of this chapter.
Parking.
Off-street parking to be provided. Off-street parking must be provided and continuously
maintained upon the same plot for any freestanding building that is erected, altered or
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 386/441
(2)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(1)
(2)
D.
enlarged for use as business offices, fast-food establishments or restaurants. Off-street
parking must be provided and continuously maintained upon the same plot for any
freestanding building that is erected or enlarged for the sale of goods at retail or services
clearly incidental to retail sales.
When an existing freestanding building is enlarged, parking must be so provided based upon
the increase in square footage.
Special exception.
The Board of Appeals may vary the parking requirements as set forth in Subsection B hereof
upon the showing of circumstances which will warrant the creation of special exception. The
Board shall be guided by the following standards:
The size and location of the building (whether it is new construction or an enlargement or
an alteration of an existing building), the nature and intensity of the use and whether it is
an enlargement of the existing use or a change of the use to another permitted use.
The availability of off-site parking either on adjoining land or on land reasonably close to
the site.
The availability of municipal parking which will accommodate the parking of the type
required for the use made of the building, i.e., whether it is shopping or employee or any
other kind of parking permitted in a nearby municipal parking field.
The traffic conditions in the general vicinity of the site.
The character of the district and whether the granting of a special exception would
discourage the appropriate development or use of adjacent land or buildings or impair the
value thereof, all with the view of conserving the value of such land and buildings.
The encouragement of the most appropriate use of the lands consistent with the
permitted usages in the area.
The standards set forth in Article XXV of this chapter.
The Board may impose conditions which would bring about the termination of the special
exception should the usage change or should the applicant, or the successor in interest of the
applicant, violate or fail to comply with any condition imposed by the Board in connection with
or as part of the granting of the special exception.
§ 340-73. Parking fields shown on plot plans.
All such parking fields required by this article shall be shown upon the plot plan submitted for the
building permit for the premises, which plot plan shall also show the proposed curb cuts, driveways,
arrangement for parking and drainage system.
§ 340-74. Maintenance of parking fields.
All parking fields required pursuant to this article shall be kept clean and free from rubbish, debris and
snow, and the surface of the parking area shall be suitably graded and drained to prevent the
accumulation of water. The failure of the owner or occupant of premises upon which a parking area is
required pursuant to this article to maintain such parking area as above provided shall constitute a
violation of this chapter and shall subject the violator to the penalties prescribed in this chapter.
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 387/441
[1]
A.
(1)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(2)
B.
§ 340-75. Use of parking spaces.
Parking spaces shall not be considered as provided pursuant to this article unless reasonable
precautions are taken to assure that such parking spaces are used only by persons who are at the
time either owners, proprietors or employees of business being conducted in the building or premises
for which such parking spaces are provided or are persons conducting business with such owners or
proprietors of such places of business.
Article XV. Business AAA District
§ 340-76. Purpose.
The existence of certain parcels of land in the Village bordering business districts and adjoining
property used for residential purposes has presented problems of the use of such parcels in conformity
with the general purpose of this chapter and specifically the use of such parcels in such manner so as
to blend residence use and business use with the least possible harmful effects requires the
establishment of an area in the nature of a buffer zone to accomplish the intent and purposes of this
chapter, which buffer zone is designated as Business AAA.
§ 340-77. Uses.
[Amended 6-10-2002 by L.L. No. 5-2002]
Parking space requirements are set forth in Chart IV of the Rockville Centre Zoning Code. Chart
IV is entitled "Schedule of Minimum Required Off-Street Parking."[1]
Editor's Note: Chart IV is included at the end of this chapter.
In the Business AAA District, no building or premises shall be used, and no building shall be
erected or altered, for other than one or more of the following uses:
Any use permitted in the Residence C District and subject to all limitations and restrictions
contained therein.
Any use permitted in the Business A District except as hereinafter set forth, and subject to
limitations in respect to building height, front yards, side yards, rear yards and corner plots as
required in the Residence C District, and subject to parking requirements as set forth in Chart
IV of the Rockville Centre Zoning Code. Chart IV is entitled "Schedule of Minimum Required
Off-Street Parking,"[2] provided that the consent and permission of the Board of Appeals as
hereinafter set forth has been obtained; except that the following uses are prohibited:
Theater.
Store for sale of food.
Restaurant, nightclub, cabaret, cafe or other place serving food or beverages; provided,
however, that no nightclub, cabaret, or other similar use otherwise permitted by law shall
be operated in any portion of a building or premises which is below street level, and no
nightclub, cabaret, or other similar use shall be permitted on any premises without the
prior consent of the Board of Trustees.
[Added 7-9-2007 by L.L. No. 2-2007]
Railway or passenger station.
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 388/441
(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)
(i)
(j)
(k)
(l)
(m)
(n)
[2]
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
Express office.
Funeral home or parlor.
Public garage, automobile service or gas filling station, taxi or motor vehicle station,
shooting gallery, bowling alley, billiard or pool parlor.
Plumbing shop and tinsmith shop.
Storage warehouse.
Wholesale store for sale of goods.
Wholesale sample room.
Light manufacturing.
Carpet and rug cleaning.
Hotels and motels.
Editor's Note: Chart IV is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 340-78. Application for business uses; conditions.
Applications for business use of property in Business AAA District shall be made to the Board of
Appeals, which in passing upon such applications must consider and be guided by the general
provisions contained in Article XXVII of this chapter, and in addition thereto and as a basis for granting
such application, must find that the proposed use will not create any of the following conditions:
Parking problems as relating to employees and customers.
Traffic problems as relating to driveway entrances and exits and as relating to the proximity of
such business to public and parochial schools.
That such business will not generate objectionable noise and odors.
That the hours of operation will not be harmful to the public health and welfare of the surrounding
residents.
That such use will not interfere with the serene living of persons in the residential districts.
Spilling of light on residential premises.
§ 340-79. Use change; permission required.
Any business use permitted as provided in this article shall not be changed to any other use without
the permission of the Board of Appeals granted after the application for such change made in the same
manner as set forth in § 340-78.
§ 340-80. Compliance required.
Any permit granted by the Board of Appeals as hereinbefore provided in this article shall be subject to
termination upon failure of the owner or operator of such business to comply with any conditions or
requirements that the Board of Appeals may impose for the granting of such permit. The failure of an
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 389/441
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
(11)
A.
owner or operator of a business to comply with such conditions or requirements shall also constitute a
violation of this chapter and subject the violator to the enforcement procedures contained in this
chapter.
§ 340-81. Combination business and residence prohibited.
In Business AAA District, no building erected or altered for Residence C District use shall be permitted
to be used in part for any business purpose, and no building shall be erected, altered or used for any
combination of residence and business purposes, it being the intent of this section to prohibit the future
mixing of residence and business use in any single building in the district.
Article XVI. Business A District
[Amended 9-17-1973 by L.L. No. 1-1973; 10-15-1973 by L.L. No. 3-1973; 1-11-1988 by L.L. No. 4-
1988; 1-11-1988 by L.L. No. 7-1988; 7-11-1988 by L.L. No. 12-1988; 10-6-1997 by L.L. No. 3-1997; 6-
15-1998 by L.L. No. 1-1998; 12-2-1998 by L.L. No. 3-1998; 3-29-1999 by L.L. No. 4-1999; 6-10-2002
by L.L. No. 5-2002; 1-13-2003 by L.L. No. 2-2003]
§ 340-82. Uses.
In Business A District, no building or premises shall be used and no building shall be erected or
altered for any other than one or more of the following uses:
Store for the sale of goods at retail or performance of customary personal services, or
services clearly incidental to retail sales, but no fabrication or manufacturing except incidental
to and on the same premises with such retail sale.
Business, professional, banking or post office.
Restaurant, nightclub, cabaret, cafe or other place serving food or beverages, provided;
however, that no nightclub, cabaret, or other similar use otherwise permitted by law shall be
operated in any portion of a building or premises which is below street level, and no nightclub,
cabaret, or other similar use shall be permitted on any premises without the prior consent of
the Board of Trustees.
[Amended 7-9-2007 by L.L. No. 2-2007]
Advertising signs; provided, however, that the same shall in all cases conform to the
requirements set forth in other ordinances of the Village.
Railway or bus passenger station.
Telegraph office, express office.
Funeral home or parlor.
Hotel or motel.
Printing office and shop.
Private school.
Public garage, automobile service or gas filling station, taxi or motor vehicle station, used car
lot, dry-cleaning establishment, amusement park, miniature golf course, bowling alley,
shooting gallery, billiard or pool parlor and business of a similar nature, subject however, to
the consent and permit of the Board of Appeals as provided in this chapter; provided,
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 390/441
(12)
(13)
(14)
(15)
(16)
(17)
(18)
(19)
[1]
[2]
[3]
[4]
[5]
[6]
[7]
[8]
[9]
(a)
(20)
however, that the Board of Appeals will not give its consent or issue any permit for any activity
which would include mechanical rides of any type.
Parking lot area for transient motor vehicles.
Plumbing shop, tinsmith shop.
Storage warehouse.
Theater, provided that a special use permit is obtained from the Board of Appeals.
[Amended 7-9-2007 by L.L. No. 2-2007]
Wholesale store for the sale of goods.
Wholesale sample room.
Light manufacturing; provided, however, the consent and permit of the Board of Appeals is
first obtained; and further provided that the noise caused by the operation of the machinery,
the emission of odors, stenches, dust, smoke, gas or noise are confined within the building or
premises where such manufacturing or assembling of articles is carried on.
Carpet or rug cleaning; provided, however, that the consent and permit of the Board of
Appeals as provided in this chapter is first obtained; and provided further that the process or
operation of cleaning carpets and rugs does not employ the use of flammables of any nature
whatsoever, that the operation or process is completely performed within the building where
such business is carried on and that the noise caused by the operation or process of cleaning
and the emission of odors, stenches, dust, smoke or gas are confined within the building
where such cleaning is carried on.
Exterior drive-through window; provided, however, that the consent of the Board of Appeals
as provided in this chapter is first obtained.
When an application for an exterior drive-through window is made to the Board of
Appeals, the Board must consider and be guided by the general provisions contained in
Article XXVII of this chapter, including the health, safety and general welfare of the
community. In addition, and as a basis for determining such an application, the Board of
Appeals must consider the impact of the proposed use of the exterior drive-through
window, as it relates to each of the following factors, as well as additional factors relevant
to the particular application, by considering:
Hours of operation for such use.
Use, noise and placement of microphones.
Placement of signs.
Location of driveways.
Location of window.
Impact on traffic, and emissions from traffic using the drive-through window.
Odors from use.
Installation of fencing and screening to protect abutting residential property.
Lighting from the signage of the drive-through window.
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 391/441
(b)
(c)
(21)
[1]
(22)
[2]
(23)
[3]
B.
[1]
In addition, the applicant, where required by the Board of Appeals, will provide a report
from a traffic expert acceptable to the Board of Appeals on the impact of the exterior
drive-through window upon traffic flow and safety.
Notwithstanding anything in this Village Code to the contrary, when granting any variance
or permit or consent or other form of approbation, the Board of Appeals may impose
reasonable conditions and restrictions that relate to the use, ownership, manner of use,
duration of relief granted or any other condition which to the Board of Appeals may seem
just and proper in the circumstances.
Senior care housing, in accordance with § 340-111 et seq.
(Reserved)[1]
Editor's Note: Former Subsection A(22), regarding multifamily uses with a nonresidential use
on the street floor, was repealed 8-6-2007 by L.L. No. 3-2007.
(Reserved)[2]
Editor's Note: Former Subsection A(23), regarding multifamily uses, was repealed 8-6-2007
by L.L. No. 3-2007.
(Reserved)[3]
Editor's Note: Former Subsection B, regarding special use permits, was repealed 8-6-2007 by L.L.
No. 3-2007.
§ 340-83. Building area.
[Amended 8-6-2007 by L.L. No. 3-2007]
The building area shall not exceed 90% of the lot area.
§ 340-83.1. (Reserved)
Editor's Note: Former § 340-83.1, Density, added 5-22-2006 by L.L. No. 4-2006, was repealed 8-6-2007
by L.L. No. 3-2007.
§ 340-84. Building height.
[Amended 8-6-2007 by L.L. No. 3-2007]
No building shall be raised and no such building or part thereof shall be erected or altered to be greater
in height than the lesser of 36 feet or three stories.
§ 340-85. Front yards.
[Amended 8-6-2007 by L.L. No. 3-2007]
A setback of at least 10 feet from the front property line on interior lots shall be required.
§ 340-86. Side yards.
[Amended 8-6-2007 by L.L. No. 3-2007]
No side yards are required, except that where abutting any residential district a ten-foot setback is
required.
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 392/441
A.
B.
[1]
A.
B.
A.
§ 340-87. Rear yards.
[Amended 8-6-2007 by L.L. No. 3-2007]
A rear yard of at least 10 feet is required, except where the rear property or lot line of any lot
constitutes the common boundary line between such lot and municipally owned land or premises
designed and actually used for public parking spaces for motor vehicles, in which case no rear yard
setback is required.
§ 340-88. Corner plots.
On corner plots a setback of at least 10 feet from the property line on both street frontages shall
be required.
[Amended 8-6-2007 by L.L. No. 3-2007]
No side or rear yard setbacks are required, except where abutting any residential district, in which
case a ten-foot setback is required.
§ 340-89. Parking requirements.
Parking space requirements are set forth in Chart IV of the Rockville Centre Zoning Code. Chart
IV is entitled "Schedule of Minimum Required Off-Street Parking."[1]
Editor's Note: Chart IV is included as an attachment to this chapter.
Parking shall be provided for and continuously maintained within 200 feet of the premises for
funeral homes and parlors, theaters, bowling alleys, hotels and motels, office buildings and
buildings used for the sale of goods at retail or services clearly incidental to retail sales, and light
manufacturing.
[Amended 8-6-2007 by L.L. No. 3-2007]
Article XVI-A. Business A-1 District
[Added 5-1-2017 by L.L. No. 2-2017]
§ 340-89.1. Business A-1 District defined; Zoning Map amended.
The areas of the Village which shall constitute the Business A-1 District are those portions of the
existing Business A District as are located (a) north of Sunrise Highway and between Oceanside Road
and Long Beach Road, (b) along Long Beach Road north of the intersection of Oceanside Road and
Long Beach Road, and (c) south of Merrick Road, east of South Kensington Avenue and west of
Oceanside Road. The Zoning Map of the Village of Rockville Centre is hereby amended accordingly, to
reclassify each such area as constituting the Business A-1 District.
§ 340-89.2. Permitted uses.
[Amended 5-7-2018 by L.L. No. 3-2018; 6-28-2018 by L.L. No. 5-2018]
In the Business A-1 District, only the following uses are permitted:
Store for the sale of goods at retail or performance of customary personal services, or services
clearly incidental to retail sales, but no fabrication or manufacturing except incidental to and on the
same premises with such retail sale.
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 393/441
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
I.
J.
K.
L.
M.
Business, professional, banking or post office.
Restaurant, cafe or other place serving food or beverages; provided, however, that nightclubs or
cabarets and drive-through windows are prohibited.
General business, including printing office, printing shop, and dry-cleaning establishment.
Funeral home or parlor.
Private school.
Public garage, automobile service or gas filling station, taxi or motor vehicle station, dry-cleaning
establishment, bowling alley, billiard or pool parlor; subject, however, to the consent and permit of
the Board of Appeals as provided in this chapter; and provided, however, that the Board of
Appeals shall not give its consent nor issue any permit for any activity which would include
mechanical rides of any type.
Parking lot area for transient motor vehicles.
Storage warehouse.
Light manufacturing; provided, however, the consent and permit of the Board of Appeals is first
obtained; and further provided that the noise caused by the operation of the machinery, the
emission of odors, stenches, dust, smoke, gas or noise is confined within the building or premises
where such manufacturing or assembling of articles is carried on.
Carpet or rug cleaning; provided, however, that the consent and permit of the Board of Appeals as
provided in this chapter is first obtained; and provided further that the process or operation of
cleaning carpets and rugs does not employ the use of flammables of any nature whatsoever, that
the operation or process is completely performed within the building where such business is
carried on and that the noise caused by the operation or process of cleaning and the emission of
odors, stenches, dust, smoke or gas is confined within the building where such cleaning is carried
on.
(Reserved)
Senior care housing, in accordance with § 340-111 et seq.
§ 340-89.3. Building area.
The building area shall not exceed 90% of the lot area.
§ 340-89.4. Building height.
No building shall be raised and no such building or part thereof shall be erected or altered to be greater
in height than the lesser of 18 feet or one story.
§ 340-89.5. Front yards.
A setback of at least 10 feet from the front property line on interior lots shall be required.
§ 340-89.6. Side yards.
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 394/441
A.
B.
[1]
A.
B.
A.
B.
C.
D.
No side yards are required, except that where abutting any residential district a ten-foot setback is
required.
§ 340-89.7. Rear yards.
A rear yard of at least 10 feet is required, except where the rear property or lot line of any lot
constitutes the common boundary line between such lot and municipally owned land or premises
designed and actually used for public parking spaces for motor vehicles, in which case no rear yard
setback is required.
§ 340-89.8. Corner plots.
On corner plots a setback of at least 10 feet from the property line on both street frontages shall
be required.
No side or rear yard setbacks are required, except where abutting any residential district, in which
case a ten-foot setback is required.
§ 340-89.9. Parking Requirements.
Parking space requirements are set forth in Chart IV of the Rockville Centre Zoning Code. Chart
IV is entitled "Schedule of Minimum Required Off-Street Parking Spaces."[1]
Editor's Note: Chart IV is included as an attachment to this chapter.
Required parking shall be provided and continuously maintained within 200 feet of the premises
for funeral homes and parlors, theaters, bowling alleys, hotels and motels, office buildings and
buildings used for the sale of goods at retail or services clearly incidental to retail sales, and light
manufacturing.
Article XVII. Business B District
§ 340-90. Uses.
In the Business B District, no building or premises shall be used and no building shall be erected or
altered for residential use of any kind or nature and no building or premises shall be used and no
building shall be erected or altered for any other than one or more of the following uses:
Any use permitted in the Business A District.
Lumberyard.
Contractor's plant; provided, however, that the premises so used shall be used only for the storage
or handling of material and equipment ordinarily and actively used by the contractor in the
operation of his business and shall not be used for the storage or handling of discarded or
secondhand material, equipment or junk.
Heavy-manufacturing or -assembling plant, provided that said plant is not noxious or offensive by
reason of emission of odor, dust, smoke, gas or noise and is not dangerous to health, life or
property and is not contrary to the general plan and purpose of this chapter. The consent and
permit of the Board of Appeals shall be necessary in all cases for any heavy-manufacturing or -
assembling plant.
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 395/441
E.
[1]
Milk or beverage bottling plant.
§ 340-91. Building area.
The building area shall not exceed 90% of the lot area.
§ 340-92. Building height.
[Amended 1-11-1988 by L.L. No. 5-1988]
No building shall be raised and no building or part thereof shall be erected or altered to be greater in
height than an aggregate of 48 feet.
§ 340-93. Front yards.
A setback of at least 10 feet from the front property line on interior lots shall be required.
§ 340-94. Side yards.
No side yards are required.
§ 340-95. Rear yards.
A rear yard of at least 10 feet is required, except that where the rear property or lot line of any lot
constitutes the common boundary line between such lot and municipally owned land or premises
designed and actually used for parking spaces for motor vehicles, no rear yard setback from such
common boundary line is required and the rear wall of a building or buildings constructed on such lot
may be extended to such boundary line.
§ 340-96. Corner plots.
On corner plots, a setback of at least 10 feet from the property line on both street frontages shall be
required.
§ 340-97. Parking requirements.
[Amended 12-2-1998 by L.L. No. 3-1998; 6-10-2002 by L.L. No. 5-2002]
Parking spaces and requirements are set forth in Chart IV of the Rockville Centre Zoning Code. Chart
IV is entitled "Schedule of Minimum Required Off-Street Parking."[1]
Editor's Note: Chart IV is included at the end of this chapter.
Article XVIII. Urban Renewal Commercial or Light
Manufacturing A District
[Amended 10-15-1973 by L.L. No. 3-1973; 9-19-1977 by L.L. No. 6-1977; 12-2-1998 by L.L. No. 3-
1998; 6-10-2002 by L.L. No. 5-2002; 1-13-2003 by L.L. No. 3-2003]
§ 340-98. Uses.
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 396/441
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
[1]
(6)
(7)
A.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
B.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(1)
C.
In Urban Renewal Commercial or Light Manufacturing A District, no building or premises shall be
used, and no building shall be erected or altered, for other than one or more of the following uses:
Office buildings, including professional and medical office buildings.
Commercial and retail commercial.
Private parking.
Recreational facilities, together with the usual auxiliary facilities.
Hotel and motel.
(Reserved)[1]
Editor's Note: Former Subsection A(6), regarding community theater uses, was repealed 7-9-
2007 by L.L. No. 2-2007.
Multifamily uses.
The following uses are also permitted, subject to a special use permit to be issued by the Planning
Board in accordance with the criteria set forth in § 340-98C.
Light manufacturing and parts assembly.
Research facilities.
Warehousing and distribution.
Multifamily uses, with a nonresidential use on the street floor.
Community theaters, which shall include movie theaters with no more than two screens, and
theaters for concerts, plays and community events.
[Added 7-9-2007 by L.L. No. 2-2007]
When a special use permit is required, the Planning Board shall have the power, in accordance
with Chapter 330, and after public notice and hearing, to grant a special use permit.
Approval criteria.
A site plan is required.
Compatibility with district. The location and size of the use, the nature and intensity of the
operations involved in or conducted in connection with the use, the size of the site in
relation to the use, the assembly of persons in connection with the use, and the location
of the site with respect to streets giving access to the site are such that the use will be in
harmony with the appropriate and orderly development of the district in which the use is
proposed to be located.
Services. The proposed structure will be readily accessible for fire and police protection.
Adjacent properties. The location, nature and height of the structure and its walls and
fences and the landscaping shall not hinder or discourage the development of adjacent
land and buildings.
Neighborhood character. The neighborhood character and surrounding property values
shall be reasonably safeguarded.
Traffic. The use will not cause undue traffic congestion or create a traffic hazard.
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 397/441
(g)
(a)
(b)
[2]
(c)
(d)
(2)
(a)
[1]
[2]
[3]
[4]
(b)
(3)
Parking. Parking areas will be properly located and suitably screened from adjoining
residential uses and districts, and the entrance and exit drives shall be laid out so as to
achieve maximum safety.
Specific approval criteria for multifamily uses with nonresidential street floor uses.
A site plan shall be required. The structure shall be required to adhere to area, bulk,
setback and height provisions for multifamily structures in the district, regardless of the
nonresidential use that may be located on the ground floor.
Allowed street floor uses. The uses proposed for the street floor of the structure shall be
only those principal permitted uses allowed in the district. Such uses shall be compatible
with the immediately adjacent multifamily housing. The Planning Board shall consider
noise and vibration, odors, pollution, hours of operation and expected traffic volumes in
making this determination.
Off-street parking and loading. The proposed nonresidential street floor use(s) shall
provide sufficient parking and loading spaces, in accordance with Chart VI.[2] Such
parking spaces shall be designated as separate from the parking spaces for the
multifamily units. Residential parking spaces shall be in a separate lot, separate area of
the whole lot, or reserved. The Planning Board may require additional parking for visitors
up to 15% more than required in these regulations. Loading spaces, if required, and
dumpster areas shall be located and designed to minimize interference with the parking
for the residential and nonresidential uses. Dumpster areas shall be screened.
Editor's Note: Chart VI is included at the end of this chapter.
Separate access. Access to the street floor nonresidential uses shall be separate from
the access to the residential units. However, the Planning Board may approve a common
lobby or plaza.
Specific approval criteria for light manufacturing, warehousing, distribution, parts assembly
and research facilities. These uses are allowed in URCLMA Districts, after public notice and
hearing, subject to the approval of a special use permit by the Planning Board.
Site plan. A site plan shall be required.
Performance standards. The Planning Board shall require the applicant to demonstrate
that noise, odors, dust or other particulate matter, smoke, glare, heat, gas, solid wastes,
nontoxic wastes, hazardous or toxic or noxious wastes, radioactivity, fire or explosion
hazards shall be minimized to the greatest extent possible and shall in all cases be
confined within the building or premises where such manufacturing or assembling of
articles is carried on. Continued conformance with such standards shall be a requirement
for a valid special use permit. The following specific provisions shall apply:
Enclosed operations, material storage. All operations shall be conducted within
enclosed structures. All materials shall be stored within enclosed structures.
Fuel. All operations shall be required to comply with federal, state and local
municipal and environmental regulations.
Smoke and particulate emissions. The permitted levels shall be no greater than
those allowable under applicable state administrative regulations regarding air
pollution control.
Dust. No dust of any kind is permitted to escape beyond the confines of the structure
in which it is produced.
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 398/441
[5]
[6]
[7]
[8]
[9]
[10]
[11]
(c)
[1]
[2]
[3]
[4]
(d)
Vibrations. There shall be no measurable vibrations beyond the lot line of any
individual operation.
Toxic or noxious matter. No use shall discharge across the boundaries of the lot
wherein it is located toxic or noxious matter that can cause any damage to health, to
animals and vegetation, or to other forms of property.
Odors. There shall be no emission of odors as to be offensive at any point along or
beyond lot lines. Any process that may involve the creation or emission of any odor
shall be provided with a secondary safeguard system so that control will be
maintained if the primary safeguard system should fail.
Explosive hazards. No activities involving the storage, utilization or manufacture of
materials or products that decompose by detonation shall be permitted within the
district.
Glare. Any operation producing intense glare or heat shall be performed within an
enclosed building as to be completely imperceptible from any point beyond the lot
lines.
Radioactivity. No activities shall be permitted which cause radioactivity, with the
exception of medical uses.
Noise. See Chapter 232, Noise.
Compliance with standards. Any application for a special use permit for such uses listed
above shall be accompanied by a sworn statement filed by the owner of subject property
or the operator of the proposed use that such use will be operated in accordance with the
performance standards set forth herein. Continued compliance with performance
standards is required and shall be enforced by the Building Inspector. All violations shall
be terminated within thirty days or shall be deemed a separate violation for each day
following and subject to fines as set forth herein. Continued violation shall result in the
revocation of the special use permit.
Required development standards. All permitted, accessory, and special permit uses in
this district shall be subject to the following development standards.
Use of structure and lot. Such uses shall be carried on in an area fully concealed
from any street or adjacent residential district. All work shall be in properly ventilated
structures. Where accessory retail use is allowed, only goods produced on the
premises shall be sold at retail. The area used by such accessory retail use shall not
exceed 15% of the lot area.
Structure materials. Structures housing special permit uses shall be fireproof and
constructed of masonry or other acceptable materials.
Height waiver. The maximum height allowed in the district may be exceeded for
water towers or tanks, standpipes, or structures for housing elevators or related
equipment, stairways, ventilating fans or other equipment required to operate or
maintain the buildings; fire or parapet walls; cooling tanks or towers; signs on top of
parapets; flagpoles, chimneys, storage and/or mixing towers; and similar structures.
But no structure or any space above the height limit shall be allowed for the purpose
of creating additional office or production floor space or for sign display other than
the permitted signs on top of the parapet.
Off-street parking; dumpsters. Each use shall provide sufficient off-street parking for
employees, visitors, trucks, and trailers, as per off-street parking and loading
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 399/441
[5]
[6]
[7]
[8]
[1]
requirements of these regulations. Dumpster areas shall be screened. All food waste
is to be held in refrigerated areas and compacted in an area on the first floor.
Loading facilities. The maneuvering of trucks and trailers shall be confined to the
premises of each special permit use. The number of truck loading docks will be
dependent upon the nature of the industry and types of transport service needed,
and shall conform to off-street loading requirements of these regulations. Loading
areas and bays shall be located and designed for maximum safety and efficiency,
and to minimize nuisance impacts to neighboring uses.
Condition of property. All open portions of any developed lot operating under a
special use permit shall have adequate grading and drainage and shall be
continuously maintained in a dust-free and erosion-resistant condition by suitable
landscaping with trees, shrubs, grasses or other planted ground cover or by paving
with asphalt, concrete, washed stone or other suitable material. Required yard areas
shall be planted and maintained in accordance with the approved site plan for the
premises and in a manner that is compatible with its use and beneficial enjoyment.
Unpaved parts of the site shall be maintained in grass and landscaped, including any
such property that may be in a street, rail, or utility right-of-way. Maintenance of
individual building sites shall be the responsibility of the occupant and/or owner. The
premises, buildings, and all improvements shall be kept in a safe, clean, healthful,
and presentable condition at all times. The removal of undergrowth, weeds, debris,
rubbish, trash, excess dirt, industrial wastes or garbage, and any other unsightly
material from a building site shall be done or arranged to be done by the occupant
and/or owner.
Outside storage. Outside storage shall not be permitted. Where necessary to
temporarily store finished or semifinished products or other materials outside the
plant building, the rear part of the property shall be used for such storage, and a
fence shall screen the storage area at least six feet in height. All fencing for
screening, security, or other purposes shall be attractive in appearance and be of an
all-metal industrial type of galvanized or nonferrous material.
Drainage plan. The applicant or occupant of the property shall submit for review and
approval a drainage system plan for controlling storm and surface water runoff, with
special emphasis on controlling the drainage in off-street parking and loading areas.
§ 340-99. Lot size.
Lot areas shall be a minimum of 10,000 square feet. For multifamily uses with or without a
nonresidential use on the street floor, lot size shall be in accordance with Chart VI. Chart VI is entitled
"Area and Bulk Regulations for Multifamily Uses."[1]
Editor's Note: Chart VI is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 340-100. Building area.
The building area shall not exceed 50% of the lot area, except as otherwise provided. For each 400
square feet of area available for and usable for parking within the building, land coverage may be
increased by an equal amount. Roof top parking is prohibited. In no event shall the building area be
increased so as to infringe upon the front, side, rear or corner plot setbacks. For multifamily uses with
or without a nonresidential use on the street floor, lot coverage shall be in accordance with Chart VI.
Chart VI is entitled "Area and Bulk Regulations for Multifamily Uses."
§ 340-100.1. Density.
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 400/441
[1]
[1]
[1]
A.
B.
[Added 5-22-2006 by L.L. No. 6-2006]
For multifamily uses with or without a nonresidential use on the street floor, density shall be in
accordance with Chart VI. Chart VI is entitled “Area and Bulk Regulations for Multifamily Uses.”[1]
Editor's Note: Chart VI is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 340-101. Building height.
No building shall be raised and no such building or part thereof shall be erected or altered to be greater
in height than the lesser of 48 feet or four stories. For multifamily uses with or without a nonresidential
use on the street floor, building height shall be in accordance with Chart VI. Chart VI is entitled "Area
and Bulk Regulations for Multifamily Uses."
§ 340-102. Front yards.
A setback of at least 12 feet from the front property line shall be required. For multifamily uses with or
without a nonresidential use on the street floor, setbacks shall be in accordance with Chart VI. Chart VI
is entitled "Area and Bulk Regulations for Multifamily Uses."
§ 340-103. Side yards.
The sum of both side yard setbacks shall be a minimum of 25 feet. Neither side yard setback shall be
less than five feet, except that where abutting any residence district, a minimum setback of 20 feet is
required. For multifamily uses with or without a nonresidential use on the street floor, setbacks shall be
in accordance with Chart VI. Chart VI is entitled "Area and Bulk Regulations for Multifamily Uses."
§ 340-104. Rear yards.
A rear yard of at least 10 feet is required, except where the rear property or lot line of any lot
constitutes the common boundary line between such lot and municipally owned land or premises
designed and actually used for public parking spaces for motor vehicles, in which case no rear yard
setback is required. For multifamily uses with or without a nonresidential use on the street floor,
setbacks shall be in accordance with Chart VI. Chart VI is entitled "Area and Bulk Regulations for
Multifamily Uses."
§ 340-105. Corner plots.
On corner plots a setback of at least 12 feet from the property line on both street frontages shall be
required. For multifamily uses with or without a nonresidential use on the street floor, setbacks shall be
in accordance with Chart VI. Chart VI is entitled "Area and Bulk Regulations for Multifamily Uses."[1]
Editor's Note: Chart VI is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 340-106. Parking requirements.
Parking space requirements are set forth in Chart IV of the Rockville Centre Zoning Code. Chart
IV is entitled "Schedule of Minimum Required Off-Street Parking."[1]
Editor's Note: Chart IV is included as an attachment to this chapter.
Parking is to be provided for and continuously maintained within 500 feet of the premises.
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 401/441
C.
A.
B.
C.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
[1]
G.
Off-street parking to be provided. Off-street parking must be provided and continuously maintained
upon the same plot for any freestanding building that is erected, altered or enlarged for use as
business offices, fast-food establishments or restaurants. Off-street parking must be provided and
continuously maintained upon the same plot for any freestanding building that is erected or
enlarged for the sale of goods at retail or services clearly incidental to retail sales.
§ 340-107. Loading requirements.
There shall be at least one off-street loading space provided for each 25,000 square feet of floor area
or fraction thereof in excess of 5,000 square feet for all uses except retail commercial and multifamily
uses.
Article XIX. Urban Renewal Recreational and Limited
Commercial District
§ 340-108. Uses permitted.
In Urban Renewal Recreational and Limited Commercial District, no building or premises shall be used
and no building shall be erected or altered for other than one or more of the following uses:
Recreational facilities exclusive of theaters.
Private parking.
Personal service establishments including the sale of goods providing said goods are incidental to
the personal services being rendered on the premises.
§ 340-109. Other controls.
[Amended 6-10-2002 by L.L. No. 5-2002]
Controls affecting the items as herein listed below shall be the same as the controls as listed in Article
XVIII entitled "Urban Renewal Commercial or Light Manufacturing A District."
Lot size.
Building area.
Front yards.
Side yards.
Rear yards.
Corner plots.
Parking space requirements are set forth in Chart IV of the Rockville Centre Zoning Code. Chart
IV is entitled "Schedule of Minimum Required Off-Street Parking."[1]
Editor's Note: Chart IV is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 340-110. Building height.
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 402/441
A.
B.
[1]
A.
B.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
A.
B.
No building, except a church or school, shall be raised, altered or erected greater in height than two
stories, which height shall not exceed an aggregate of 30 feet including false peaks or gables.
Article XX. Senior Care Housing
[Added 3-29-1999 by L.L. No. 4-1999; amended 10-25-2004 by L.L. No. 8-2004; 5-1-2017 by L.L. No.
2-2017]
§ 340-111. Permitted uses.
Senior care housing is allowed by special permit in Business A, Business A-1, Business AA,
Business AAA, Business B and Residence A-M Districts, provided that the permit conditions listed
in this section are met. Senior care housing is defined in § 340-2. A proposed senior care housing
development program may comprise any one of the defined types or a combination of them.
Senior care housing shall be limited to persons who are 55 years of age and older.
§ 340-112. Area and building bulk controls.
Conditions and restrictions. In approving any senior care housing, the Planning Board shall
impose requirements as per the Table of Area and Bulk Controls for Senior Care Housing.[1]
Editor's Note: The Table of Area and Bulk Controls for Senior Care Housing is included as an
attachment to this chapter.
All required parking areas, loading spaces and outdoor storage areas shall be screened from view
by a screen or landscaped or natural buffer. The requirements of § 340-121 shall apply.
§ 340-113. Requirements for approval.
In order to grant approval, the Planning Board is first required to find that:
The area and bulk conditions listed in § 340-112 are met.
The applicant has disclosed all relevant and necessary information about the operator,
including but not limited to name, address, state and date of incorporation, name and address
of owners and/or shareholders of the operation and prior experience in the operation of such
facilities.
If the proposed facility is subject to licensing by the state (depending on current New York
State licensing requirements), the developer/operator shall demonstrate that the required
license(s) has/have been obtained, in accordance with New York State law.
In senior care facilities that combine types, facilities and services shall be available to all
residents regardless of which type of housing the resident is in.
The facility is properly designed for the purpose of serving the needs of senior citizens, aged
55 years and older, including suitable and adequate facilities for social, cultural and
recreational activities that are regarded as essential to the well-being of the occupants and
the success of the facility.
The health, safety and general welfare of the public is not adversely affected.
In addition, all other general special permit requirements shall be met.
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 403/441
A.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
B.
§ 340-114. Review procedure.
(Reserved)
§ 340-115. Performance bond or other security.
(Reserved)
Article XXI. Adult Uses
[Added 3-11-2002 by Ord. No. 2-2002]
§ 340-116. Regulation of adult use establishments.
Purpose and findings. The purpose of this local law is to regulate adult use establishments and
sexually oriented businesses and to protect and promote the health, safety, morals and general
welfare of the residents of the Village of Rockville Centre. The provisions of this local law do not
limit or restrict the content of any speech, including sexually oriented speech. Further, the Board of
Trustees of the Village of Rockville Centre has recognized that adult use establishments can have
a deleterious effect on the existing businesses around them, particularly in the central business
district, as well as upon the surrounding residential areas adjacent to them, adult use
establishments present threats to the safety of children, and adult use establishments present
objectionable operational characteristics, particularly when located in close proximity to each
other. Further, the Board of Trustees recognizes and finds that the adoption of this local law
protects the Village without infringing upon constitutionally protected rights. The Board of Trustees
further finds that licensing and inspection procedures are appropriate mechanisms to regulate the
operation of adult use establishments and sexually oriented businesses. The Board of Trustees
further finds that the general welfare, health, morals and safety of the citizens of the Village will be
promoted by the enactment of this local law.
Definitions. As used in this local law, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
ADULT USE ESTABLISHMENTS
Each of the following shall constitute an adult use establishment:
ADULT ARCADE
A business enterprise that offers or maintains one or more adult video viewing booths.
ADULT BOOKSTORE or ADULT VIDEO STORE
An establishment that sells, as a substantial or significant portion of its stock-in-trade,
adult material such as books, magazines, other periodicals, films, slides, and videotapes
which are characterized by their emphasis on the description or depiction of specified
anatomical areas or specified sexual activities.
ADULT CABARET
A business enterprise that regularly features or offers to the public, customers or
members topless or bottomless dancers, strippers, male or female impersonators, exotic
dancers, or other similar entertainment and which establishment is not customarily open
to the public but excludes any minor by reason of age.
ADULT RETAIL STORE
A business enterprise that sells sexually oriented materials, including lingerie and leather
goods that are marketed in a context that suggests their connection with sexual activities.
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 404/441
(5)
(6)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
C.
ADULT THEATER
A theater that customarily presents motion pictures, film or videotapes or slide shows and
is not open to the public generally but excludes any minor by reason of age.
BODY RUB ESTABLISHMENT
Any establishment where sexually oriented body rubs are administered for pay, including,
but not limited to body rub parlors, sauna baths and steam baths. This definition shall
exclude a hospital, nursing home, or medical clinic, or the office of a duly licensed
physician, surgeon, chiropractor, osteopath, or physical therapist or occupational
therapist, or barbershop, beauty salon or spa. This definition shall also exclude health
clubs that have facilities for physical exercise such as tennis courts, racquetball courts, or
exercise rooms, and that do not receive their primary source of revenue through the
administering of body rubs, as well as those individuals holding New York State
Department of Education licenses as a masseuse or masseur. In addition, this definition
will also exclude barbershops, beauty parlors, salons and spas that offer massage of
feet, necks, heads, shoulders and faces in conjunction with haircutting and beauty
treatment services.
Location, distance, separation and size restrictions.
No adult use establishments shall be allowed in any residential district or in the Business A, C
or C2 Districts.
[Amended 9-10-2007 by L.L. No. 4-2007]
No adult use establishment shall be allowed within a one-thousand-foot radius of another
existing adult use establishment, whether within the Village of Rockville Centre or in a
neighboring community. The one-thousand-foot radius shall be measured in a straight line
from the nearest point of the wall of the portion of the building in which an adult use business
is conducted to the nearest point on the boundary line of the property of the area in question.
An applicant for an adult use establishment license shall provide a survey prepared by a New
York State licensed land surveyor. The survey must establish the distance from the perimeter
of the property to the nearest existing adult use establishment.
No adult use establishment shall be located within a two-hundred-foot radius of any zoning
district which is zoned to allow residential use, or within a two-hundred-foot radius of any
residential property. For measurement purposes, the distances between an adult use and
residential zoning district shall be measured in a straight line, without regard to intervening
structures or objects, from the closest structural wall of such adult use to the boundary line of
such residential district. An applicant for an adult use establishment license must provide a
survey prepared by a New York State licensed land surveyor. The survey must establish the
distances from the perimeter of the property to the nearest adjacent residence zone or
residential area.
No adult use establishment shall be located within a two-hundred-foot radius of a preexisting
public, private or parochial school, child-care center, senior center or senior-care housing
facility, library, civic or youth-oriented center, cultural entertainment center, designated historic
preservation site or district, park, public playground, indoor or outdoor stadium or place of
worship, as well as any areas designated as "scenic" under New York State law. The twohundred-
foot radius shall be measured in a straight line from the nearest point of the wall of
the portion of the building in which an adult use business is conducted to the nearest point on
the property of the area in question. An applicant for an adult use establishment license must
provide a survey prepared by a New York State licensed land surveyor. The survey must
establish the distances from the perimeter of the property to the nearest exclusionary sites.
Neither the footprint nor the aggregate square footage of any adult use establishment shall be
in excess of 2,000 square feet.
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 405/441
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
[1]
[2]
[3]
[4]
[5]
[6]
[7]
[8]
(a)
[1]
[2]
(b)
(5)
D. Licensing, registration and inspection. It is unlawful to operate an adult use establishment without
a valid license, which will be issued in accordance with this chapter and Chapter 222 of the Code
of Rockville Centre.
Application. Prior to commencing any operations, any person, partnership, corporation, owner
or operator that seeks to operate an adult use establishment must apply for an adult use
establishment license by filing an application with the Village Clerk on a form provided by the
Village of Rockville Centre. In addition, any person, partnership, corporation, owner or
operator must obtain a business license from the Village Clerk, in accordance with Chapter
222. A license fee, as determined by the Board of Trustees, must accompany all applications.
Denial. Any appeal from a denial of a license will be in accordance with the provisions of
Chapter 222.
Renewal. Any person, owner or operator who seeks to continue to operate an adult use
establishment shall file an application for the renewal of the license no less than sixty days
prior to the anniversary date of the issuance of the first license. In addition, any person,
partnership, corporation, owner or operator must renew its business license with the Village
Clerk, in accordance with Chapter 222. Any suspension, revocation or nonrenewal of a
license will be in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 222.
Referral. Upon receipt of a completed application, the Village Clerk will refer it to the Police
Department, the Fire Department and the Building Department. Each Department will conduct
an investigation to establish compliance with this chapter, with Chapter 222, and with
applicable fire, building, zoning, and health and safety codes. The investigation process will
be completed within 60 days of the filing of the application. No license will be issued until the
referrals are complete, which must include a written report from each Department that
confirms the compliance with this chapter, Chapter 222 and all relevant codes.
Information to be provided. Any application for a license under this chapter must include the
following information, in addition to the information required in Chapter 222, and must be
accompanied by the following documents:
If the applicant is a person:
Name, address, phone number, age and place of birth.
Any alias.
Proof that the applicant is at least 18 years of age.
Driver's license (copy).
Social security number.
Federally issued tax identification number.
Location of establishment.
Four colored photographs of the applicant that clearly show the applicant's face and
have been taken no less than 30 days prior to the filing of the application.
If the applicant is a partnership:
Name and address of the partnership.
Name, address, age, social security number, driver's license and signature of all
partners.
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 406/441
[3]
[4]
[5]
[1]
[2]
[3]
[4]
[5]
(c)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(1)
(2)
(3)
E.
F.
Form of partnership (general or limited), including any federally issued tax
identification number.
Current partnership agreement.
Registration documents for any fictitious name.
If the applicant is a corporation:
Name(s), address(es), social security numbers, driver's licenses and capacity of all
officers and/or shareholders and/or principal stockholders of the corporation.
List of any prior ownership or operation of such an establishment by any officer or
shareholder.
Proof of date of incorporation.
Federally issued tax identification number(s).
Registration documents for any fictitious name.
Criminal convictions. Any applicant must provide the date, place and jurisdiction of any
criminal conviction of any partner, owner or operator of the adult use establishment.
Alcohol. Any applicant must specify the location where such license is to be used and
whether the sale, dispensing or use of alcohol will be permitted at that location. The sale,
dispensing or use of alcohol is subject to the adult use establishment obtaining all licenses
and approvals as required by the State Liquor Authority.
Nontransferability. The license is not transferable and will expire automatically upon any
change in ownership or operation of an adult use establishment.
Inspections. The licensee must permit representatives of the Police Department, Fire
Department and Building Department to inspect the premises of an adult use establishment to
insure compliance with this chapter and with applicable fire, building, zoning and health and
safety codes. The inspection will be permitted prior to the initial opening for business and at
any subsequent time that the premises is occupied or open for business. Failure to permit an
inspection will result in the revocation of the license, in accordance with the procedures set
forth in Chapter 222.
Sign regulations.
Advertisements, displays or other promotional material for an adult use establishment shall
not be shown or exhibited so as to be visible to the public from pedestrian sidewalks or
walkways or other areas, public or semipublic, and such displays shall be considered signs.
No signs or other structures for an adult use establishment shall be placed, erected or used
on the premises except as provided in Chapter 335 of the Rockville Centre Code.
The message on the sign of an adult use establishment shall be generic in nature (e.g., bar,
cabaret, restaurant).
Severability. If any part or provision of this local law, or the application thereof to any person or
circumstance, is adjudged invalid by any court of competent jurisdiction, such judgment shall be
confined in its operation to the part or provision or application directly involved in the controversy
in which such judgment shall have been rendered. Such judgment shall not affect or impair the
validity of the remainder of this local law or the application thereof to other persons or
circumstances. The Board of Trustees of the Village of Rockville Centre hereby declares that it
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 407/441
G.
A.
(a)
(b)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(a)
(b)
(4)
B.
would have passed this local law or the remainder thereof had such invalid application or invalid
provision been apparent.
When effective. This local law will be effective immediately upon adoption and filing pursuant to
the Municipal Home Rule Law.
Article XXII. Telecommunications Towers and Facilities
[Added 1-28-2002 by L.L. No. 1-2002]
§ 340-117. Regulation of wireless telecommunications towers
and facilities.
Title. This article is entitled the "Regulation of Wireless Telecommunications Towers and
Facilities."
Purpose and intent.
On February 8, 1996, the United States Congress enacted the Telecommunications Act of
1996 (the Act). The purpose of the Act is to provide a more competitive environment for wired
and wireless communication services in the United States by deregulating the
telecommunications industry. The Act preserves the authority of local government to regulate
the placement, construction, and modification of wireless services antennas, towers and
accessory structures to protect the health, safety, and welfare of the public, while granting the
Federal Communications Commission (FCC) exclusive jurisdiction over environmental
effects. Specifically, the Communications Act of 1934, as amended by the Act, grants the
Federal Communications Commission (FCC) exclusive jurisdiction over:
The regulation of the environmental effects of radio frequency (RF) emissions from
telecommunications facilities; and
The regulation of radio signal interference among users of the RF spectrum.
The purpose of this article is to establish predictable and balanced regulations for the siting
and screening of accessory structures, antennas, telecommunications facilities and towers.
The establishment of such regulations is to accommodate the growth of such systems within
the Incorporated Village of Rockville Centre (the Village). Such regulations will further serve to
protect the public against any adverse impacts on aesthetic resources. In addition, the
regulations will eliminate potential damage to adjacent properties from tower failure through
structural standards and setback requirements. Finally, the regulations set forth in this article
will reduce the number of towers needed to service the community by maximizing the use of
existing towers and structures.
The Village's regulation of towers and telecommunications facilities in the Village will not have
the effect of prohibiting any person from providing wireless telecommunications services in
violation of the Act.
This article is intended to regulate the placement, construction, and modification of towers
and telecommunications facilities to protect the health, safety, and welfare of the public, while
at the same time not unreasonably interfering with the development of the competitive
wireless telecommunications marketplace in the Village. Specifically, this article is intended to:
Regulate the location of the towers and telecommunications facilities in the Village;
Protect residential areas and land uses from potential adverse impacts of towers and
telecommunications facilities;
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 408/441
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)
C.
Encourage placement of antennas and new towers on municipal property or in
commercial and industrial zones.
Minimize adverse visual impacts of towers and telecommunications facilities through
careful design, siting, landscaping, and innovative camouflaging techniques;
Promote and encourage shared use/collocation of towers and antenna support structures
as a primary option rather than construction of additional single-use towers;
Promote and encourage utilization of technological designs that will either eliminate or
reduce the need for erection of new tower structures to support antenna and
telecommunications facilities;
Avoid potential damage to property caused by towers and telecommunications facilities
by ensuring such structures are soundly and carefully designed, constructed, modified,
maintained and removed when no longer used or when determined to be structurally
unsound; and
Ensure that towers and telecommunications facilities are compatible with surrounding
land uses.
Definitions. The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the
meaning set forth in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different
meaning:
ACCESSORY STRUCTURES
Accessory buildings and structures, including base stations designed and used to shelter
equipment and/or to support personal wireless services. The term "accessory structure" does
not include offices, long-term storage of vehicles or other equipment storage, or broadcast
studios.
ACT
The Telecommunications Act of 1996.
ANTENNA
The actual device that transmits and/or receives radio or electromagnetic waves.
ANTENNA SUPPORT STRUCTURE
Any building or structure, other than a tower, that can be used for location of
telecommunications facilities.
APPLICANT
Any person, as defined in the definition of "person" in this article, that applies for a building
permit for telecommunications facilities.
APPLICATION
The process by which the owner of a parcel of land within the Village submits a request to
develop, construct, build, modify or erect an antenna, antenna support structure,
telecommunications facility or tower upon such parcel of land. "Application" includes all
written documentation, verbal statements, and representations, in whatever form or forum,
made by an applicant to the Village concerning such a request.
ENGINEER
Any engineer licensed by the State of New York.
OWNER
Any person with fee title or a long-term (exceeding 10 years) leasehold to any parcel of land
within the Village who desires to develop, or construct, build, modify or erect a tower,
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 409/441
(1)
(2)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
D.
antenna, antenna support structure, or telecommunications facility upon such parcel of land.
PERSON
Any natural person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company, or other legal entity,
private or public, whether for profit or not for profit.
PERSONAL WIRELESS SERVICES
Commercial mobile services, unlicensed wireless services, and common carrier wireless
exchange access services as defined by Subsection 704 of the Federal Telecommunications
Act.
STEALTH
Any tower or telecommunications facility designed to enhance compatibility with adjacent land
uses, including, but not limited to, architecturally screened roof-mounted antennas, antennas
integrated into architectural elements, and towers designed to look other than like a tower,
such as light poles, power poles, and trees. The term "stealth" does not necessarily exclude
the use of uncamouflaged lattice or monopole tower designs.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES
Any cables, wires, lines, wave guides, antennas, and any other equipment or facilities
associated with the transmission or reception of communications which a person seeks to
locate or has installed upon or near a tower or antenna support structure. However,
"telecommunications facilities" shall not include:
Any satellite earth station antenna two meters in diameter or less which is located in an
area zoned industrial or commercial; or
Any satellite earth station antenna one meter or less in diameter, regardless of zoning
category.
TOWER
A self-supporting lattice or monopole structure constructed from grade, which supports
telecommunications facilities. The term "tower" shall not include amateur radio operators'
equipment, as licensed by the FCC.
Review authority.
In a residential district, no accessory structure, antenna, antenna support system,
telecommunications facility or tower shall hereafter be erected, changed or altered unless the
applicant can establish that the site is necessary to provide adequate service, and that no
alternate site is available, and except after obtaining a special use permit in conformity with
this article.
In a nonresidential district, no accessory structure or tower shall be erected, changed or
altered except after obtaining a special use permit in conformity with this article.
In any nonresidential district, or on any municipal property, the Superintendent of Buildings is
authorized to issue a building permit to an applicant to erect, change or alter antennas or
telecommunications facilities on an existing building or antenna support structure, upon the
Superintendent of Buildings' determination that the applicant has complied with the applicable
requirements of § 340-117F(2) of this article. The Superintendent of Buildings has the
authority to impose such reasonable conditions and restrictions as are directly related to and
incidental to the proposed antenna or telecommunications facility, in accordance with the Act.
The Zoning Board of Appeals is authorized to review and approve, approve with
modifications, or disapprove special use permits, when such a permit is required, pursuant to
this article. The Zoning Board of Appeals has the authority to impose such reasonable
conditions and restrictions as are directly related to and incidental to the proposed accessory
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 410/441
(5)
E.
(1)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(2)
F.
structure, antenna, antenna support structure, telecommunications facility or tower, in
accordance with the Act.
A special use permit issued by the Zoning Board of Appeals will be effective for a period of
two years, and will be renewable thereafter upon reapplication by the applicant and the
payment of the fee referenced herein in Subsection AA.
Procedural requirements. For applications that require Zoning Board of Appeals approval, the
Zoning Board shall conduct a public hearing within 60 days from the date that an application is
received and determined to be complete by the Superintendent of Buildings. The Zoning Board of
Appeals shall issue a decision within 40 days of the completion of the hearing. Proceedings or
public hearings in accordance with New York State SEQRA proceedings will stay the time
limitations imposed by this subsection. Any denial of a permit under this article shall be in writing
and shall be supported by substantial evidence, in accordance with the Act.
Development of towers, antennas, antenna support structures or telecommunications facilities. No
person shall build, erect, or construct an accessory structure, antenna, antenna support structure,
telecommunications facility or tower upon any parcel of land within any zoning district within the
Village unless a special use permit has been approved by the Zoning Board of Appeals when
required by Subsection D, and unless a building permit has been issued by the Superintendent of
Buildings, in accordance with Subsections D and E.
Towers are exempt from the maximum height restrictions of the districts where located.
Towers shall be permitted to a height of 150 feet above the ground upon which the antenna is
placed. Towers may be permitted in excess of 150 feet, in accordance with Subsection S,
"Criteria for site plan development modifications."
When applicable, an application to develop an accessory structure antenna, antenna support
structure, telecommunications facility or tower shall include:
The name, addresses, and telephones number of the owner and lessee of the parcel of
land upon which the telecommunications facility or tower is to be situated. If the applicant
is not the owner of the parcel of land upon which the tower is to be situated, an affidavit
attesting to the owner's consent must be provided as part of the application.
The legal description and address of the parcel of land upon which the
telecommunications facility or tower is to be situated.
The names, addresses, and telephone numbers of all owners of other towers or usable
antenna support structures within a one-half-mile radius of the proposed new
telecommunications facility or tower site, including Village-owned property.
A site plan including the proposed facilities, supporting structures, access and planting,
and a description of the design plan proposed by the applicant. An applicant must identify
its utilization of the most recent technological design, including microcell design, as part
of the design plan. An applicant for a tower must demonstrate the need for tower and
why design alternatives, such as the use of microcell, cannot be utilized to accomplish
the provision of the applicant's telecommunications services.
An affidavit attesting to the fact that the applicant made diligent, but unsuccessful, efforts
to obtain permission to install or collocate the applicant's telecommunications facilities on
Village-owned towers or usable antenna support structures located within a one-half-mile
radius of the proposed tower site.
An affidavit attesting to the fact that the applicant made diligent, but unsuccessful, efforts
to install or collocate the applicant's telecommunications facilities on towers or usable
antenna support structures owned by other persons located within a one-half-mile radius
of the proposed tower site.
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 411/441
(g)
(h)
(i)
(j)
(k)
(l)
(m)
(n)
(3)
(4)
Written technical evidence from a licensed engineer that the proposed tower or
telecommunications facilities cannot be installed or collocated on another person's tower
or usable antenna support structures owned by other persons located within a one-halfmile
radius of the proposed tower site.
A written statement from a licensed engineer that the construction and placement of the
tower will not interfere with public safety communications and the usual and customary
transmission or reception of radio, television, or other communications services enjoyed
by adjacent residential and nonresidential properties, or with the Village's electrical
transmission lines.
A written report from an independent and certified industrial hygienist, or expert whose
qualifications are acceptable to the Village, which provides certification that the RF
emissions do not exceed those acceptable under the Act and FCC guidelines. In
addition, when installation is complete and the equipment is fully operational, a written
report from an independent and certified industrial hygienist or expert whose
qualifications are acceptable to the Village, which provides certification that the RF
emissions do not exceed those acceptable under the Act and FCC guidelines.
Written, technical evidence from a licensed engineer that the proposed structure meets
the standards set forth in § 340-117I, "Structural requirements," of this article.
Written, technical evidence from a licensed engineer acceptable to the Fire Chief, Village
Engineer and the Superintendent of Buildings that the proposed site of the tower or
telecommunications facilities does not pose a risk of explosion, fire, or other danger to life
or property due to its proximity to volatile, flammable, explosive, or hazardous materials
such as LP gas, propane, gasoline, natural gas, or corrosive or other dangerous
chemicals.
To assist Village staff and the Zoning Board of Appeals in evaluating visual impact, the
applicant shall submit color photo simulations showing the proposed site of the tower with
a photo-realistic representation of the proposed tower as it would appear viewed from the
closest residential property and from adjacent roadways.
A completed environmental assessment form, in accordance with SEQRA.
The Act gives the FCC sole jurisdiction of the field of regulation of RF emissions and
does not allow the Village to condition or deny on the basis of RF impacts the approval of
any telecommunications facilities (whether mounted on towers or antenna support
structures), as long as the RF emissions meet FCC standards. Antennas and towers
shall be subject to state and federal regulations pertaining to nonionizing radiation and
other health hazards related to such facilities. Applicants shall be required to submit
information on the proposed power density of their proposed telecommunications
facilities and demonstrate, through an independent certified industrial hygienist, or expert
whose qualifications are acceptable to the Village, how this meets FCC standards.
Applicants shall submit evidence of compliance with FCC standards on a yearly basis to
the Village. If new, more restrictive standards are adopted, the antennas shall be made to
comply with FCC standards or continued operations may be restricted by the Board of
Trustees. The cost of verification of compliance shall be paid by the owner and operator
of the tower.
The use of guyed towers is prohibited. Towers must be self-supporting without the use of
wires, cables, beams or other means. The design should utilize an open framework or
monopole configuration. Permanent platforms or structures, exclusive of antennas, that serve
to increase off-site visibility are prohibited.
The base of the tower shall not occupy more than 500 square feet, and the top of the tower
shall be no longer than the base.
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 412/441
(5)
(6)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(1)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(2)
G.
Minimum spacing between tower locations is 1/4 of a mile.
The Superintendent of Buildings or the Zoning Board of Appeals may require an applicant to
supplement any information that is considered inadequate or that the applicant has failed to
supply, and may deny an application on the basis that the applicant has not satisfactorily
supplied the information required in this subsection.
Collocation requirements. All towers erected, or located within the Village, shall comply with the
following requirements:
A proposal for a tower shall not be approved unless the Zoning Board of Appeals finds that
the antenna planned for the proposed tower cannot be accommodated on an existing or
approved tower or building within a one-mile search radius (one-half-mile search radius for
towers under 120 feet in height, one quarter mile search radius for towers under 80 feet in
height) of the proposed tower due to one or more of the following reasons:
The antenna would exceed the structural capacity of the existing or approved tower or
building, as documented by a licensed engineer, and the existing or approved tower
cannot be reinforced, modified, or replaced to accommodate the planned or equivalent
antenna at a reasonable cost.
The antenna would cause interference materially impacting the usability of other existing
or planned antennas at the tower or building as documented by a licensed engineer and
the interference cannot be prevented at a reasonable cost.
Existing or approved towers and buildings within the search radius cannot accommodate
the antenna at a height necessary to function reasonably as documented by a licensed
engineer acceptable to the Village.
Other foreseen reasons that make it infeasible to locate the antenna upon an existing or
approved tower or building.
Any proposed tower shall be designed, structurally, electrically, and in all respects, to
accommodate both the applicant's antennas and comparable antennas for at least two
additional users if the tower is over 100 feet in height or for at least one additional user if the
tower is over 60 feet in height. Towers must be designed to allow for future rearrangement of
antennas upon the tower and to accept antennas mounted at varying heights. The applicant
shall submit a letter of intent committing the applicant, and its successors in interest, to
negotiate in good faith for shared use of the proposed tower by other personal wireless
service providers in the future. The issuance of a special use permit (assuming the tower is
approved according to this section) shall commit the new tower owner and its successors in
interest to:
Responding in a timely, comprehensive manner to a request for information from a
potential shared-use applicant.
Negotiating in good faith concerning future requests for shared use of the new tower by
other personal wireless service providers.
Allowing shared use of the new tower if another personal wireless service provider
agrees in writing to pay charges.
Making no more than a reasonable charge for shared use, based on generally accepted
accounting principles. The charge may include, but is not limited to, a pro rata share of
the cost of site selection, planning, project administration, land costs, site design,
construction and maintenance financing, return on equity, and depreciation, and all of the
costs of adapting the tower or equipment to accommodate a shared user without causing
electromagnetic interference.
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 413/441
(a)
(b)
(3)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
H.
I.
(1)
(2)
J.
To ensure that neighboring municipalities are informed, and to facilitate the possibility of
directing that an existing tall structure or existing tower in a neighboring municipality be
considered for shared use, the Zoning Board of Appeals shall require that:
An applicant who proposes a new tower shall notify in writing the legislative body of each
municipality that borders the Village and the County Planning Commission. Notification
shall include the exact location of the proposed tower, and a general description of the
project, including, but not limited to, the height of the tower and its capacity for future
shared use.
Documentation of this modification shall be submitted to the Zoning Board of Appeals at
the time of application.
Setbacks. Towers and all accessory structures shall conform to each of the following minimum
setback requirements:
All towers up to 100 feet in height shall be set back on all sides a distance equal to the
underlying setback requirement in the applicable zoning district. Towers in excess of 100 feet
in height shall be set back one additional foot per each foot of tower height in excess of 100
feet.
Setback requirements for towers shall be measured from the base of the tower to the property
line of the parcel of land on which it is located.
Setback requirements may be modified, as provided in Subsection S(2)(a), when placement
of a tower in a location that will reduce the visual impact can be accomplished.
The minimum setbacks of the underlying zoning district shall be met, with the exception of
industrial zoning districts, where towers and accessory structures may encroach into the rear
setback area, provided that the real property line abuts another industrially zoned property
and the tower does not encroach upon any easements.
Towers and accessory structures shall be set back from the planned public rights-of-way as
shown on the most recently adopted plan or map of the Village showing such rights-of-way,
by a minimum distance equal to one half of the height of the tower, including all antennas and
attachments.
Setback requirements may be modified in the sole discretion of the Zoning Board of Appeals
to allow the integration of a tower into an existing or proposed structure such as a church
steeple, light pole, power line, or similar structure.
Structural requirements. All towers must be designed and certified by a licensed engineer to be
structurally sound and, at minimum, in conformance with the Village Code, and any other
standards outlined in this article. All towers in operation shall be affixed to land.
Separation or buffer requirements. For the purpose of this article, the separation distances
between towers shall be measured by drawing or following a straight line between the base of the
existing or approved structure and the proposed base, pursuant to a site plan, of the proposed
tower. Tower separation distances from residentially zoned lands shall be measured from the base
of a tower to the closest point of residentially zoned property. The minimum tower separation
distances from residentially zoned land and from other towers shall be calculated and applied
irrespective of Village jurisdictional boundaries.
Towers shall be separated from all residentially zoned lands by a minimum of 200 feet or
200% of the height of the proposed tower, whichever is greater.
Proposed towers must meet the following minimum separation requirements from existing
towers or towers that have a special use permit but are not yet constructed at the time a
special use permit is granted pursuant to this article:
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 414/441
(a)
(b)
(c)
K.
L.
M.
N.
O.
P.
(1)
(2)
Q.
Monopole tower structures shall be separated from all other towers, whether monopole or
self-supporting lattice, by a minimum of 750 feet.
Self-supporting lattice towers by a minimum of 1,500 feet.
Self-supporting lattice tower structures shall be separated from all monopole towers by a
minimum of 750 feet.
Method of determining tower height. Measurement of tower height for the purpose of determining
compliance with all requirements of this article shall include the tower structure itself, the base
pad, and any other telecommunications facilities attached thereto which extend more than 20 feet
over the top of the tower structure itself. Tower height shall be measured from grade.
Illumination. Artificial light shall be limited to that required by the Federal Aviation Administration or
other federal or state authority for a particular tower. Upon commencement of construction of a
tower, in cases where there are residential uses located within a distance which is 300 percent of
the height of the tower from the tower and when required by federal law, dual-mode lighting shall
be requested from the Federal Aviation Administration.
Design of antennas, towers and accessory structures. Antennas, towers and accessory structures
shall be designed to blend into the surrounding environment through the use of color and
camouflaging architectural treatment, except in instances where the color is indicated by federal or
state authorities such as the Federal Aviation Administration. Every antenna, tower and accessory
structure shall be of neutral colors that are harmonious with, and that blend with, the natural
features, buildings and structures surrounding such antenna and structure; provided, however,
that directional or panel antennas and omnidirectional or whip antennas located on the exterior of
a building that will also serve as an antenna tower shall be of colors that match, and cause the
antenna to blend with, the exterior of the building. Accessory structures shall be designed to be
architecturally compatible with principal structures on the site.
Landscaping and security of structures. All landscaping on a parcel of land containing towers,
antenna support structures or telecommunications facilities shall be in accordance with the
applicable landscaping requirements in the zoning district where the tower, antenna support
structure, or telecommunications facilities is located. The Village may require landscaping in
excess of the requirements in the Village Code to enhance compatibility with adjacent land uses.
Landscaping shall be installed on the outside of any fencing. Existing on-site vegetation shall be
preserved to the maximum extent practicable. The base of the tower and any accessory structures
shall be landscaped. Towers and accessory structures shall be provided with security fencing, to
prevent unauthorized entry.
Access. A parcel of land upon which a tower is located must provide access to at least one paved
vehicular parking space on site. A road and parking will be provided to assure adequate
emergency and service access. Maximum use of existing roads, public or private, shall be made.
Stealth design. All towers shall be of stealth design.
Certifications and inspections.
All towers shall be certified by a licensed engineer as structurally sound and in conformance
with the requirements of the Building Code and all other construction standards set forth by
the Village's Code and federal and state law. For new monopole towers, such certification
shall be submitted with an application and every two years thereafter. The tower owner may
be required by the Village to submit more frequent certifications should there be reason to
believe that the structural and electrical integrity of the tower is jeopardized.
The Village or its agents shall have authority to enter onto the property upon which a tower is
located, between the inspections and certifications required above, to inspect the tower for
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 415/441
(3)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
R.
[1]
[2]
[3]
[4]
(a)
(1)
S.
the purpose of determining whether it complies with the Village Code and all other
construction standards provided by the Village Code and federal and state law.
The Village reserves the right to conduct such inspections at any time, upon reasonable
notice to the tower owner. All expenses related to such inspections by the Village shall be
borne by the tower owner.
Maintenance.
Tower owners shall at all times employ ordinary and reasonable care and shall install and
maintain in use nothing less than commonly accepted methods and devices for preventing
failures and accidents which are likely to cause damage, injuries, or nuisances to the public.
Tower owners shall install and maintain towers, telecommunications facilities, wires, cables,
fixtures and other equipment in substantial compliance with the requirements of the National
Electric Safety Code and all FCC, state, and local regulations, and in such manner that will
not interfere with the use of other property.
All towers, telecommunications facilities, and antenna support structures shall at all times be
kept and maintained in good condition, order, and repair so that the same shall not menace or
endanger the life or property of any person.
All maintenance or construction of towers, telecommunications facilities, or antenna support
structures shall be performed by licensed maintenance and construction personnel.
All antennas, telecommunications facilities and towers shall maintain compliance with current
RF emission standards of the FCC, and shall be tested for compliance every two years by a
certified industrial hygienist to be selected by the Village. The owner shall pay any fee related
to the testing.
In the event that the tower owner discontinues the use of a tower, the tower owner shall
provide written notice to the Village of its intent to discontinue use and the date when the use
shall be discontinued.
Criteria for site plan development modifications.
Notwithstanding the tower requirements provided in this article, a modification to the
requirements may be approved by the Zoning Board of Appeals as a conditional use in
accordance with the following:
In addition to the requirements for a tower application, the application for modification
shall include the following:
A description of how the plan addresses any adverse impact that might occur as a
result of approving the modification.
A description of off-site or on-site factors that mitigate any adverse impacts that
might occur as a result of the modification.
A technical study that documents and supports the criteria submitted by the
applicant upon which the request for modification is based. The technical study shall
be certified by a licensed engineer and shall document the existence of the facts
related to the proposed modifications and its relationship to surrounding rights-ofway
and properties.
For a modification of the setback requirement, the application shall identify all
parcels of land where the proposed tower could be located, attempts by the
applicant to contract and negotiate an agreement for collocation, and the result of
such attempts.
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 416/441
[5]
[1]
[2]
[3]
(b)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(2)
(1)
T.
The Zoning Board of Appeals may require the application to be reviewed by an
independent engineer under contract to the Village to determine whether the
antenna study supports the basis for the modification requested. The costs of the
review by the Village's engineer shall be reimbursed to the Village by the applicant.
The Zoning Board of Appeals shall consider the application for modification based on the
following criteria:
That the tower as modified will be compatible with and will not adversely impact the
character and integrity of surrounding properties.
Off-site or on-site conditions exist which mitigate the adverse impacts, if any, created
by the modification.
In addition, the Zoning Board of Appeals may include conditions on the site where
the tower is to be located if such conditions are necessary to preserve the character
and integrity of the neighborhoods affected by the proposed tower and mitigate any
adverse impacts that arise in connection with the approval of the modification.
In addition to the requirements of Subsection S(1)(a) of this section, in the following cases,
the applicant must also demonstrate, with written evidence, the following:
In the case of a requested modification to the setback requirements set forth in
Subsection H, that the setback requirement cannot be met on the parcel of land upon
which the tower is proposed to be located and the alternative for the applicant is to locate
the tower at another site which is closer in proximity to a residentially zoned land.
In the case of a requested modification to the separation and buffer requirements from
other towers of Subsection J, that the proposed site is at least the double minimum
standard for separation from residentially zoned lands as provided for in Subsection J.
In the case of a requested modification of the separation and buffer requirements from
residentially zoned land of Subsection J, if the person provides written technical evidence
from a licensed engineer, acceptable to the Village, that the proposed tower and
telecommunications facilities must be located at the proposed site in order to meet the
coverage requirements of the applicant's wireless communications system and if the
person is willing to create approved landscaping and other buffers to screen the tower
from being visible to residentially zoned property.
In the case of a request for modification of the height limit for towers and
telecommunications facilities or to the minimum height requirements for antenna support
structures, that the modification is necessary to: facilitate collocation of
telecommunications facilities in order to avoid construction of a new tower; or to meet the
coverage requirements of the applicant's wireless communications system, which
requirements must be documented with written, technical evidence from a licensed
engineer that demonstrates that the height of the proposed tower is the minimum height
required to function satisfactorily, and no tower that is taller than such minimum height
shall be approved.
Abandonment.
If any tower shall cease to be used for a period of 365 consecutive days, the Superintendent
of Buildings shall notify the owner, with a copy to the applicant, that the site will be subject to
a determination by the Zoning Board of Appeals that such site has been abandoned. The
owner shall have 30 days from receipt of said notice to show, by a preponderance of the
evidence, that the tower has been in use or under repair during the period. If the owner fails to
show that the tower has been in use or under repair during the period, the Zoning Board of
Appeals shall issue a final determination of abandonment for the site. Upon issuance of the
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 417/441
(2)
(3)
U.
V.
W.
X.
Y.
(1)
(2)
Z.
AA.
BB.
A.
final determination of abandonment, the owner shall, at its own expense and within 75 days,
dismantle and remove the tower.
In the event a tower is not removed within the relevant time period, the tower and associated
facilities may be removed by the Village and the costs of removal assessed against the
owner.
Unused portions of towers above a manufactured connection shall be removed within six
months of the time of antenna relocation. The replacement of portions of a tower previously
removed requires the issuance of a new special use permit.
Severability. If any clause, section, or other part of this article shall be held invalid or
unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, the remainder of this article shall not be
affected thereby, but shall remain in full force and effect.
Conflicts (repeal of local laws). All local laws or parts of local laws in conflict herewith are hereby
repealed.
Signs and advertising on towers. The use of any portion of a tower for signs other than warning or
equipment information signs is prohibited.
Compliance with other laws. The operator of every tower, antenna and accessory structure shall
submit to the Village Clerk copies of all licenses and permits required by other agencies and
governments with jurisdiction over the design, construction, location and operation of such tower,
antenna and accessory structure and shall maintain such licenses and permits and provide
evidence of renewal or extension thereof when granted.
Assignment of permit. Every special use permit granting approval of an antenna, tower or
accessory structure shall state that any assignment or transfer of the special use permit or of any
rights thereunder may be made only with the approval of the Village.
Review of special use permit. The special use permit shall be subject to review by the Zoning
Board of Appeals at five-year intervals to determine the following:
Whether the technology in the provision of personal wireless services has changed such that
the necessity for the special use permit at the time of its approval has been eliminated or
modified; and
Whether the special use permit should be modified or terminated as a result of any such
change.
Fees. Upon initial application for a building permit or a special use permit for the maintenance of a
tower, antenna or accessory structure pursuant to this article, and upon subsequent renewals of
such special use permit, the applicant shall pay a fee to the Village as shall be set from time to
time by resolution of the Board of Trustees.
Effective date. This article shall become effective immediately upon filing with the Secretary of
State.
Article XXIII. Uses in All Districts
§ 340-118. Uses prohibited and uses permitted in all districts.
Uses prohibited in all districts. No manufacturing of any kind shall be permitted in any district of
the Village except as herein elsewhere specifically provided, and, in addition, no building or
premises in any district of the Village shall be used and no building shall be erected or altered for:
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 418/441
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
(11)
(12)
(13)
(14)
(15)
(16)
(17)
(18)
Blacksmith shop or horseshoeing establishment.
Crematory.
Dyeing establishment.
Gas manufacture or storage.
Institution for the care of the insane.
Iron, steel, copper or brass foundry.
Junkyards or the storage, sorting or baling of junk, scrap metal, paper, rag or of secondhand
or used lumber or building material.
Laundry, except separate washing machines for individual use.
Slaughterhouse or live storage for poultry or other animals.
Storage or sale of explosives of inflammable petroleum products, except in retail stores,
garages and service stations as permitted by law.
Tourist or trailer camp and/or the keeping of a house trailer on any premises in the Village
other than a camp-type travel trailer which is permitted pursuant to § 340-132.
Any business which shall be noxious or offensive by reason of noise or the emission of gas,
vapor, dust or noise, or which, because of its general nature or operation, will be offensive or
contrary to the general plan and purpose of this chapter, or detrimental to the general health
or welfare.
Any structure or building or assembly of component parts, whether housed or not, which is
intended to generate electrical energy or to convert or transform electrical energy or to
change the type of frequency or voltage; except, however, that the Board of Trustees may, in
specific cases, grant a permit for the construction of such a structure, building or component
parts when and if such Board shall find as a fact, after public notice and hearing, that such a
structure, building or component parts is necessary and desirable to improve and increase the
efficiency of any electric light and power transportation or like facilities and services rendered
to the inhabitants of the Village of Rockville Centre, and that in the proposed location, size
and character of construction thereof and its general nature and operation will not be
detrimental to the general health and welfare of the community.
Fraternity houses, sorority houses or dormitories, except such as may be located on a college
campus.
Circuses, carnivals and rodeos.
Off-track gambling establishments operated by any governmental agency or authority
pursuant to law.
[Added 12-2-1974 by L.L. No. 6-1974]
A mobile unit; provided, however, that any mobile unit in existence on the effective date of this
provision shall be discontinued at the expiration of five years from such effective date.
[Added 7-19-1976 by L.L. No. 5-1976]
A penny arcade, game room, amusement parlor or other similar establishment utilizing or
housing on the premises pinball machines or other coin-operated devices.
[Added 11-15-1976 by L.L. No. 9-1976; amended 8-11-1980 by L.L. No. 7-1980]
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 419/441
(19)
(20)
(21)
(22)
(1)
(2)
(3)
B.
(1)
C.
A.
Establishment, shop, office or parlor engaged in the business or operation of affixing, placing
upon, making or coloring by any means whatsoever, tattoos on the human body.
[Added 11-3-1980 by L.L. No. 13-1980]
Establishment, facility, shop, office, parlor, business or other nonresidential building or
premises where the primary or ancillary use of the premises includes or is intended to include
the smoking, ingestion or inhaling of vegetable, herbal, or other organic substances through
one or more hookah pipes (also commonly referred to as a "hookah," "water pipe," "shisha,"
"narthile" or "bong") or any other similar equipment or device.
[Added 10-6-2014 by L.L. No. 9-2014]
The sale, dispensing, or consumption of any good, substance, material or product, whether
as a principal, primary, accessory, incidental or ancillary use of the building or premises, in
violation of any law, rule or regulation of the United States or the State of New York, or of any
other governmental body having jurisdiction over such activity or property. For the purposes of
this subsection, the term "dispensing" shall mean the preparation or physical delivery of, but
not the issuance of an order, authorization or prescription for, a good, substance, material or
product.
[Added 9-8-2015 by L.L. No. 5-2015]
Establishment, facility, shop, office, parlor, business or other non-residential building, use or
premises, where the primary or ancillary use of the premises includes or is intended to include
the demonstration, testing, smoking, or other use of electronic cigarettes. For the purposes of
this subsection, the term "electronic cigarette" shall mean a battery-operated device that
contains or utilizes one or more cartridges or other containers filled with a combination of
nicotine and liquid, or other substance(s) and liquid, that is turned into vapor and inhaled by
the user.
[Added 11-2-2015 by L.L. No. 9-2015]
Uses permitted in all districts. The following uses shall be permitted in any district of the Village:
[Amended 9-30-2002 by L.L. No. 9-2002]
House of worship.
Public library.
Public school.
Uses permitted in all districts, subject to site plan review:
[Added 9-30-2002 by L.L. No. 9-2002]
Not-for-profit nonpublic schools. In Residence A, B and C Districts, not-for-profit nonpublic
schools must also obtain a special use permit, in accordance with § 340-131.
Article XXIIIA. Outdoor Uses In Nonresidential Districts
[Added 1-25-2011 by L.L. No. 1-2011]
§ 340-118.1. Outdoor uses above ground floor or ground level.
Except as provided in Subsection B of this section, no use otherwise allowed in a Business A,
Business AA, Business AAA, Business B, Business C or Business C-2 District shall be conducted
in whole or in part outdoors except on the ground floor or ground level of the premises, unless a
special use permit for such outdoor use above the ground level or ground floor has been obtained
from the Board of Trustees. No such approval from the Board of Trustees shall be required where
a use of property, including the outdoor component above the ground level or ground floor, has
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 420/441
B.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
A.
been authorized by the Board of Appeals. For the purposes of this section, a use shall be
considered to be conducted "outdoors" if all or any part of the use is conducted outside the
exterior walls of the principal building on the property, or if any product, service, food or beverage
is sold, displayed (other than lawful signage on an exterior wall), served, provided or consumed on
the premises outside the exterior walls of the principal building.
Any outdoor use above the ground floor or ground level allowed pursuant to Subsection A of this
section and lawfully existing on January 1, 2011, or for which a building permit application has
been filed on or before the effective date of this section, may continue without a required special
use permit for a period not to exceed five years from January 1, 2011; provided, however, that if
any such use is discontinued for a period of six or more consecutive months such use shall be
deemed abandoned and shall not thereafter resume. On and after January 1, 2016, any such
existing lawful outdoor use above the ground floor or ground level and not so abandoned shall be
discontinued unless a special use permit has been issued for such use by the Board of Trustees
pursuant to this section or the principal use at the property, including the outdoor use above the
ground floor or ground level, has been approved by the Board of Appeals.
Article XXIIIB. Substantial Occupancy Permits
[Added 3-3-2014 by L.L. No. 1-2014]
§ 340-118.2. Permit required.
Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, the following uses, where otherwise
authorized by law and where not otherwise required to obtain a special use permit or conditional
use permit from the Board of Trustees, Planning Board or Board of Appeals of the Village, shall
not be commenced, and no existing such use may be enlarged or expanded, without first
obtaining a substantial occupancy permit from the Board of Appeals where the actual or projected
maximum occupancy of the premises where such use is located, as determined by the
Superintendent of the Building Department, is at least 50 persons:
Restaurant and/or bar;
Theater;
Nightclub;
Cabaret;
Cafe;
Any other place of business serving food or beverage for on-premises consumption, whether
or not such business also serves food or beverage for off-premises consumption;
Multifamily residence or dwelling;
Hospital or skilled nursing facility;
Medical office building (for the purposes of this section, a "medical office building" shall be
defined as an office or building where medical services or treatment is provided, or where
medical testing is performed, and where at least 40% of the floor area of such office or
building is used to provide such services or testing. Portions of such office or building which
are used solely for billing, medical equipment sales, or other back office activities shall not be
included in the calculation of floor area used to provide medical services or testing);
Hotel or motel.
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 421/441
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
This section shall not apply to any premises in which a use included in Subsection A is lawfully
located and operating on the date of adoption of this section, provided that such use is not
thereafter changed to a different use than the one which existed on such date, nor altered,
expanded or enlarged to a portion of the premises where such use did not lawfully exist on such
date.
Supersession of state law. Notwithstanding the provisions of Village Law § 7-725-b, the substantial
occupancy permit required by this section shall not be considered "special use permits" as defined
in the Village Law. To the extent Village Law § 7-725-b defines such permits as "special permits,"
Village Law § 7-725-b is hereby superseded in its application to such permits.
The Zoning Board of Appeals shall have authority to grant substantial occupancy permits required
by this section. No substantial occupancy permit may be granted by the Board of Appeals without
a public hearing.
[Amended 1-5-2015 by L.L. No. 1-2015]
Unless the Board of Appeals determines that the use for which the substantial occupancy permit is
proposed is not requisite in the interest of the public health, safety or general welfare, or is
inappropriate to the particular location for which such permit is sought, the Board of Appeals shall
approve the substantial occupancy permit. In approving any such substantial occupancy permit
application, with or without a public hearing, the Board of Appeals may impose such reasonable
conditions and restrictions as such Board shall determine are reasonably necessary to protect the
public health, safety or general welfare. Such conditions shall be directly related to or incidental to
the proposed permit and to the use authorized by such permit, including reasonable restrictions on
times and manner of operation and upon the term of the substantial occupancy permit. The
issuance of a substantial occupancy permit pursuant to this section shall not relieve any person
from obtaining any permits, certificates of occupancy and/or compliance, or similar permits or
approvals as may be required by law. Any person conducting or operating, or causing or
permitting the operation of, any use or business pursuant to a substantial occupancy permit
granted pursuant to this section shall comply with the terms and conditions of such substantial
occupancy permit.
Where the Board of Appeals conducts a public hearing on a permit application pursuant to this
section, public notice of said hearing shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in
the Village at least five days prior to the date thereof, and the applicant shall mail notice of such
hearing in the same time and manner as required for applications to the Board of Appeals for
variances.
Each decision of the Board of Appeals pursuant to this section shall be filed in the office of the
Village Clerk promptly after such decision is rendered, and a copy thereof mailed to the applicant.
Compliance with State Environmental Quality Review Act. A substantial occupancy permit
required by this section shall be deemed to be a Type II action pursuant to the New York State
Environmental Quality Review Act pursuant to Article 8 of the Environmental Conservation Law
and its implementing regulations, and no environmental assessment form shall be required for
such substantial occupancy permit application. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the Board of
Appeals may consider any relevant environmental factor in making its determination whether to
approve a substantial occupancy permit, or whether to impose conditions upon any approved
substantial occupancy permit.
Article XXIV. Garages, Accessory Buildings, Service
Stations, Fences, Air-Conditioning Equipment and
Swimming Pools
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 422/441
A.
B.
C.
D.
[1]
E.
A.
B.
A.
B.
§ 340-119. Garages and accessory buildings on lots developed
with residence buildings.
[Amended 1-24-1983 by L.L. No. 2-1982]
On both interior lots and corner lots developed with residence buildings, attached garages and
accessory buildings shall not project beyond the setback line as established.
On interior lots developed with residence buildings, all detached garages and accessory buildings
shall be located wholly on the rear third of the lot.
On corner lots developed with residence buildings, all detached garages and accessory buildings
shall be so located that no part thereof shall encroach upon the area between each respective
street and a line drawn parallel to such street in a manner to divide the lot into two equal parts.
Detached garages and accessory buildings shall in all cases be located at least four feet from the
interior side and rear lines of lots. No portion of any detached garage or other accessory building
shall be nearer than eight feet to the main building on the same plot or nearer than six feet to any
other accessory building. No detached garage or accessory building shall be more than 15 feet in
height.
A garage where no service or business for vehicles is conducted shall be permitted only when
located on the same lot with a dwelling in a residence district.[1]
Editor's Note: Former Subsection F, regarding fencing requirements for parking fields, which
immediately followed this subsection, was repealed 1-24-1983 by L.L. No. 2-1983.
§ 340-120. Public garages and service stations.
[Amended 1-24-1983 by L.L. No. 2-1983]
In a public garage, service station or automobile salesroom, no workshop shall be located and no
repair work shall be carried on nearer than 25 feet to any street. No automobile commercial work,
except emergency work, shall be carried on out-of-doors.
In any district, no pump or other apparatus for the furnishing or dispensing of gasoline, oil, air or
water to motor vehicles shall be altered, erected or installed unless the same be so located so as
to be not less than 15 feet from the street property line.
§ 340-121. Fences and other accessory structures.
[Amended 10-20-1980 by L.L. No. 12-1980; 1-24-1983 by L.L. No. 2-1983]
In residence districts, fences may be erected but shall not be more than four feet in height, except
that a six-foot-high fence may be erected enclosing the rear yard. Fences shall be situated so that
the finished side of the fence faces away from the property fenced. No fence shall be erected on
corner property unless the same shall be set back from the abutting streets in conformity with the
provisions of other applicable Village laws. In business districts, the erection and maintenance of
fences shall be in conformity with the provisions of the Village Code.
[Amended 12-3-2012 by L.L. No. 5-2012]
Pergolas, clothes yards and poles, play yards, trellises and similar structures shall conform in
location to the requirements for garages. In the case of a trellis or pergola, such structure shall not
exceed 10 feet in height; in the case of a clothes yard or clothes pole, eight feet in height; in the
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 423/441
C.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
(1)
(2)
F.
case of a play yard, three feet in height. No pool deeper than two feet shall be constructed except
in compliance with this chapter.
Parking fields required in connection with any use permitted in any use district under this chapter
shall be enclosed with a four-foot chain-link fence situate on the property line abutting said parking
field.
§ 340-121.1. Central air-conditioning equipment at one- and twofamily
dwellings.
[Added 6-17-2008 by L.L. No. 5-2008]
Purpose and intent. The Board of Trustees of the Village of Rockville Centre finds that it is
necessary to regulate the installation and location of outdoor central heating, ventilating, or airconditioning
(hereinafter referred to as "central air conditioning") equipment at one- and two-family
dwellings to protect and preserve property within the Village as described in this section. As used
in this section, the term "central air conditioning" shall mean a heating, ventilating and/or air
conditioning system, located in whole or in part outside the dwelling, which consists of heat
exchangers, blowers, filters, supply, exhaust and return ducts to distribute heated, cooled or
dehumidified air to more than one room, or uses pipes to distribute chilled water to heat
exchangers in more than one room, and which is not plugged into a standard electrical outlet.
Central air-conditioning and other related mechanical equipment or systems at one- or two-family
dwellings shall be installed, located and maintained, or replaced, so that under normal conditions
of use such equipment and systems will not be a danger to health or welfare and will not create
excessive noise or otherwise become a nuisance. Related equipment or systems include, but are
not limited to, apparatus, devices, fixtures, piping, pipe hangers, pipe covering, wiring, fittings and
materials used as part of or in connection with central air-conditioning installations.
Moving parts of central air-conditioning equipment which may be a potential hazard shall be
guarded as may be required by the Superintendent of Buildings to protect against accidental
contact.
Location. All outdoor compressors used in connection with central air-conditioning systems shall
be installed at grade and shall be set back a minimum of 20 feet from the front property line and a
minimum of 15 feet from the rear property line. No outdoor compressor may be located in a side
yard unless it is located not more than six feet from the dwelling and at least three feet from the
nearest property line, except that in the case of a corner lot an outdoor compressor may be
located in a side yard which abuts two streets, provided that it is located not more than six feet
from the dwelling and at least 10 feet from the nearest property line.
[Amended 4-3-2012 by L.L. No. 1-2012]
In addition to any other requirement for a building permit, no person shall install or replace centralair
conditioning equipment at a one- or two-family dwelling without first obtaining a permit as
provided by this section.
Central air-conditioning permits shall be issued by the Superintendent of Buildings upon written
application, which shall include, at a minimum:
A completed building application form, including a completed one-family affidavit and a noplumbing
affidavit, if applicable;
Proof that the contractor is duly licensed to perform the proposed installation, and
documentation of the contractor's workers' compensation policy and liability insurance policy;
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 424/441
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
G.
(1)
(2)
H.
I.
A.
B.
C.
D.
Two copies of an accurate and legible survey prepared by a duly authorized person indicating
with sufficient clarity and detail the location of the air-conditioning equipment;
An electrical underwriter's application, including a current copy of the electrician's worker's
compensation policy and liability insurance policy;
Such other information as the Superintendent of Buildings shall require as reasonably
necessary to the determination whether a permit should issue hereunder, including
documentation demonstrating that the levels of sound emitted by the proposed unit(s)
complies with the requirements of this Code; and
[Amended 4-3-2012 by L.L. No. 1-2012]
Payment of any required permit fee.
In granting a permit pursuant to this section, the Superintendent of Buildings may impose
reasonable requirements for the remediation of sound when such remediation is necessary in the
opinion of the Superintendent of Buildings to protect occupants of adjoining properties. Such
requirements may include, but are not limited to, the integration of sound-deadening materials or
sound-absorbing materials, or the addition of landscaping or other buffering.
In granting any permit pursuant to this section for replacement of an existing central airconditioning
system, the Superintendent of Buildings may waive or vary the setback requirements
otherwise required by this section, upon satisfactory demonstration that the existing central airconditioning
unit:
Is being replaced in kind; and
Was lawfully installed
Upon completion of the installation authorized by a permit described in this section, submission of
a completed underwriter's certificate, and payment of any applicable fee, the Superintendent of
Buildings shall issue a notice of completion.
§ 340-121.2. Green space buffer required between residential
property and any adjoining nonresidential property.
[Added 10-6-2014 by L.L. No. 8-2014]
A professionally landscaped green space buffer shall be located and maintained on every property
in a nonresidential zoning district or used for nonresidential purposes and which adjoins property
in a residential district or used for residential purposes.
Such buffer shall consist of a minimum depth of five feet from the property line between the
properties, and shall be located and maintained along the entire length of the lot line and/or
boundary separation between the properties. The buffer area may contain suitable trees, shrubs
and grass, and shall include a six-foot-high fence of suitable design located on the property line
separating the nonresidential property from the adjoining residential property.
Where the approval of the Board of Appeals, Planning Board, or Exterior Design Review Board is
required for the use of the nonresidential property, each such board shall have jurisdiction to
enforce this requirement and approve the proposed buffer. Where no approval is required from
any of such boards, the Building Department shall enforce this requirement and approve the
proposed buffer before any building permit issued for construction on the nonresidential property.
The requirements of this section shall not be applicable to nonresidential properties adjacent to
residential properties if the nonresidential property is lawfully being used without such buffer at the
time of adoption of this section. However, in the event of any subsequent construction,
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 425/441
E.
A.
(1)
(2)
(3)
B.
(1)
(2)
(3)
C.
enlargement or alteration of any building or structure on such property, or other development of
such property requiring a permit or approval from the Village, such buffer shall be required to be
installed and maintained as provided in this section unless determined by the appropriate authority
not to be feasible after consideration of existing conditions on the site.
Where adjoining properties in a residential district and in a nonresidential district lawfully are being
used for a common use, the buffer zone required by this section shall be located along each
exterior property line of such property which separates such entire property from any adjoining
residential use or district.
§ 340-122. Swimming pools.
[Added 1-24-1983 by L.L. No. 2-1983; amended 12-3-2012 by L.L. No. 5-2012; 4-4-2016 by L.L. No. 2-
2016]
Swimming pools as defined in this chapter and in compliance with the Uniform Fire Prevention and
Building Code are permitted in any residential use district as an accessory to a residential dwelling
for the private use of the owner of such dwelling and the families and guests of such owner,
provided that a permit is obtained in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, other
provisions of this Code, and the provisions of the New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and
Building Code.
Location.
On lots other than corner lots, swimming pools shall be located in the rear third of the lot and
shall be set back a minimum of 10 feet from all property lines.
On corner lots, swimming pools shall be located within the rear quadrant and/or the rear third
of the lot, taken from a forty-five-degree angle from the adjacent street frontage/corner, and
shall be set back at least 10 feet from all property lines. In no case shall any part of the
swimming pool be located in a required setback area of a front, rear or side yard.
In all cases, swimming pools shall be set back at least eight feet from every part of the
principal dwelling on the property and at least six feet from any accessory building or structure
and detached garage on the property.
Fence required.
In all cases there shall be erected and maintained a fence, approved by the Superintendent of
Buildings, not less than six feet in height, entirely surrounding and enclosing the swimming
pool from all adjoining lots. Such fence shall be constructed of quality materials and shall be
designed to contain no openings or projections which would permit hand or toe holds
sufficient for climbing, as determined by the Superintendent of the Building Department.
On lots other than corner lots, such required fencing shall be located within the rear setback
line of the principal dwelling, as determined by the Superintendent of the Building
Department.
On corner lots, such required fencing shall be located within the rear setback line of the
principal dwelling, except that an estate-type fence not less than six feet in height may be
located beyond the front setback line along the longest street frontage, provided that such
fence is set back at least three feet from the property line, as determined by the
Superintendent of Building Department, and further provided that evergreen arborvitae or
similar landscaping is planted and maintained, as approved by the Superintendent, between
such fence and such property line.
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 426/441
(4)
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
I.
J.
[1]
On all lots, in addition to all other fencing requirements, a fence not less than four feet high
shall be installed and continuously maintained to separate the swimming pool from the
principal dwelling.
Fence gates; openings. Every gate or other opening in the fence surrounding such swimming pool
shall be equipped with a self-closing and self-latching device designed to keep, and capable of
keeping, such gate or opening securely closed. Such gate or opening shall be kept locked at all
times the swimming pool is not in actual use.
Percentage of lot coverage. The area of such swimming pool shall be added to the area of all
main buildings, garages and accessory buildings in computing the permitted building area in a use
district.
Lighting. There shall be installed minimum security lighting surrounding such swimming pool, as
approved by the Superintendent of Buildings. Lighting devices installed in connection with a
swimming pool shall be designed so as to prevent glare or rays therefrom from going beyond the
property lines.
Water supply connections and drainage facilities. All water supply connections and drainage
facilities to and from a swimming pool must be approved by the Superintendent of Public Utilities
and Superintendent of Public Works and shall be designed to safeguard and protect the water
supply system of the Village in compliance with the rules and regulations of said departments. All
swimming pools, whether indoor or outdoor, shall comply with said rules and regulations.
Materials and construction standards. All swimming pools shall be constructed and maintained of
materials having adequate strength to retain the water designed to be contained therein.
Drainage. All swimming pools shall have proper drainage sufficient in size, capacity and scope to
be able to drain the swimming pool onsite within a proper time frame, in accordance with generally
acceptable standards, as determined by the Superintendent of the Building Department and the
Superintendent of Public Works. No person shall cause or permit a swimming pool to be drained
onto public property or onto private property owned by any person other than the owner of the
property on which the swimming pool is located.
Code requirements. All electric services, devices, pumps, filters and associated swimming pool
appurtenances, including alarms, shall be installed, maintained and operated in accordance with
the New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code, and to the reasonable satisfaction
of the Superintendent of Electric Department and the Superintendent of the Building Department,
and with certification from an approved electrical inspection agency where applicable. Further, the
swimming pool and all electrical components or related equipment shall comply with clearance
requirements of the National Electrical Code and the National Electrical Safety Code to the
satisfaction of the Superintendent of the Electrical Department.
Editor's Note: See also Ch. 291, Swimming Pools.
Article XXV. General Provisions
§ 340-123. Sleeping quarters in attics.
In a one- or two-family house, sleeping quarters for servants employed on the premises may be
maintained in the attic.
§ 340-123.1. Bathroom and kitchen facilities, entrances and
emergency egress at one- and two-family dwellings.
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 427/441
A.
B.
C.
A.
[Added 7-7-2008 by L.L. No. 8-2008]
In a one- or two-family dwelling, no bathroom located below the first floor or above the second
floor may have more than two plumbing fixtures, consisting only of a water closet and wash basin.
No shower stall or bathtub may be located below the first floor or above the second floor of a oneor
two-family dwelling.
No one- or two-family dwelling shall have more than one kitchen in each dwelling, and no kitchen
may be located below the first floor or above the second floor of a one- or two-family dwelling.
An entrance or emergency egress window well servicing an area of the building below the first
floor at a one- or two-family dwelling may encroach into a required rear yard, side yard, or front
yard setback, provided that it does not extend above grade.
§ 340-124. Projection of a cornice or eaves.
Nothing in this chapter shall prevent the projection of a cornice or eaves beyond the setback line to an
extent not exceeding two feet.
§ 340-125. Erection or alteration of buildings.
No building shall be erected or altered and no lot areas shall be so reduced that thereby the required
minimum dimensions of yards or other open space shall be less than prescribed by this chapter,
except as herein otherwise provided.
§ 340-126. Buildings used for dwelling purposes at rear of
buildings fronting streets.
No building used for dwelling purposes shall be located in the rear of any building fronting on the
street, except with the consent of and under such conditions as may be prescribed by the Board of
Appeals.
§ 340-127. Breeding of animals and fowl.
The keeping or breeding of poultry, pigeons, horses, livestock, wild animals and farm animals and the
breeding of dogs shall not be permitted in any district of the Village.
§ 340-128. Buildings used by Village boards or departments.
Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed to prevent the erection of any building or the use
of any property in any part of the Village of Rockville Centre by the Village of Rockville Centre or any of
its boards or departments for any municipal or public purpose.
§ 340-129. Alteration permitted.
[Amended 5-10-1971; 1-11-1988 by L.L. No. 8-1988]
Where existing plots are subdivided into smaller lots, the perimeter boundary lines of each of such
smaller lots shall be as nearly straight and as nearly parallel to the existing property lines of the
plot being subdivided as is possible; provided, nevertheless, that, if the lot being subdivided has
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 428/441
[1]
B.
[1]
(a)
(b)
[1]
[2]
[3]
[4]
[5]
[6]
[7]
(c)
(d)
(1)
(2)
A.
jogged lines on its existing boundaries, the lines of the smaller plots need not follow such jogged
lines.[1]
Editor's Note: Former Subsection B, regarding plots lacking the minimum frontage or area
requirements, which immediately followed this subsection, was repealed 7-11-1994 by L.L. No. 10-
1994.
No parcel of property shall be subdivided into plots of a frontage or area smaller than required in
the district in which the property is located without the consent of the Board of Appeals, and all
other provisions of this chapter and other ordinances of the Village shall be complied with.
§ 340-130. (Reserved)
Editor's Note: Former § 340-130, Deliberations and determinations of the Zoning Board of Appeals, was
renumbered as § 340-142.1 and amended 2-5-2018 by L.L. No. 1-2018.
§ 340-131. Not-for-profit nonpublic schools.
[Amended 9-30-2002 by L.L. No. 11-2002]
Grant of special use permit.
The Planning Board may, after public notice and hearing, and subject to appropriate
conditions and safeguards, grant a special use permit to a not-for-profit nonpublic school by
granting it permission to erect or alter a building or to use premises as a not-for-profit
nonpublic school in Residence A, B or C Districts, when the Planning Board finds as facts and
determines that:
Its maintenance as such will not tend to depreciate the value of adjacent or nearby
properties.
The use thereof as such will not add to congestion in streets that are essentially
residential in character.
The facility complies with New York State requirements for:
Food preparation and handling facilities;
Sanitation facilities;
Normal and emergency exits;
Indoor and outdoor play equipment;
Sizes of rooms;
Protection against fire;
Adequate light and air.
As a condition for the granting of such permission to erect or alter a building, the
applicant agrees to comply with such conditions and restrictions with regard to the use of
the premises as the Board shall deem necessary, as long as any condition or restriction
imposed is in conformance with New York State law.
In granting such permission, the Board may impose conditions or restrictions pertaining to the
hours, days and months of the year of use of said premises for such purposes, as long as any
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 429/441
(1)
(2)
(3)
B.
C.
(1)
(2)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(3)
A.
B.
condition or restriction imposed is in conformance with New York State law.
Permission for such a school use shall not be granted where:
It is designed and intended to accommodate pupils overnight, except in case of emergency;
or
The outside play facilities and equipment constitute more than an incidental part of the school
plant.
The plot size is less than 1 1/2 acres.
No special use permit is required for an existing not-for-profit nonpublic school that increases its
size at its present location by less than 15% of the aggregate square footage.
§ 340-132. Keeping or storing of trailers and certain vehicles
prohibited; exceptions.
[Amended 6-18-1984 by L.L. No. 1-1984]
The storage or parking or use of a trailer, recreation vehicle, boat, boat trailers or camp-type trailer
by any person or persons, except as hereinafter provided, is prohibited in a Residence A District
and Residence B District; provided, however, that one such trailer, recreation vehicle, boat with or
without a trailer, boat trailer or camp-type trailer may be kept or stored on a premises in a
Residence A District and Residence B District upon the following conditions:
Said trailer, recreation vehicle, boat, boat trailer or camp-type trailer must be owned or rented
by the occupants of the premises, must not be kept for purposes of sale or rental and must be
used solely for the personal use of such occupants;
Said trailer, recreation vehicle, boat, boat trailer or camp-type trailer shall not be occupied as
living quarters at any time when it is located on the premises; and
Said trailer, recreational vehicle, boat, boat trailer or camp-type trailer, when stored upon the
premises, shall at all times be parked in accordance with the following:
On interior and corner lots, vehicles shall not be parked within the established setback
lines for the district and shall in all cases be stored or parked at least four feet from the
interior side and rear lines of lots.
On interior lots, said vehicle shall be stored on the rear third of the lot only.
On corner lots, said vehicles shall be stored so that no part thereof shall encroach upon
the area between each respective street and a line drawn parallel to such street in a
manner to divide the lot into two equal parts.
No vehicle shall be nearer than eight feet from the main residence building or nearer than
six feet from any accessory building; provided, however, that vehicles may be stored
inside garages on the premises.
Vehicles in excess of 3/4 ton capacity, excluding station wagons, compact-type bus vehicles,
recreation vehicles and pickup trucks used for private transportation shall not be parked or stored
outside in any Residence A District or Residence B District except as provided in this section.
Article XXVI. Interpretation and Purposes
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 430/441
§ 340-133. Interpretation and purposes.
The provisions of this chapter shall be construed to be the minimum requirements adopted for the
promotion of public health, safety, morals, comfort, convenience and general welfare. It is not intended
by this chapter to repeal, abrogate, annul or in any way impair or interfere with any existing provisions
of law or ordinances, or any rules, regulations or permits previously adopted or issued or which shall
be adopted or issued pursuant to law, relating to the use of buildings or premises; provided, however,
that where this chapter imposes a greater restriction upon the use of buildings or premises or upon the
heights of buildings, or requires larger yards or other open spaces, than are imposed or required by
such existing provisions of law or of ordinances, or by such rules, regulations or permits or by such
easements, covenants or agreements, the provisions of this chapter shall control, and provided further
than nothing herein contained shall prohibit or restrict the revocation of any permit heretofore or
hereafter issued where no vested rights have arisen in favor of the holder thereof.
Article XXVII. Violations, Enforcement and Penalties
§ 340-134. Violation of chapter.
[Amended 11-6-1978 by L.L. No. 10-1978; 3-5-1990 by L.L. No. 4-1990]
Each and every failure to comply with the provisions of this chapter shall and is hereby declared to be
an unclassified misdemeanor pursuant to the Penal Law of the State of New York.
§ 340-135. Noncompliance with provisions imposed by Board of
Appeals.
A violation of or failure to comply with any condition imposed by the Board of Appeals in connection
with and as part of the granting of affirmative relief on applications for permits, consents and/or
variances shall and is hereby declared to be a violation of this chapter.
§ 340-136. Filing of complaints; investigation; appropriate action.
Whenever a violation of this chapter occurs, any person may file a complaint in regard thereto. All such
complaints must be in writing and shall be filed with the Building Department, which shall properly
record and investigate such complaint and take appropriate action thereon within a reasonable time.
§ 340-137. Owners, architects, builders, etc., to comply with
provisions.
The owner, architect, builder, general agent, contractor, lessee or tenant of, or any other person having
a contractual or other interest in, any part of a building or premises in which a violation has been
committed or shall exist, shall be subject to and be held accountable for compliance with the provisions
of this chapter and any part thereof and the penalties for violation thereof.
§ 340-138. Penalties for offenses.
[Amended 11-6-1978 by L.L. No. 11-1978; 3-5-1990 by L.L. No. 5-1990]
Each and every failure to comply with the provisions of this chapter is a misdemeanor punishable by a
fine not exceeding $1,000 for each day that such violation continues or by imprisonment for a period
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 431/441
(1)
(a)
(b)
(2)
A.
not to exceed 20 days, or both such fine and imprisonment.
§ 340-139. Enforcing of chapter.
This chapter shall be enforced by the Board of Trustees of the Village or by a person or persons
authorized to do so under the rules and regulations adopted by said Board.
Article XXVIII. Board of Appeals
[Amended 10-7-1974 by L.L. No. 2-1974; 1-11-1999 by L.L. No. 1-1999; 1-25-1999 by L.L. No. 2-1999;
11-27-2000 by L.L. No. 4-2000; 2-5-2018 by L.L. No. 1-2018]
§ 340-140. Powers and duties.
Board of Appeals.
In accordance with Village Law § 7-712(2), the Mayor shall appoint members of the Board of
Appeals and the Chairperson, subject to the approval of the Board of Trustees, to serve for
terms of five years each. At the expiration of each term, the succeeding member shall be
appointed for a term of five years. Any vacancy on the Board of Trustees shall be filled in the
same manner, for the remainder of the unexpired term. The Board of Appeals shall hear and
decide appeals from and review any order, requirement, decision or determination made by
an administrative officer or board charged with the enforcement of this chapter. The Board of
Trustees may also appoint a counsel or legal advisor and the Secretary (Clerk) for the Board
of Appeals. The Board of Appeals shall also hear and decide all matters referred to it or upon
which it is required or authorized to pass pursuant to the Village Code or the Village Law of
the State of New York. Such appeal may be taken by a person aggrieved or by any officer,
department, board or bureau of the Village. Such Board of Appeals shall have all the rights,
powers and duties granted to or imposed upon it by the Village Law of the State of New York.
Such Board of Appeals may determine and vary the application of the regulations herein
contained, in harmony with their general purpose and intent in accordance with the general
and specific rules herein contained, as provided in the Village Law.
Alternate members.
In accordance with Village Law § 7-712, Subdivisions 11(a) through (c), the Board of
Trustees may appoint alternate members of the Board of Appeals for purposes of
substituting for a member who is unable to participate in any matter because of a conflict
of interest, protracted absence or other cause. The Board of Trustees shall appoint such
alternate members in a number sufficient to meet the needs of the Village, for terms of
one year each.
The Chairperson of the Board of Appeals shall designate such alternate members to
serve on a rotating basis, to substitute for a member who is unable to participate because
of a conflict of interest, protracted absence or other reason with respect to any one or
more applications or matters before the Board. When so designated, the alternate
member shall possess all the powers and responsibilities of the member of the Board
replaced by such alternate, and all the provisions of the Village Law relating to Board of
Appeals member training and continuing education, attendance, conflict of interest,
compensation, eligibility, vacancy in office, removal and service on other boards shall
also apply to alternate members. When a designation is made by the Chairperson of the
Board of Appeals, it shall be entered into the minutes of the Board of Appeals meeting at
which the substitution is made.
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 432/441
B.
C.
(1)
(2)
(3)
[1]
[2]
[3]
[4]
(a)
(4)
D.
Such Board of Appeals may make rules to govern procedure in matters before it, consistent with
the provisions of law and this Village Code. Such rules may require that the applicant or appellant
give such notice of a pending proceeding as the Board may prescribe to the owners of such
adjacent or surrounding property as the Board may deem to be affected thereby, and file with the
Board proof of the service of such notice.
Such Board of Appeals shall not require any applicant or appellant appearing before it to obtain
the signature or consent of any person residing or having property In the vicinity of the property
described in the application or the appeal as a condition of granting relief. Determinations of the
Board whether to grant relief in any matter shall be made based upon the considerations specified
by law and in this Code, and shall not be dependent upon the consent or agreement of any person
or entity other than a person or entity who is the owner of the property, or property interest, which
is the subject of such matter.
In addition to the powers enumerated herein, but not in limitation thereof, the Board of Appeals
may, in specific cases, after public notice and hearing, and subject to appropriate conditions and
safeguards, determine and vary the application of the regulations herein established, in harmony
with their general purpose and intent, as follows:
Approve the issuance of a permit wherever it is provided in this chapter that the approval of
the Board of Appeals is required.
Permit the erection of a building and accessory buildings on lots having less than the frontage
or area required in the use district in which the property is located.
Where a district boundary line divides a lot held in single and separate ownership, the Board
of Appeals may permit the use authorized on either portion of the lot to extend to the entire lot
but not more than 50 feet beyond the boundary line of the district in which such use is
authorized.
Parking in residence zone:
Permit the use of property in a Residential A Zone that abuts premises zoned for
business, for the parking of vehicles in connection with the business activity conducted
upon such adjoining business property, provided that:
Any permit or permit renewal that is granted and any conditions that are imposed
shall be in accordance with the standards set forth in § 340-142.1 of this chapter,
and only upon an application made by the owner or owners of the abutting business
property and of the property covered by the application.
The property that may be used pursuant to a permit or permit renewal shall in no
event extend to a distance greater than 100 feet from the abutting business property,
or to the nearest street, whichever distance is shorter.
Any permit or permit renewal granted under this section shall be for a period to be
determined by the Board of Appeals, in its discretion, but in any event not more than
three years. When a permit is issued for more than one year, the Zoning Board of
Appeals shall require the submission of an annual report by the Building Department
to the Zoning Board of Appeals with respect to the status and condition of the
property and use.
A permit or permit renewal granted pursuant to this section shall contain reasonable
conditions and requirements as, in the sole discretion of the Board of Appeals, relate
to the use of both the business and residential property, including but not limited to
the type of parking field surface; parking arrangements; suitable entrances and exits;
installation and/or maintenance of fencing or screening; location, enclosure and
maintenance of refuse containers; cleanliness; safety; police and fire access;
lighting; and signage, in keeping with neighborhood conditions.
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 433/441
(b)
(c)
(5)
(6)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(7)
Applications made pursuant to Subsection D(4)(a) shall contain photographic or other
evidence from which the Board can determine whether the granting of the application for
a permit or permit renewal will have an undue adverse effect upon the adjoining
residential area into which the parking field is sought to be or has been established, and
whether the establishment or continuation of such parking area will be beneficial or
detrimental to the adjoining residential properties and neighborhood.
Any permit granted hereunder shall be subject to revocation by the Board of Appeals
upon submission to the Board by any interested party of evidence which the Board finds
to be sufficient to prove a violation of any of the conditions upon which such permit was
granted.
Permit the change, continuance or extension of a nonconforming use as provided in Article Ill
of this chapter.
Issue temporary and conditional permits to contractors or builders under such conditions as
the Board shall prescribe for not more than one year for structures, signs and uses in
contravention of the use regulations controlling residence districts, including signs, temporary
offices and structures on a plot or tract in course of development, provided that such uses are
important to the development of such undeveloped plot or tract, and also provided that such
uses are not prejudicial to adjoining and neighboring plots or tracts already developed or
proposed to be developed. Such structures and signs shall in any event be removed and such
uses shall be discontinued within 30 days after completion of the work on the plot or tract.
Permit the construction, extension, alteration or conversion of a building and the use of
premises in the Business A District for the business of a public garage for the storage or
repair of motor vehicles, or for the business of a motor vehicle or taxi service or of an
automobile service or gas filling station, used-car lot, dry-cleaning establishment or of an
amusement park or carnival, miniature golf course, bowling alley, shooting gallery, billiard or
pool parlor or business of a similar nature; and in the Business B District, for the business of a
dry-cleaning establishment, amusement park or carnival, shooting gallery or business of a
similar nature; provided, however, that the Board of Appeals shall find and determine, in each
instance, that such use of the premises will not be an annoyance, detriment, disturbance or
nuisance to the neighborhood and will not imperil the safety of persons and property or
prejudice the general health or welfare or the general plan and purpose of this chapter, and
provided further that all other ordinances of the Village be complied with. The Board of
Appeals, in passing upon applications for use of premises in Business A District for bowling
alley use, shall in addition to the foregoing findings, in each instance, also find and determine
before granting such application, the following:
That the premises upon which a bowling alley use is requested is located at a sufficient
distance from premises used for residential uses and/or zones so that such bowling alley
use will not constitute an annoyance, detriment, disturbance or nuisance to such
residential property.
That sufficient parking space is available.
That the building is constructed in such manner, including ventilation system, that such
use creates a minimum of sound both within and without the building.
That such use shall be operated in a manner so as not to disturb the use of any premises
for religious purposes upon the Sabbath or other religious holidays.
That such use of premises shall not constitute an undue burden upon the streets or roads
so as to create a traffic hazard.
§ 340-141. Time limit to act upon variance.
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 434/441
A.
B.
C.
[1]
Whenever a permit or variance is granted by the Board of Appeals, such permit or variance shall be
acted upon to an extent required by law to obtain vested status, and, in the case of a structural permit
or variance, completed, within the time set forth in the decision of the Board of Appeals, unless an
extension shall be granted by the Board of Appeals upon application or on its own motion. Any such
extension may be granted without public hearing, in the discretion of the Board of Appeals. If not so
acted upon and completed within one year of the granting of the same, unless extended as aforesaid,
such permit or variance shall automatically expire without notice.
§ 340-142. Meetings.
Meetings of the Board of Appeals shall be public to the extent required by law. The Clerk to the Board
shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon every question, or if
absent or falling to vote, indicating that fact. The Clerk shall also keep a record of the examinations
and other official actions of the Board. When required, the Board shall employ adequate stenographic
assistance to make a proper record of proceedings and testimony before the Board. Every rule,
regulation, every amendment or repeal thereof and every order, requirement, determination or decision
of the Board shall promptly be filed in the office of the Board and shall be a public record to the extent
provided by law.
§ 340-142.1. Deliberations and determinations of Board of
Appeals.
Whenever under the provisions of this chapter or the Village Law of the State of New York any
matter is referred to the Board of Appeals to hear and decide or upon which it is required to pass,
or when its approval, consent or permit is required, it shall confine itself to a consideration of the
health, safety, morals and general welfare of the community in harmony with the general purpose
and intent of this chapter, and such other considerations as may be applicable pursuant to the
Village Code or the Village Law.
Each such determination by the Board of Appeals shall be made in accordance with the Village's
Comprehensive Plan and design, and shall include considerations of relevant factors to, and
conditions reasonably necessary to, lessen congestion in the streets; secure safety from fire,
panic and other dangers; promote the health and general welfare; provide adequate light and air;
prevent overcrowding of land; avoid undue concentration of population; and facilitate the adequate
provision of transportation, water, sewerage, schools, parks and other public requirements.
The deliberations and determinations of the said Board shall be made with reasonable
consideration, among other things, of the character of the district and its peculiar suitability to the
particular uses, and with a view to conserving the value of building and property generally, and
encouraging the most appropriate use of land throughout the Village.
Editor's Note: This section was formerly designated as § 340-130 and was renumbered to § 340-142.1
and amended 2-5-2018 by L.L. No. 1-2018.
Article XXIX. Fees
§ 340-143. Board of Appeals application fees; payment or
reimbursement of costs.
[Amended 12-4-1972; 10-27-2008 by L.L. No. 11-2008]
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 435/441
A.
B.
(1)
(2)
(3)
C.
A.
B.
C.
The fee for any application to the Board of Appeals pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall
be at the level fixed from time to time by resolution of the Board of Trustees of the Village of
Rockville Centre.
In addition to any fees established pursuant to Subsection A hereof, the fee for applications to the
Board of Appeals shall include payment or reimbursement of reasonable costs incurred by the
Board for private engineering, environmental, planning and/or architectural consultants, or other
private consulting services reasonably deemed necessary by the Board, and other extraordinary
expenses in connection with the review of a proposed subdivision. Such reimbursable costs shall
be in addition to any other fees required. The applicant shall be required to provide an escrow
deposit account at any time on or after the receipt of the application, in an amount sufficient to
cover the anticipated costs for such consultant review and other expenses.
The fees to be paid by the applicant shall also include payment or reimbursement of the following
costs:
Publication of legal notices for public hearings, or other required legal notices;
Stenographic minutes and transcription of meetings and hearings;
Any fees or costs for environmental review conducted pursuant to the State Environmental
Quality Review Act or the regulations adopted pursuant thereto.
Article XXX. Amendments, Alterations and District Line
Changes
§ 340-144. Amendments, changes and modifications.
[Amended 1-24-1983 by L.L. No. 3-1983; 6-8-2010 by L.L. No. 11-2010]
This chapter or any part thereof may be amended, supplemented, modified or repealed from time
to time by the Village Board of Trustees, acting on its own motion or upon petition, as provided by
law.
The Board of Trustees may, in connection with the consideration of any action specified in
Subsection A of this section, enact by resolution a moratorium on the issuance of building permits
by the Building Department of the Village of Rockville Centre; provided, however, that said
moratorium shall be effective for a limited and reasonable period of time and shall be limited to the
issuance of building permits pertaining only to those sections of this chapter which are the subject
of such action.
The Board of Trustees of the Village of Rockville Centre hereby exercises its authority pursuant to
Municipal Home Rule Law § 10(1)(ii)(e)(3), to supersede and amend Village Law § 7-706(5) in its
application to the Village of Rockville Centre, and with respect to the Village of Rockville Centre
such § 7-706(5) shall read as follows:
[Added 7-10-2017 by L.L. No. 3-2017]
5. Filing. Every zoning law and every amendment thereto (excluding any map incorporated
therein) adopted pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be entered in the minutes of the
village board. Such minutes shall describe and refer to any map adopted in connection with such
local law or amendment.
§ 340-145. Petitions; fees.
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 436/441
A.
B.
C.
D.
[Amended 6-8-2010 by L.L. No. 11-2010]
Each petition for a zoning amendment shall be in writing, and shall be accompanied by payment of
the applicable fee and deposit as prescribed by resolution of the Board of Trustees. In addition,
the applicant shall be responsible to mail any legal notices required by law.
If the petition is withdrawn before publication of notice of a public hearing thereon, the fee may be
refunded, in whole or in part, at the discretion of the Board of Trustees. No fee shall be required
for a petition filed in favor of or against a pending application.
Upon written request from an applicant upon or after the completion of processing any application
for which a deposit was made, and upon the payment of all expenses to which that deposit may
be applied, the Village Administrator may return any unexpended balance of such deposit.
Each such petition shall be in writing and shall contain the items and information required for an
application for a zoning variance.
§ 340-146. Notice of application for change or amendment.
[Amended 6-8-2010 by L.L. No. 11-2010]
If the Board of Trustees determines to entertain a petition pursuant to this article, notice of public
hearing shall be published and posted by the Village, and mailed by the applicant, in the same manner
as provided for applications for a zoning variance, except that in the case of an amendment made by
the Board of Trustees on its own motion, no notice shall be required except by publication and posting
as required by law. Proof of such mailing shall be filed with the Village Administrator at least three
business days prior to such hearing.
Article XXXI. Completion and Restoration of Existing
Buildings
§ 340-147. Nonapplicability.
Nothing herein contained shall require any change in the plans, construction or designated use of a
building, the construction of which has been started prior to the adoption of this chapter.
Derivation Table
Chapter DT. Derivation Table
ATTACHMENTS
DERIVATION TABLE
Disposition List
Chapter DL. Disposition List
The following is a chronological listing of legislation of the Village of Rockville Centre adopted since the
2002 republication of the Code, indicating its inclusion in the Code or the reason for its exclusion.
[Enabling legislation which is not general and permanent in nature is considered to be non-Code
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 437/441
material (NCM).] The last legislation reviewed for the 2002 republication of the Code was L.L. No. 14-
2002, adopted 10-21-2002.
§ DL-1. Disposition of legislation.
L.L. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
1-2003 1-13-2003 Zoning amendment Ch. 340
2-2003 1-13-2003 Zoning amendment Ch. 340
3-2003 1-13-2003 Zoning amendment Ch. 340
4-2003 1-13-2003 Planning Board amendment Ch. 330
5-2003 3-10-2003 Adoption of Code Ch. 1, Art. II
6-2003 9-22-2003 Animals Ch. 87
7-2003 9-22-2003 Towing amendment Ch. 300
8-2003 9-22-2003 Water conservation Ch. 318, Art. I
9-2003 9-22-2003 Planning Board; site plan review;
subdivision of land amendment
Ch. 330
10-2003 10-27-2003 Zoning amendment Ch. 340
11-2003 10-27-2003 Zoning amendment Ch. 340
12-2003 10-27-2003 Senior citizens, disabled persons with
limited incomes and volunteer fire
fighters tax exemption amendment
Ch. 340, Art. V
1-2004 9-13-2004 Taxicabs amendment Ch. 297
2-2004 10-25-2004 Zoning amendment Ch. 340
3-2004 10-25-2004 Zoning amendment Ch. 340
4-2004 10-25-2004 Zoning amendment (Chart VII) Ch. 340
5-2004 10-25-2004 Zoning amendment (Chart VIII) Ch. 340
6-2004 10-25-2004 Zoning amendment (adoption of revised
Zoning Map)
Ch. 340
7-2004 10-25-2004 Zoning amendment Ch. 340
8-2004 10-25-2004 Zoning amendment Ch. 340
9-2004 11-29-2004 Planning Board; site plan review;
subdivision of land amendment
Ch. 330
1-2005 1-10-2005 Senior citizens, disabled persons with
limited incomes and volunteer fire
fighters tax exemption amendment
Ch. 340, Art. V
2-2005 4-11-2005 Planning Board; site plan review;
subdivision of land amendment
Ch. 330
3-2005 5-3-2005 Building Code administration
amendment
Ch. 115
4-2005 6-6-2005 Zoning amendment (charts) Ch. 340
5-2005 8-8-2005 Building Code administration
amendment
Ch. 115, Art. I
6-2005 11-14-2005 Taxicabs amendment Ch. 297
7-2005 11-14-2005 Zoning amendment Ch. 340
1-2006 2-13-2006 Veterans tax exemption amendment Ch. 294, Art. IV
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 438/441
L.L. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2-2006 4-10-2006 Zoning amendment Ch. 340
3-2006 5-22-2006 Zoning amendment Ch. 340
4-2006 5-22-2006 Zoning amendment Ch. 340
5-2006 5-22-2006 Zoning amendment Ch. 340
6-2006 5-22-2006 Zoning amendment Ch. 340
7-2006 5-22-2006 Zoning amendment Ch. 340
8-2006 5-22-2006 Zoning amendment Ch. 340
9-2006 5-22-2006 Zoning amendment Ch. 340
10-2006 5-22-2006 Zoning amendment Ch. 340
11-2006 5-22-2006 Zoning amendment Ch. 340
12-2006 11-6-2006 Senior citizens, disabled persons with
limited incomes and volunteer
firefighters tax exemption amendment
Ch. 294, Art. V
13-2006 12-4-2006 Temporary storage containers Ch. 285
14-2006 12-4-2006 Real estate signs amendment Ch. 335, Art. III
1-2007 1-29-2007 Planning Board; site plan review;
subdivision of land amendment
Ch. 330
2-2007 7-9-2007 Zoning amendment Ch. 340
3-2007 8-6-2007 Zoning amendment Ch. 340
4-2007 9-10-2007 Zoning amendment Ch. 340
5-2007 9-10-2007 Building Code administration: general
provisions amendment
Ch. 115, Art. I
6-2007 10-16-2007 Zoning amendment Ch. 340
7-2007 10-16-2007 Public nuisance Ch. 263
8-2007 10-16-2007 Social host Ch. 278
9-2007 12-17-2007 Fire Department: election of members Ch. 24, Art. I
10-2007 12-17-2007 Stormwater management and erosion
and sediment control
Ch. 286
11-2007 12-17-2007 Taxation: veterans tax exemption
amendment
Ch. 294, Art. IV
1-2008 4-28-2008 Officers and employees: criminal history
checks
Ch. 35, Art. II
2-2008 4-28-2008 Zoning amendment Ch. 340
3-2008 4-28-2008 Planning Board; site plan review;
subdivision of land amendment; zoning
amendment
Chs. 330; 340
4-2008 4-28-2008 Illicit discharges, activities and
connections to storm sewer system
Ch. 212
5-2008 6-17-2008 Zoning amendment Ch. 340
6-2008 6-17-2008 Building Code administration: general
provisions amendment
Ch. 115, Art. I
7-2008 6-17-2008 Licensing of public assembly places Ch. 262
8-2008 7-7-2008 Zoning amendment Ch. 340
9-2008 7-7-2008 Landscapers and gardeners amendment Ch. 219
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 439/441
L.L. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
10-2008 9-22-2008 Zoning amendment Ch. 340
11-2008 10-27-2008 Planning Board; site plan review;
subdivision of land amendment; zoning
amendment
Chs. 330; 340
12-2008 10-27-2008 Taxation: Cold War veterans tax
exemption
Ch. 294, Art. VI
13-2008 12-15-2008 Dangerous and unsafe buildings and
premises amendment
Ch. 122
1-2009 5-18-2009 General provisions: definitions and
penalties amendment
Ch. 1, Art. I
2-2009 8-10-2009 Flood damage prevention Ch. 188
3-2009 10-6-2009 Clothing bins Ch. 144
1-2010 1-26-2010 Taxation: Cold War veterans tax
exemption amendment
Ch. 294, Art. VI
2-2010 3-2-2010 Vehicles and traffic: dimensions and
weights of vehicles
Ch. 309, Art. IA
3-2010 3-2-2010 Rental dwelling registration Ch. 264
4-2010 5-3-2010 Building Code administration: general
provisions amendment
Ch. 115, Art. I
5-2010 5-3-2010 Landscapers and gardeners amendment Ch. 219
6-2010 5-3-2010 General provisions: definitions and
penalties amendment; peace and good
order: conduct and morals generally
amendment
Chs. 1, Art. I;
247, Art. III
7-2010 5-25-2010 Social host responsibility amendment Ch. 278
8-2010 5-25-2010 Commercial filming Ch. 176
9-2010 6-8-2010 Animals amendment Ch. 87
10-2010 6-8-2010 Food and drink dispensers amendment Ch. 191
11-2010 6-8-2010 Zoning amendment Ch. 340
12-2010 6-8-2010 Comptroller amendment Ch. 10
13-2010 7-20-2010 Animals amendment Ch. 87
14-2010 10-26-2010 Dog enumerators amendment; animals
amendment
Chs. 19; 87
1-2011 1-25-2011 Zoning amendment Ch. 340
2-2011 1-25-2011 Solid waste: littering amendment Ch. 283, Art. III
3-2011 2-8-2011 Noise amendment Ch. 232
4-2011 2-8-2011 Extension of term of existing licenses for
tow services for towing at police request
NCM
5-2011 3-1-2011 Zoning amendment Ch. 340
6-2011 3-1-2011 Zoning amendment Ch. 340
7-2011 4-11-2011 Vehicles and traffic: general street traffic
and parking regulations amendment
Ch. 309, Art. I
8-2011 4-26-2011 Building Code administration: general
provisions amendment; master
electricians amendment
Chs. 115, Art. I; 160
9-2011 4-26-2011 Towing amendment Ch. 300
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 440/441
L.L. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
10-2011 6-7-2011 Zoning amendment Ch. 340
11-2011 6-7-2011 Towing amendment Ch. 300
12-2011 8-29-2011 Vehicles and traffic: metered parking
fields amendment; parking meters
amendment
Ch. 309, Arts. IX and X
13-2011 11-21-2011 Zoning amendment Ch. 340
1-2012 4-3-2012 Noise amendment; zoning amendment Ch. 232; Ch. 340
2-2012 4-24-2012 2012-2013 tax levy limit override NCM
3-2012 12-3-2012 Zoning amendment Ch. 340
4-2012 12-3-2012 Streets and sidewalks: installations
between curb and property line
amendment
Ch. 287, Art. VI
5-2012 12-3-2012 Zoning amendment Ch. 340
6-2012 12-3-2012 Signs amendment Ch. 335, Art. I
1-2013 1-7-2013 Zoning Map amendment NCM
2-2013 3-28-2013 2013-2014 tax levy limit override NCM
3-2013 6-24-2013 Lodging and boarding houses
amendment; zoning amendment
Ch. 225; Ch. 340
4-2013 12-5-2013 Superstorm Sandy tax assessment relief Ch. 294, Art. VII
1-2014 3-3-2014 Zoning amendment Ch. 340
2-2014 4-3-2014 2014-2015 tax levy limit override NCM
3-2014 5-1-2014 Licenses amendment Ch. 222
4-2014 5-1-2014 Planning Board; site plan review;
subdivision of land amendment
Ch. 330
5-2014 5-1-2014 Adoption of local laws amendment Ch. 30
2-2014 4-3-2014 2014-2015 tax levy limit override NCM
3-2014 5-1-2014 Licenses amendment Ch. 222
4-2014 5-1-2014 Planning Board; site plan review;
subdivision of land amendment
Ch. 330
5-2014 5-1-2014 Adoption of local laws Ch. 30
6-2014 6-2-2014 Planning Board; site plan review;
subdivision of land amendment
Ch. 330
7-2014 7-14-2014 Streets and sidewalks: maintenance of
sidewalks and premises amendment
Ch. 287, Art. II
8-2014 10-6-2014 Zoning amendment Ch. 340
9-2014 10-6-2014 Zoning amendment Ch. 340
1-2015 1-5-2015 Zoning amendment Ch. 340
2-2015 1-5-2015 Zoning amendment Ch. 340
3-2015 2-4-2015 Signs amendment Ch. 335, Art. I
4-2015 2-4-2015 Planning Board; site plan review;
subdivision of land amendment
Ch. 330
5-2015 9-8-2015 Zoning amendment Ch. 340
6-2015 9-8-2015 Ordinances, when to take effect repealer Ch. 38, reference only
7/15/2020 Village of Rockville Centre, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/RO0303?guid=RO0303&children=true 441/441
L.L. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
7-2015 9-8-2015 Environmental quality review
amendment
Ch. 166
8-2015 10-6-2015 Parks Ch. 241
9-2015 11-2-2015 Zoning amendment Ch. 340
1-2016 1-4-2016 Zoning amendment Ch. 340
2-2016 4-4-2016 Zoning amendment Ch. 340
3-2016 4-4-2016 Zoning amendment Ch. 340
1-2017 1-3-2017 Moratorium on land use approvals in
Business A District
NCM
2-2017 5-1-2017 Zoning amendment Ch. 340
3-2017 7-10-2017 Zoning amendment Ch. 340
4-2017 7-10-2017 Moratorium on use or development of
property for private roads or streets
NCM
1-2018 2-5-2018 Zoning amendment Ch. 340
2-2018 3-29-2018 Police Commissioner amendment Ch. 45
3-2018 5-7-2018 Zoning amendment Ch. 340
4-2018 5-7-2018 Peace and Good Order: Preservation of
Public Safety amendment; Streets and
Sidewalks: Installations Between Curb
and Property Line amendment;
Impounding of Personal Property on
Streets amendment; Recreational
Equipment and Activities In or Upon
Public Streets, Highways, Sidewalks or
Adjacent Areas
Ch. 247, Art. IV; Ch. 287,
Art. VI; Ch. 287, Art. XI;
Ch. 287, Art. XII
5-2018 6-28-2018 Zoning Amendment Ch. 340
1-2019 1-7-2019 Peace and Good Order: Block Parties
and Special Events
Ch. 247, Art. V
2-2019 4-1-2019 Village Property Ch. 311
L.L. No. Adoption Date Subject Disposition Supp. No.
1-2020 3-2-2020 Taxicabs
Amendment
Ch. 297 45