Part I: Administrative Legislation
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
1:1

ARTICLE I
Adoption of Code
[Adopted 2-6-2012 by L.L. No. 2-2012]
§ 1-1. Legislative intent.
In accordance with Subdivision 3 of § 20 of the Municipal Home Rule
Law, the local laws and ordinances of the Town of Ramapo, as codified by
General Code and consisting of Chapters 1 through 376, shall be known
collectively as the "Code of the Town of Ramapo," hereafter termed the
"Code." Wherever reference is made in any of the local laws and ordinances
contained in the Code of the Town of Ramapo to any other local law or
ordinance appearing in said Code, such reference shall be changed to
the appropriate chapter title, chapter number, article number or section
number appearing in the Code as if such local law or ordinance had been
formally amended to so read.
§ 1-2. Continuation of existing provisions.
The provisions of the Code, insofar as they are substantively the same
as those of local laws and ordinances in force immediately prior to the
enactment of the Code by this local law, are intended as a continuation
of such local laws and ordinances and not as new enactments, and the
effectiveness of such provisions shall date from the date of adoption of the
prior local law or ordinance. All such provisions are hereby continued in full
force and effect and are hereby reaffirmed as to their adoption by the Town
Board of the Town of Ramapo, and it is the intention of said Board that each
such provision contained within the Code is hereby reaffirmed as it appears
in said Code. Only such provisions of former local laws and ordinances as
are omitted from this Code shall be deemed repealed or abrogated by the
provisions of § 1-3 below.
§ 1-3. Repeal of enactments not included in Code.
All local laws and ordinances of a general and permanent nature of the
Town of Ramapo in force on the date of the adoption of this local law and not
contained in such Code or recognized and continued in force by reference
therein are hereby repealed from and after the effective date of this local
law.
§ 1-4. Enactments saved from repeal; matters not affected.
The repeal of local laws and ordinances provided for in § 1-3 of this local law
shall not affect the following classes of local laws, ordinances, rights and
obligations, which are hereby expressly saved from repeal:
A. Any right or liability established, accrued or incurred under any
legislative provision of the Town of Ramapo prior to the effective date of
this local law or any action or proceeding brought for the enforcement
of such right or liability.
§ 1-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-4
1:3
§ 1-5. Severability.
If any clause, sentence, paragraph, section, article, chapter or part of this
local law or of any local law or ordinance included in this Code now or
through supplementation shall be adjudged by any court of competent
jurisdiction to be invalid, such judgment shall not affect, impair or invalidate
the remainder thereof but shall be confined in its operation to the clause,
B. Any offense or act committed or done before the effective date of this
local law in violation of any legislative provision of the Town of Ramapo
or any penalty, punishment or forfeiture which may result therefrom.
C. Any prosecution, indictment, action, suit or other proceeding pending
or any judgment rendered prior to the effective date of this local law
brought pursuant to any legislative provision of the Town of Ramapo.
D. Any agreement entered into or any franchise, license, right, easement
or privilege heretofore granted or conferred by the Town of Ramapo.
E. Any local law or ordinance of the Town of Ramapo providing for the
laying out, opening, altering, widening, relocating, straightening,
establishing grade, changing name, improvement, acceptance or
vacation of any right-of-way, easement, street, road, highway, park or
other public place within the Town of Ramapo or any portion thereof.
F. Any local law or ordinance of the Town of Ramapo appropriating money
or transferring funds, promising or guaranteeing the payment of money
or authorizing the issuance and delivery of any bond of the Town of
Ramapo or other instruments or evidence of the Town's indebtedness.
G. Local laws or ordinances authorizing the purchase, sale, lease or
transfer of property or any lawful contract, agreement or obligation.
H. The levy or imposition of special assessments or charges.
I. The annexation or dedication of property or approval of preliminary or
final subdivision plats.
J. Any local law or ordinance relating to salaries and compensation.
K. Any local law or ordinance amending the Zoning Map.
L. The Subdivision Regulations and Highway Specifications and any local
law or ordinance amending the Subdivision Regulations or Highway
Specifications.
M. Any local law or ordinance relating to or establishing a pension plan or
pension fund for Town employees.
N. Any local law or ordinance or portion of a local law or ordinance
establishing a specific fee amount for any license, permit or service
obtained from the Town.
O. Any local law adopted subsequent to May 25, 2011.
§ 1-4 RAMAPO CODE § 1-5
1:4
sentence, paragraph, section, article, chapter or part thereof directly
involved in the controversy in which such judgment shall have been
rendered.
§ 1-6. Copy of Code on file.
A copy of the Code has been filed in the office of the Town Clerk of the
Town of Ramapo and shall remain there for use and examination by the
public until final action is taken on this local law; and, if this local law
shall be adopted, such copy shall be certified by the Town Clerk of the
Town of Ramapo by impressing thereon the Seal of the Town, and such
certified copy shall remain on file in the office of said Town Clerk to be
made available to persons desiring to examine the same during all times
while said Code is in effect. The enactment and publication of this local law,
coupled with the availability of a copy of the Code for inspection by the
public, shall be deemed, held and considered to be due and legal publication
of all provisions of the Code for all purposes.
§ 1-7. Amendments to Code.
Any and all additions, deletions, amendments or supplements to any of the
local laws and ordinances known collectively as the "Code of the Town of
Ramapo" or any new local laws or ordinances, when enacted or adopted in
such form as to indicate the intention of the Town Board to be a part thereof,
shall be deemed to be incorporated into such Code so that reference to the
Code shall be understood and intended to include such additions, deletions,
amendments or supplements. Whenever such additions, deletions,
amendments or supplements to the Code shall be enacted or adopted, they
shall thereafter be inserted in said Code as amendments and supplements
thereto. Nothing contained in this local law shall affect the status of any
local law or ordinance contained herein, and such local laws or ordinances
may be amended, deleted or changed from time to time as the Town Board
deems desirable.
§ 1-8. Code to be kept up-to-date.
It shall be the duty of the Town Clerk to keep up-to-date the certified copy of
the Code of the Town of Ramapo required to be filed in the office of the Town
Clerk for use by the public. All changes in said Code and all local laws and
ordinances adopted by the Town Board subsequent to the enactment of this
local law in such form as to indicate the intention of said Board to be a part
of said Code shall, when finally enacted or adopted, be included therein by
temporary attachment of copies of such changes, local laws or ordinances
until such changes, local laws or ordinances are included as supplements to
said Code.
§ 1-9. Sale of Code; supplementation.
Copies of the Code, or any chapter or portion of it, may be purchased from
the Town Clerk, or an authorized agent of the Clerk, upon the payment of a
§ 1-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-9
1:5
fee to be set by resolution of the Town Board. The Clerk may also arrange
for procedures for the periodic supplementation of the Code.
§ 1-10. Penalties for tampering with Code.
Any person who alters or tampers with the Code of the Town of Ramapo
in any manner whatsoever which will cause the legislation of the Town of
Ramapo to be misrepresented thereby, or who violates any other provision
of this local law, shall be guilty of an offense and shall, upon conviction
thereof, be subject to a fine of not more than $250 or imprisonment for a
term of not more than 15 days, or both.
§ 1-11. Changes in previously adopted legislation; new provisions.
§ 1-12. Incorporation of provisions into Code.
The provisions of this local law are hereby made Article I of Chapter 1 of
the Code of the Town of Ramapo, such local law to be entitled "General
Provisions, Article I, Adoption of Code," and the sections of this local law
shall be numbered §§ 1-1 to 1-14, inclusive.
§ 1-13. Amendments to Town Law.
In adopting the Code of the Town of Ramapo, it is the intent of the Town
Board to exercise the powers granted to it by § 10(1)(d)(3) of the Municipal
Home Rule Law to amend the Town Law. Therefore, any provisions of the
Code of the Town of Ramapo adopted hereby or which may be adopted
in the future which conflict with the Town Law are hereby declared to be
amendments to the Town Law, enacted pursuant to the above-cited section,
A. In compiling and preparing the local laws and ordinances for
publication as the Code of the Town of Ramapo, no changes in the
meaning or intent of such local laws and ordinances have been made,
except as provided for in Subsections B and C hereof. In addition,
certain grammatical changes and other minor nonsubstantive changes
were made in one or more of said pieces of legislation. It is the intention
of the Town Board that all such changes be adopted as part of the Code
as if the local laws and ordinances had been previously formally
amended to read as such.
B. Throughout the Code, references to the "Building Department" and
"Building and Zoning Department" are amended to read "Building,
Planning and Zoning Department."
C. In addition, the amendments and/or additions as set forth in Schedule A
attached hereto and made a part hereof are made herewith, to become
effective upon the effective date of this local law. (Chapter and section
number references are to the local laws and ordinances as they have
been renumbered and appear in the Code.)1
1. Editor's Note: A copy of Schedule A is on file in the office of the Town Clerk.
§ 1-9 RAMAPO CODE § 1-13
1:6
regardless of whether or not the legislation establishing such amendments
specifically refers to the Town Law.
§ 1-14. When effective.
This local law shall take effect immediately upon filing with the Secretary of
State of the State of New York.
§ 1-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-14
1:7

ARTICLE II
Penalties
[Adopted 5-23-1979 by L.L. No. 4-1979]
§ 1-15. Scope.
The provisions of this article shall govern the classification and designation
of every offense or violation as defined within the Revised Code of the Town
of Ramapo and any of its rules, regulations or resolutions hereafter adopted
or promulgated by the Town Board of the Town of Ramapo, except as may
be otherwise expressly set forth.
§ 1-16. Definitions.
The terms "Code," "Revised Code" and "Revised Code of the Town of
Ramapo" as used throughout the Revised Code of the Town of Ramapo
shall be deemed to include all local laws, ordinances, resolutions, rules and
regulations duly passed, authorized or promulgated by the Town Board of
the Town of Ramapo.
§ 1-17. Penalties for offenses.
A. Any person, firm, corporation or business entity committing an offense
against or violating any provision of the Revised Code of the Town of
Ramapo shall be subject to the penalty set forth or specified within the
chapter or section violated or against which the offense was committed.
(1) Class 1 violation. A loss of privileges and the use of the facility
which the rules or regulations were designed to afford the use of.
Such loss of privileges, whether by suspension for a definite period
or revocation, shall be determined by the head of the department in
charge of such activity, whose determination shall be reviewable
pursuant to Article 78 of the Civil Practice Law and Rules;
provided, nevertheless, that if other or different procedure is
required for the imposition of sentence under this section, in any
part of this Revised Code, such other method shall be employed.
(2) Class 2 violation. A civil penalty of not less than $25 nor more than
$50 for each day of violation.
(3) Class 3 violation. Upon conviction, a sentence of imprisonment not
to exceed 15 days and/or a fine not to exceed $250 for each week of
violation, or both.
(4) Class 4 violation. Upon conviction, a sentence of not more than one
year of imprisonment and/or a fine of not more than $1,000 for
each week of violation, or both.
B. If a person, firm or corporation has been found guilty of a Class 3 or
Class 4 violation and has gained money or property through the
commission of said violations, then the court, in lieu of any fine
§ 1-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-17
1:9
authorized under this section, may sentence the defendant to pay an
amount equal to twice the amount of the defendant's gain from the
commission of the offense.
C. The imposition of any of the penalties provided for above shall not be
construed to abridge or alter any rights of the Town to seek any other
remedy, including the imposition of any civil penalty or the seeking of
any injunctive or remedial relief which may be authorized under law.
§ 1-17 RAMAPO CODE § 1-17
1:10
Chapter 9
DEFENSE AND INDEMNIFICATION
§ 9-1. Legislative intent. [Added 1-26-2000 by L.L. No. 1-2000]
The Town Board of the Town of Ramapo recognized the increasing litigation
exposure faced by public employees in 1980 and conferred the defense
benefits contained in § 18 of the Public Officers Law on Town of Ramapo
employees by adoption of Local Law No. 2-1980. The Town Board wishes to
provide additional indemnification and defense protection pursuant to law
by amendment of that local law.
§ 9-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, unless the context otherwise requires, the following
terms shall have the meanings indicated:
EMPLOYEE — Any person holding a position by election, appointment
or employment in the service of the Town, including any Town auxiliary
policemen. Other than a Town auxiliary policeman, who shall be considered
an employee under this section, "employee" shall not include a volunteer,
any person not compensated for his services or an independent contractor.
The term "employee" shall include a former employee, his estate or
judicially appointed personal representative.[Amended 4-12-1989 by L.L.
No. 6-1989]
TOWN — The Town of Ramapo.
§ 9-3. Benefits conferred. [Added 1-26-2000 by L.L. No. 1-20002]
The full benefits of § 18 of the Public Officers Law regarding defense and
indemnification shall apply to all employees of the Town as defined in § 9-2
above.
§ 9-4. Additional indemnification. [Added 1-26-2000 by L.L. No.
1-2000]
The Town will provide for the defense of any Town employee in any civil
action or proceeding arising out of any alleged act or omission in which it
is alleged that the employee has violated the civil rights of the claimant,
petitioner or plaintiff under Sections 1981 and 1983 of the United States
Civil Rights Act. The Town shall indemnify and save harmless such
employee in the amount of any judgment or settlement of claim obtained
against such officer or employee, including punitive and exemplary
damages. Such legal defense and indemnification shall be provided where
the employee at the time of such alleged act or omission was acting in good
faith and within the scope of his public employment, powers or duties.
2. Editor's Note: This local law also repealed original §§ 15-2, Defense authorized;
representation by attorney, and 15-3, Contingencies.
§ 1-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 9-5
1:11
§ 9-5. Other rights not affected.
The benefits of this chapter will inure only to employees as defined herein
and shall not enlarge or diminish the rights of any other party, nor shall
any provision of this chapter be construed to affect, alter or repeal any
provisions of the Workers' Compensation Law.
§ 9-6. Agreements with negotiating units.
The benefits of this chapter shall be extended to an employee of a
negotiating unit for which an agreement has been negotiated pursuant to
Civil Service Law, Article 14, only if such agreement expressly so provides.
§ 9-7. Insurance not affected.
The provisions of this chapter shall not be construed to impair, alter, limit
or modify the rights and obligations of any insurer under any policy of
insurance.
§ 9-8. Immunity not affected.
The provisions of this chapter shall not be construed in any way to impair,
alter, limit, modify, abrogate or restrict any immunity available to or
conferred upon any unit, entity, officer or employee of the Town or any
right to defense provided for any governmental officer or employee by, in
accordance with or by reason of any other provision of state or federal
statutory or common law.
§ 9-9. Applicability.
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all actions and proceedings
specified herein pending or which shall have been commenced or instituted
on or after the effective date of this chapter.
Chapter 12
ELECTIONS
§ 9-5 RAMAPO CODE § 9-9
1:12
ARTICLE I
Wards
[Adopted 12-20-2004 by L.L. No. 11-2004]
§ 12-1. Legislative intent.
Subdivision 1 of § 85 of the Town Law provides that whenever a proposition
shall have been adopted for the establishment of the ward system and
the election thereafter of one Councilperson from each ward, the Board
of Elections of Rockland County shall divide the Town into wards and fix
the boundaries thereof. Pursuant to the Municipal Home Rule Law § 10,
Subdivision 1(ii)d(3), the Town Board, by local law, can supersede in its
application to it, any provision of the Town Law relating to the property,
affairs or government of the Town, unless the State Legislature shall have
prohibited the adoption of such local law. The boundary of a ward system
is a permissible subject of a local law and there is no state law prohibiting
the adoption of this article. The Town Board believes that the Town is best
suited to fix the boundaries of each ward. Other towns have done so.
§ 12-2. Ward boundaries.
Whenever a proposition shall have been adopted in the Town for the
establishment of the ward system and the election thereafter of one
Councilperson from each ward, the Town Board shall divide the Town into
four wards and fix the boundaries thereof, unless a proposition shall have
been adopted to increase the number of Councilpersons from four to six, in
which instance, the Town Board shall divide the Town into six wards and fix
the boundaries thereof. The division shall be made so that the number of
inhabitants in each ward, based upon the last regular federal census, shall
be substantially equal, with wards composed of convenient and contiguous
territory in as compact form as practicable. No election district heretofore
or hereinafter created under the Election Law shall contain parts of two
or more wards. The Town Board shall make appropriate revisions of the
boundaries of the wards so that they shall contain a substantially equal
number of inhabitants not later than six months after the publication of the
results of a regular federal census which indicated that the districts do not
contain a substantially equal number of inhabitants. When the Town Board
shall have finally determined the boundaries of the wards, it shall cause a
map of the Town to be prepared, showing, in detail, the location of each
ward and the boundaries thereof. The original map so made shall be filed in
the office of the Town Clerk and copies thereof shall be filed in the offices of
the County Clerk and the Board of Elections of Rockland County. The ward
system shall be deemed established after such filing is complete.
§ 12-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 12-2
1:13
Chapter 14
ETHICS
§ 14-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and cited as the "Ethics in Government Law of
the Town of Ramapo."
§ 14-2. Legislative intent.
§ 14-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AGENCY — Any Town department, division, board, commission or bureau of
the Town of Ramapo.
COMPENSATION — Remuneration in money, services, merchandise, loans,
promise, travel or any other form.
CONTRACT — Any claim, account or demand against or agreement with the
Town of Ramapo, expressed or implied, and shall include the designation
of a bank depository of public funds and the designation of an official
newspaper.[Amended 2-6-2012 by L.L. No. 2-2012]
COVERED EMPLOYEES — Those individuals required to file an annual
financial disclosure statement pursuant to this chapter.
INTEREST — A direct or indirect pecuniary or material benefit accruing
to a municipal officer or employee as the result of a contract with the
municipality which such officer or employee serves. For the purposes of this
chapter, a municipal officer or employee shall be deemed to have an interest
in the contract of:[Amended 2-6-2012 by L.L. No. 2-2012]
A. The State of New York, by the Ethics in Government Act, has amended
provisions of Article 18 of the General Municipal Law requiring certain
financial disclosure by various town officials and employees. It is the
intent of the Town Board to implement the provisions of the recent
amendment and to require financial disclosure by town elected officials,
covered employees and political candidates as well as political party
chairpersons who earn more than $30,000 annually as compensation
from their party.
B. Further, it is the goal of the Town Board to revise its current ethics code
with regard to standards for ethical conduct by its officials and
employees as well as to revise the powers and procedures of the Town's
Commission on Ethics. [Amended 2-6-2012 by L.L. No. 2-2012]
His spouse, minor children and dependents, except a contract of
employment with the municipality which such officer or employee
serves;
A.
§ 12-2 RAMAPO CODE § 14-3
1:14
LICENSING — Any agency activity respecting the grant, denial, renewal or
amendment of a license, permit or other form of permission conferring the
privilege to engage in:
MINISTERIAL MATTER — An administrative act not allowing for
substantial personal discretion.
MUNICIPAL OFFICER OR EMPLOYEE — An officer or employee of the
Town of Ramapo, whether paid or unpaid, including members of any
administrative board, commission or other agency thereof. No person shall
be deemed to be a municipal officer or employee solely by reason of being
a civil defense volunteer or volunteer fireman. "Municipal officer or
employee" also means any person nominated by a political party or by
independent nominating petition as a candidate for any elective office in the
Town of Ramapo.
REPRESENTATIVE CAPACITY — The presentation of the interests of a client
or other person pursuant to an agreement for services.
§ 14-4. Standards of conduct.
Except as provided in § 14-5 of this chapter, every officer or employee of the
Town shall be subject to and abide by the following standards of conduct:
A firm, partnership or association of which such officer or employee is
a member or employee;
B.
A corporation of which such officer or employee is an officer, director
or employee; and
C.
A corporation, any stock of which is owned or controlled directly or
indirectly by such officer or employee.
D.
A. A profession, trade or occupation; or
B. Any business or activity regulated by a regulatory agency.
A. No elected official, officer or employee of the Town of Ramapo shall
enter an agreement to receive compensation for services rendered
concerning matters before any Town agency.
B. No elected official, officer or employee of the Town of Ramapo shall
receive any compensation for any services rendered against the
interest of the Town.
C. No elected official, officer or employee of the Town of Ramapo shall
receive any compensation other than that as prescribed by law for any
services rendered in the interest of the Town.
D. No elected official, officer or employee of the Town of Ramapo or firm of
which said official, officer or employee owns 50% or more of the stock
or other interest may:
(1) Sell goods or services valued over $75 to any Town agency; or
§ 14-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 14-4
1:15
(2) Contract to provide goods or services unless done pursuant to
contract let after public notice and competitive bidding. This shall
not apply to publication of resolutions, advertisements or notices in
newspapers designated pursuant to law and for which the rates are
fixed.
E. No former elected official, former officer or former employee of the
Town of Ramapo shall appear or render services before any Town
agency concerning a matter on which he was personally involved for
two years after termination of his service or employment. An official,
officer or employee is personally involved if he/she actually handled,
researched, made decisions about or discussed the matter with the
person making the decision. However, the firm of a former elected
official, officer or employee may render services in matters before a
Town agency as long as the former official, officer or employee does not
share net revenues.
F. No elected official, officer or employee of the Town of Ramapo who is a
member of a firm which is appearing before a Town agency may
communicate orally with a Town officer or employee concerned with the
matter about the matter. However, printed material, such as the
letterhead of stationery, with the name of the Town official, officer or
employee is not an appearance as long as the printed material is not
signed by the official, officer or employee. [Amended 2-6-2012 by
L.L. No. 2-2012]
G. An officer or employee shall not, directly or indirectly, solicit any gift or
accept or receive any gift having a value of $75 or more, whether in the
form of money, services, loan, travel, entertainment, hospitality, thing
or promise, or any other form, under circumstances in which it could
reasonably be inferred that the gift was intended to influence him, or
could reasonably be expected to influence him, in the performance of
his official duties or was intended as a reward for any official action on
his part. If a gift is intended to influence him in his official capacity, he
may not accept any gift.
H. An officer or employee shall not disclose confidential information
acquired by him in the course of his official duties or use such
information to further his personal interest.
I. An officer or employee shall not receive or enter into any agreement,
express or implied, for compensation or consideration of any kind for
services to be rendered in relation to any matter before any municipal
agency of the Town of Ramapo.
J. To the extent that he knows thereof, a member of the Town Board and
any officer or employee of the Town of Ramapo, whether paid or unpaid,
who participates in the discussion or gives official opinion to the Town
Board on any legislation before the Town Board shall publicly disclose
on the official record the nature and extent of any direct or indirect
financial or other private interest he has in such legislation.
§ 14-4 RAMAPO CODE § 14-4
1:16
§ 14-5. Exceptions.
The provisions of § 14-4 of this chapter shall not apply to:
K. No municipal officer or employee shall have an interest, direct or
indirect, in any contract with the Town of Ramapo.
L. Neither the Director of Finance, the Supervisor nor his deputy or
employee shall have an interest, directly or indirectly, in a bank or trust
company designated as a depository or paying agent or for investment
of funds of the Town of Ramapo. [Amended 2-6-2012 by L.L. No.
2-2012]
M. An officer or employee shall not invest or hold any investment, directly
or indirectly, in any financial, business, commercial or other private
transaction which creates a conflict with his official duties.
N. No officer or employee shall engage in, solicit, negotiate for or promise
to accept private employment or render services for private interests
when such employment or service creates a conflict with or impairs the
proper discharge of his official duties.
O. The Town Attorney or any Deputy Town Attorney is prohibited from
exercising any discretion in any matter of Town interest which shall
involve any person or corporation who or which has been a client of his
firm during one year prior to the time that said matter is handled by the
office of the Town Attorney. This, however, shall not prevent the
assignment of such matter to another attorney in the Town Attorney's
office who has had no interest in such matter. Any law firm of which the
Town Attorney or any Deputy Town Attorney shall be a member shall
not practice before the Town Board or any of the boards or commissions
of the Town of Ramapo while such member is an employee of the Town
Attorney's office.
P. The Building Inspector or any assistant is prohibited from exercising
any discretion or acting upon any matter of Town interest which shall
involve any real estate, insurance, building contracting business or
business matters in which he may have any interest as defined herein.
Q. The Tax Assessor and the employees of the Tax Assessor's office are
prohibited from engaging in the business of real estate or from
receiving or benefiting from, directly or indirectly, any fees or
commissions involving the sale of real property located in the Town of
Ramapo.
R. No attorney employed by the Town of Ramapo or otherwise hired as a
consultant or special counsel shall engage in representation of a client
in a claim or matter against the Town of Ramapo. [Added 2-6-2012 by
L.L. No. 2-2012]
A. A contract with a person, firm, corporation or association in which an
officer or employee of the Town of Ramapo has an interest solely by
§ 14-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 14-5
1:17
§ 14-6. Financial disclosure. [Amended 4-10-1991 by L.L. No.
3-1991; 4-12-1995 by L.L. No. 5-1995; 3-27-1996 by L.L. No. 3-1996;
2-6-2012 by L.L. No. 2-2012; 6-24-2015 by L.L. No. 3-2015]
reason of employment as an officer or employee thereof if the
remuneration of such employment will not be directly affected as a
result of such contract and the duties of such employment do not
directly involve the procurement, preparation or performance of any
part of such contract.
B. The purchase by the Town of Ramapo of real property or an interest
therein, provided the purchase and the consideration therefor are
approved by order of the Supreme Court upon petition of the Town
Board of the Town of Ramapo.
C. The acquisition of real property or an interest therein through
condemnation proceedings according to law.
D. A contract with a membership corporation or other voluntary nonprofit
corporation or association.
E. A contract in which a municipal officer or employee has an interest if
such contract was entered into prior to the time he was nominated,
elected or appointed as such officer or employee, but this shall in no
event authorize a renewal of any such contract.
F. A contract with a corporation in which a municipal officer or employee
has an interest by reason of stock holdings when the stock of the
corporation is listed on either the New York or American Stock
Exchange or less than 5% of the outstanding stock of the corporation is
owned or controlled directly or indirectly by such officer or employee;
provided, however, that this exception shall not apply to stock holdings
of the Director of Finance, Supervisor, Deputy Supervisor or employee
of the Supervisor in a bank or trust company designated as a depository
of the funds of the Town of Ramapo. [Amended 2-6-2012 by L.L. No.
2-2012]
G. A contract for the furnishing of public utility services when the rates or
charges therefor are fixed or regulated by the Public Service
Commission.
H. A contract for the payment of a portion of the compensation of a private
employee of an officer when such employee performs part-time service
in the official duties of the office.
I. The timely filing by a present or former municipal officer or employee of
any claim, act, demand or suit against the Town of Ramapo or any
agency thereof on behalf of himself or any member of his family arising
out of any personal injury or property damage or any lawful benefit
authorized or permitted by law.
§ 14-5 RAMAPO CODE § 14-6
1:18
A. All individuals listed in Subsection J shall file an annual financial
disclosure statement with the Commission on Ethics on or before May
15 of each year, unless an extension is granted by the Commission on
Ethics. In addition, all candidates for local elected offices shall file a
financial disclosure statement within 30 days after the filing of petitions
for nomination at a primary election or after receiving the nomination
of their party other than at a primary election. One annual filing is
sufficient even if the filer is employed in more than one capacity
requiring a filing. In addition, each individual required to file must also
file an affidavit that his or her spouse has no financial interest which
has an impact on any Town matters. Any person requesting an
extension based upon an extension granted by the Internal Revenue
Service with respect to filing of Internal Revenue Form 1040 shall
submit a copy of the extension request to the Internal Revenue Service
to the Commission on Ethics.
B. Appended to the financial disclosure statement shall be the first and
signature pages of the individual's Internal Revenue Service Form
1040. The second page of form 1040 shall be signed, or an affidavit
shall be submitted certifying that the copy of the Internal Revenue
Service Form 1040 is a duplication of the original form filed with the
Internal Revenue Service.
C. Said financial disclosure statement shall be in the form approved by the
Town Board, said form being appended to this chapter as the financial
disclosure statement.3 The statement shall be completed in its entirety.
Any questions that do not apply shall be marked "N/A." In addition, the
financial disclosure statement shall be signed.
D. The financial disclosure statement shall be supplied by the Town Clerk
to those individuals required to file.
E. The annual financial disclosure statement shall be submitted in a sealed
envelope to the person designated by the Town Board to receive such
statements by the Commission on Ethics. Said person shall keep, as a
matter of public record, a log of all such filings by name and the date on
which such filing was received.
F. The filings shall be delivered unopened to the Commission on Ethics.
The Commission shall open the same to determine that said form is
complete. Thereafter, the Town Clerk shall keep said filings in a closed
file.
G. Said financial disclosure statement is expressly for the purpose of
evaluation by the Commission on Ethics of the legitimacy of any
charges made against any individual covered by this chapter.
H. Public inspection.
3. Editor's Note: The current form for the financial disclosure statement is on file in the
Town Clerk's office.
§ 14-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 14-6
1:19
(1) The information set forth in the annual financial disclosure
statement shall be available for public inspection except for:
(a) The categories of value or amount, which shall remain
confidential, and any other item of information which the
Commission on Ethics has deleted pursuant to § 14-10E of this
chapter; and
(b) The first and last pages of the individual's 1040 form.
(2) In addition, the following records of the Commission on Ethics are
available for public inspection:
(a) Notices of delinquency sent pursuant to § 14-10E of this
chapter;
(b) Notices of violations; and
(c) Notices of penalties.
I. The Commission on Ethics shall present to the Town board in writing a
list by September 1 of each year of those individuals who are not in
compliance with the filing of their annual financial disclosure
statement. An individual will be considered conditionally in compliance
if he or she has filed a complete annual financial disclosure statement,
but has not included required pages from an income tax return because
the tax return filing is on extension and proof of the extension has been
included with the annual financial disclosure statement.
J. The individuals who must file financial disclosure statements are as
follows:
(1) All local elected officials of the Town of Ramapo (except judges or
justices of the unified court system).
(2) All local political party officials who earn $30,000 or more from
political party committee funds.
(3) All candidates for local elected offices who file petitions for
nomination at a primary election or who receive the nomination of
a party other than at a primary election.
(4) Local officers and employees who hold policymaking positions as
annually determined by the Town Board. These officers and
employees include:
(a) Persons holding the following job titles:
[1] Director of Youth Counseling Services.
[2] Confidential Assistant to Supervisor.
[3] Director of Finance.
[4] Town Clerk.
§ 14-6 RAMAPO CODE § 14-6
1:20
§ 14-7. Contracts void.
Any contract willfully entered by or with the Town of Ramapo in which
there is an interest prohibited by this chapter shall be null, void and wholly
unenforceable.
§ 14-8. Distribution of law. [Amended 2-6-2012 by L.L. No. 2-2012]
The Supervisor of the Town of Ramapo shall cause a copy of the Ethics
in Government Law to be distributed to every officer and employee of the
Town of Ramapo within 30 days after the effective date of this chapter. Each
[5] Receiver of Taxes.
[6] Superintendent of Highways.
[7] Justice Court Clerk.
[8] Director of Parks and Recreation.
[9] Director of Buildings and Grounds.
[10] Recreational Activities Manager.
[11] Personnel Administrator.
[12] Director of Purchasing.
[13] Director of Public Works.
[14] Building Inspector II.
[15] Assessor.
[16] Chief of Police.
[17] Police Captain.
[18] Deputy Director of Parks and Recreation.
[19] Deputy Director of Public Works.
(b) All members of the legal professional staff of the Town
Attorney's office.
(c) All members of the Planning Board of the Town of Ramapo.
(d) All members of the Zoning Board of Appeals of the Town of
Ramapo.
(e) All members of the Assessment Board of Review of the Town of
Ramapo.
K. Notwithstanding the above, this chapter shall not cover any employee
of the Town of Ramapo covered under the CSEA and PBA Bargaining
Units.
§ 14-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 14-8
1:21
officer and employee elected or appointed thereafter or nominated for office
shall be furnished a copy before entering upon the duties of his office or
employment or within 10 days after nomination. Failure to distribute any
such copy or failure of any officer or employee to receive such copy shall
have no effect on the duty of compliance with such law, nor the enforcement
of provisions thereof.
§ 14-9. Permissible conduct.
An elected official, officer or employee of the Town of Ramapo may:
§ 14-10. Commission on Ethics.
There is hereby created and established a Commission on Ethics consisting
of five members to be appointed by the Town Board of the Town of Ramapo,
all of whom shall reside in the Town of Ramapo and shall serve without
compensation.
A. Appear before a Town agency in a representative capacity if it is in
connection with a ministerial matter.
B. Advocate any position in his official capacity.
C. Appear before a Town agency in a representative capacity on behalf of
an employee organization.
A. One member shall be an attorney admitted to practice in the State of
New York; one member shall be an ordained clergyman, now or
formerly the spiritual leader of a congregation of 100 or more
members; one member shall be a teacher or educational administrator;
none shall be an official in any political party nor have held any political
party position, including committeeman or candidate for any public or
party office, within six months prior to his appointment; and at least two
members shall be of a party affiliation (or nonaffiliation) different than
the majority of members of the Board. The Town Board shall designate
the Chairperson who shall serve for a one-year term.
B. Of the members first appointed to the Commission, one shall hold office
for a term of one year, one for a term of two years, one for a term of
three years, one for a term of four years and one for a term of five years
from and after his appointment. Each successor shall be appointed for a
term of five years from and after the expiration of the term of his
predecessor in office. The Town Attorney shall be a member ex officio of
the Commission. [Amended 2-6-2012 by L.L. No. 2-2012]
C. Members of the Commission may be removed by the Town Board for
substantial neglect of duty or gross misconduct after written notice of
charges and opportunity for a reply.
D. The Commission on Ethics shall meet at least annually in the month of
June for purposes of organization and to review the status of all
confidential memoranda required to be on file with it and to transact
§ 14-8 RAMAPO CODE § 14-10
1:22
any other business as may properly come before it and shall report
publicly to the Town Board not later than the first day of September
annually on its current state of organization and on the currency of
all reports required to be on file and on any other matters which
may appear to be a just and proper exercise of its responsibility. The
Commission may make reasonable expenditures from funds budgeted
to it to effectuate the purposes of this chapter.
E. The Commission on Ethics shall have the powers and duties prescribed
by Article 18 of the General Municipal Law and shall render advisory
opinions to the officers and employees of the Town of Ramapo with
respect to Article 18 of the General Municipal Law and the Ethics in
Government Law contained herein. In addition, the Commission may
make recommendations with respect to any amendment to this chapter
upon the request of the Town Board. Specifically, the Commission on
Ethics shall have the following powers and duties. It shall: [Amended
4-10-1991 by L.L. No. 3-1991; 2-6-2012 by L.L. No. 2-2012]
(1) Adopt rules and regulations governing Commission procedures.
(2) Review financial disclosure statements to determine their
completeness.
(3) Grant extensions of filing dates to individuals requesting said
extension. Said extension shall be granted for a reasonable period
of time, not to exceed 60 days, unless such extension is based upon
an Internal Revenue Service 1040 extension, and then until 10 days
after the expiration of the IRS extension. [Amended 3-27-1996 by
L.L. No. 3-1996]
(4) Grant exemptions from any requirement contained in the financial
disclosure statements to individuals required to file a financial
disclosure statement.
(5) Permit any person required to file a financial disclosure statement
to request the Commission on Ethics to delete from the copy
thereof made available for public inspection one or more items of
information, upon a finding by a majority of the total members of
the Commission on Ethics that the information which would
otherwise be required to be disclosed will have no material bearing
on the reporting person's official duties.
(6) Receive and investigate complaints of violation of any provisions of
this chapter.
(7) Administer and enforce the provisions of this chapter.
(8) Notify individuals of their failure to file a statement or of any
deficiency in said statement.
§ 14-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 14-10
1:23
§ 14-11. Disposal of statements. [Amended 4-10-1991 by L.L. No.
3-1991; 6-24-2015 by L.L. No. 3-2015]
Financial disclosure statements filed with the Commission on Ethics shall
be disposed of in accordance with the rules and regulations adopted by the
Town Board.
§ 14-12. Record of appearances; filing of law with State
Comptroller.
§ 14-13. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 4-10-1991 by L.L. No.
3-1991; 4-12-1995 by L.L. No. 5-1995; 6-24-2015 by L.L. No. 3-2015]
(9) Report violations by individuals of any provisions of this chapter
and make recommendations for disciplinary action to the Town
Board.
(10) Present in writing a list of those individuals who have not filed the
required financial disclosure statement by September 1 of each
year. [Amended 4-12-1995 by L.L. No. 5-1995; 3-27-1996 by
L.L. No. 3-1996; 6-24-2015 by L.L. No. 3-2015]
(11) Hold hearings and make determinations as to violations of this
chapter.
(12) Assess civil penalties for violations of this chapter up to $10,000.
F. All financial disclosure statements and any information reported to the
Commission on Ethics shall not be used for any purpose other than
those expressly set forth in this chapter. However, said reports and
information can be released upon receipt of a properly issued subpoena
by a law enforcement agency. [Amended 4-10-1991 by L.L. No.
3-1991]
A. Each agency must keep a record of appearances of the attorneys,
agents and representatives who appear before it and the firms or
individuals they represent. This record shall be open for public
inspection.
B. The Town Clerk shall file a copy of this Ethics in Government Local Law,
a statement that the Town of Ramapo has established an Ethics
Commission and a copy of the financial disclosure form within 30 days
after adoption at the office of the State Comptroller.
A. It shall be a violation of this chapter for any individual required to file a
financial disclosure statement to fail to file such statement by May 15,
or within any extension of time granted by the Commission on Ethics, or
cure any defect in said statement within 15 days after being officially
advised of such defect in writing by the Commission on Ethics.
(1) Upon failure to file such statement by May 15, or within any
extension of time granted by the Commission on Ethics, or cure any
§ 14-10 RAMAPO CODE § 14-13
1:24
Chapter 18
FINANCE, DEPARTMENT OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Deputy Receivers of Taxes — See Ch. 37, Art.
I.
Director of Purchasing — See Ch. 37, Art. III.
§ 18-1. Title.
This chapter shall be cited and may be referred to hereinafter as the
"Department of Finance Law of the Town of Ramapo."
§ 18-2. Legislative intent.
defect in said statement within 15 days after being notified by
the Commission on Ethics, the Commission on Ethics, after a
mandatory hearing upon reasonable notice, shall officially notify
the Town Board of said violation in writing and request that said
individual be disciplined. Recommended discipline may include,
but not be limited to, suspension or termination from service or
employment within the Town and a civil penalty not to exceed
$10,000.
(2) If said violator is either an elected official or candidate for local
elected office, the failure to file the disclosure statement shall be
published by the Town Clerk at the request of the Commission on
Ethics in the official newspaper of the Town within 10 days of said
failure to file. In addition, a copy of said notice of failure to file shall
be sent to the Town Board.
B. It shall be a violation for any officer or employee to fail to comply with
any provisions of this chapter.
(1) The Commission on Ethics, after a hearing upon reasonable notice,
may assess an individual a civil penalty up to $10,000 and/or notify
the Town Board of said violation and request that said individual be
disciplined and/or terminated from service or employment with the
Town.
(2) If said violator is either an elected official or candidate for local
elected office, the determination of violation shall be published by
the Town Clerk at the request of the Commission on Ethics in the
official newspaper of the Town.
A. The Town Board of the Town of Ramapo concurs with the
recommendations of the Government Operations Committee report
dated August 1967 in relation to the formation of a Department of
Finance for the Town of Ramapo. The Committee's findings stated that
§ 14-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 18-2
1:25
§ 18-3. Creation of department.
The Department of Finance be and hereby is created as a separate
department of Town government of the Town of Ramapo, Rockland County,
New York.
§ 18-4. Appointment of Director of Finance. [Amended 6-28-2017 by
L.L. No. 2-2017]
The head of such department so created shall be called "Director of
Finance." The Director shall have a term of appointment pursuant to § 53-c
of the Town Law of the State of New York, and his salary shall be fixed by
the Town Board in the annual budget of the Town. The qualifications for the
office of the Director should be a minimum of a bachelor of science degree
in accounting and/or business administration, with five years' experience
in accounting or related occupations, or a master's degree in accounting
or business administration with three years' experience in accounting or
related occupations, or a certified public accountant or public accountant
licensed by the State of New York. The Director shall not be the Town
Supervisor or a Town Board member.
§ 18-5. Duties of Director of Finance.
The Director of Finance shall be responsible to the Supervisor as the chief
executive officer of the Town pursuant to the Suburban Town Law and is
hereby further designated as Town Comptroller and the Accounting Officer
of the Town of Ramapo and shall have the following duties. He shall:
"To firm up the control of the flow of funds and to efficiently carry out
Town functions requires the establishment of a Department of Finance."
B. The Town Board, therefore, pursuant to Article 3-A, Title 4 of the Town
Law of the State of New York, hereby creates a new department to be
known as the "Department of Finance of the Town of Ramapo" and
provides for an appointment of a Director of Finance of the new
department and defines his duties.
A. Exercise those powers and duties necessary for the general supervision
of the Department of Finance.
B. Plan, organize, direct and review administrative procedures necessary
to the operation of the Department of Finance.
C. Supervise and review the work of departmental subordinates and
report periodically to the Supervisor concerning the operation,
financial condition and future financing needs of the Town and his
department and further recommend to the Supervisor requests for
employment of such officers and/or employees as he deems necessary
for the proper operation of the Department of Finance.
D. Assist the Supervisor in the preparation of the preliminary budget and
the capital budget, if any, and in the administration of other fiscal
§ 18-2 RAMAPO CODE § 18-5
1:26
§ 18-6. Deputy Director of Finance; internal auditor. [Added
2-6-2012 by L.L. No. 2-2012]
operations of the Town for which the Supervisor is responsible and shall
furnish to the Supervisor such information and data as the Supervisor
may require for the purpose of enabling him to exercise his powers,
perform his duties and make reports as required by law.
E. Have all and exercise those powers and duties heretofore being
performed by the Town Comptroller and Accounting Officer as
authorized by the laws of the State of New York.
F. Prescribe and enforce a general accounting system for the government
of the Town, all of its officers and each of its departments.
G. Establish procedures and practices for the management of the debts of
the Town.
H. Develop policies to safeguard the financial interest of the Town,
including the obtaining, if necessary, of surety and indemnification
bonds for Town officers.
I. Be responsible for the Town insurance program, including protection
for Town officers, boards, commissions, employees, agents, property,
equipment and furnishings.
J. Be responsible for the central payroll system for the Town officers and
employees. The Director of Personnel coordinates and operates all
authorized Town employee benefit programs, including but not limited
to retirement, sickness and hospitalization, life insurance, disability and
workmen's compensation programs. [Amended 2-6-2012 by L.L. No.
2-2012]
K. Be responsible for the auditing of all Town financial records and books.
[Amended 2-6-2012 by L.L. No. 2-2012]
L. Perform the duties and powers imposed upon the Supervisor pursuant
to § 125 of the Town Law as follows:
(1) The keeping of separate appropriation accounts and preventing
funds or appropriation accounts from being overdrawn; and
(2) The drawing upon funds or appropriations, provided the
countersignature of the Supervisor shall be required.
M. Perform such other duties as may be assigned by the Supervisor, the
Town Board or other local ordinances or local laws.4
A. The Town Board may, at its discretion, appoint a Deputy Director of
Finance to assist the Director of Finance. The Deputy Director's
4. Editor's Note: Original § 15-6, Central cashier, which immediately followed this
subsection, was repealed 2-6-2012 by L.L. No. 2-2012.
§ 18-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 18-6
1:27
§ 18-7. Abolition of office of Town Comptroller.
Upon the effective date of this chapter, January 8, 1968, the office of
Town Comptroller of the Town of Ramapo shall be and the same hereby is
abolished and terminated.
Chapter 29
LOCAL LAWS, ADOPTION OF
§ 29-1. Public hearing.
No local law shall be adopted by the Town Board of the Town of Ramapo
until a public hearing has been held thereon in its final form before such
Town Board not less than three days after public notice has been given of
the time and place of the holding of such public hearing. Such notice shall
be given by the Town Clerk by causing the same to be published once in
the official newspaper of the Town. Such notice shall contain the title of the
proposed local law and a brief explanatory statement thereof.
§ 29-2. Posting notice of hearing.
The Town Clerk shall cause to be printed or otherwise reproduced copies
of such proposed local law and shall, not later than the day such notice is
published, post one such copy, together with the notice of hearing, on the
signboard at his office and shall also make copies of such proposed local law
available at his office for inspection by and distribution to any interested
person during business hours.
§ 29-3. Posting after adoption.
The Town Clerk shall forthwith upon the adoption of a local law by the Town
Board post a copy thereof on the signboard at his office, and it shall remain
so posted for a period of at least 10 days.
§ 29-4. Applicability.
The provisions of this chapter shall be deemed to apply to any local law
hereinafter adopted. In the event of any conflict between any provisions of
any local law hereinafter adopted and any section of any general law to the
extent that the same is permitted by § 10, and the subdivisions thereof, of
the Municipal Home Rule Law, the local law shall control.
qualifications, duties and compensation shall be determined by the
Town Board. The Deputy Director shall not be the Town Supervisor or a
Town Board member. [Amended 6-28-2017 by L.L. No. 2-2017]
B. At the request of the Director of Finance, the Town Board may hire an
internal auditor to assist the Director of Finance in performing audit
reviews of Town departments.
§ 18-6 RAMAPO CODE § 29-5
1:28
§ 29-5. Filing of proof of publication and posting.
Proof of publication and posting as required by §§ 29-1, 29-2 and 29-3 hereof
shall be filed in the office of the Town Clerk.
§ 29-6. Numbering and filing with state. [Amended 2-6-2012 by L.L.
No. 2-2012]
Each local law shall be numbered consecutively beginning with No. 1 for
each calendar year. When a local law is finally adopted and certified copies
thereof as required by § 27 of the Municipal Home Rule Law are filed in the
office of the Town Clerk and the Secretary of State, the Town Clerk shall
accordingly assign to such local law its appropriate number.
Chapter 37
OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Defense and indemnification — See Ch. 9.
Ethics — See Ch. 14.
Records management — See Ch. 60, Art. I.
§ 29-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 29-6
1:29

ARTICLE I
Deputy Receivers of Taxes
[Adopted 8-12-1987 by L.L. No. 14-1987]
§ 37-1. Statutory authority; legislative intent.
Pursuant to the Municipal Home Rule Law, § 10(1)(ii)(d)(3), the Town may
adopt a local law which supersedes the provisions of the Town Law,
§ 20(3)(c), and provide for the appointment of Deputy Receivers of Taxes in
addition to the two authorized by the Town Law.
§ 37-2. Appointment; terms of office; compensation.
§ 37-3. Duties.
It shall be the duty of the additional Deputy Receivers of Taxes to assist the
Receiver of Taxes in the performance of his duties.
A. The Town Board may establish offices of additional Deputy Receivers of
Taxes in addition to the two authorized by § 20(3)(c) of the Town Law.
B. The Town Board shall appoint said Deputy Receivers of Taxes for a term
of office running from their appointment until the 31st day of December
following such appointment and thereafter for a term of one year.
C. The salary of the additional Deputy Receivers of Taxes shall be fixed by
the Town Board.
§ 37-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 37-3
1:31

ARTICLE II
Deputy Building Inspectors
[Adopted 5-10-1989 by L.L. No. 8-1989]
§ 37-4. Statutory authority; legislative intent. [Amended 2-6-2012
by L.L. No. 2-2012]
The Deputy Building Inspector is a Town officer position. Pursuant to § 3
of the Public Officers Law and § 23 of the Town Law, a Town officer must
be a resident of the Town. However, pursuant to the Municipal Home Rule
Law, § 10(1)(ii)(a)(1), the Town may adopt a local law in relation to the
qualifications of its officers and permit the Deputy Building Inspectors to
reside outside the Town but within the County of Rockland. The provisions
of § 3 of the Public Officers Law and § 23 of the Town Law as they apply to
residency of Town officers are not general laws but special laws since said
state law provisions have been amended to delete residency requirements
for various Town officers in other towns throughout the state.
§ 37-5. Residency requirement.
Deputy Building Inspectors are authorized to reside outside the Town but
within the County of Rockland to be eligible to hold such position in the
Town of Ramapo.
§ 37-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 37-5
1:33

ARTICLE III
Director of Purchasing
[Adopted 8-14-1991 by L.L. No. 12-1991]
§ 37-6. Residency requirement.
§ 37-7. Elimination of term of office. [Added 8-5-1998 by L.L. No.
6-1998]
A. The Director of Purchasing is a Town officer position. Pursuant to § 3 of
the Public Officers Law and § 23 of the Town Law, a Town officer must
be a resident of the Town. However, pursuant to the Municipal Home
Rule Law, § 10(1)(ii)(a)(1), the Town may adopt a local law in relation to
the qualifications of its officers and permit the Director of Purchasing to
reside outside the Town but within the County of Rockland. The
provisions of § 3 of the Public Officers Law and § 23 of the Town Law as
they apply to residency of Town officers are not general laws but special
laws since said state law provisions have been amended to delete
residency requirements for various Town officers in other towns
throughout the state.
B. Any person holding the position of Director of Purchasing is authorized
to reside outside the Town but within the County of Rockland to be
eligible to hold such position in the Town of Ramapo.
A. The Director of Purchasing is a Town officer position. Pursuant to
§ 20(3)(e) of the Town Law, the Director of Purchasing shall have a term
of two years. Further, the position of Director of Purchasing is a position
in the competitive class of the classified service. Pursuant to the Civil
Service Law, positions in the competitive class hold permanent
appointment without any term. However, pursuant to the Municipal
Home Rule Law, § 10(1)(ii)(d)(3), the Town Board, by local law, can
supersede in its application to it any provision of the Town Law relating
to the property, affairs or government of the Town, unless the State
Legislature shall have prohibited the adoption of such local law. The
term of office is a permissible subject of a local law. There is no state
law prohibiting the adoption of this article. The Town Board believes
that since the position of Director of Purchasing is within the
competitive class it should be a permanent appointment without a term.
B. The position of Director of Purchasing in the Town of Ramapo shall not
have a term of office of two years.
§ 37-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 37-7
1:35

ARTICLE IV
Building Inspector II
[Adopted 12-18-1991 by L.L. No. 17-1991]
§ 37-8. Statutory authority; legislative intent.
The Building Inspector II is a Town officer position. Pursuant to § 3 of the
Public Officers Law and § 23 of the Town Law, a Town officer must be
a resident of the Town. However, pursuant to the Municipal Home Rule
Law, § 10(1)(ii)(a)(1), the Town may adopt a local law in relation to the
qualifications of its officers and permit the Building Inspector II to reside
outside the Town but within the County of Rockland. The provisions of § 3 of
the Public Officers Law and § 23 of the Town Law as they apply to residency
of building inspectors are not general laws but special laws since said state
law provisions have been amended to delete residency requirements for
building inspectors in other towns throughout the state.
§ 37-9. Residency requirement.
Any person holding the position of Building Inspector II is authorized to
reside outside the Town but within the County of Rockland to be eligible to
hold such position in the Town of Ramapo.
§ 37-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 37-9
1:37

ARTICLE V
Town Constabulary
[Adopted 5-9-2012 by L.L. No. 3-2012]
§ 37-10. Legislative intent.
§ 37-11. Establishment of Town Constabulary.
The Town of Ramapo hereby establishes a Town Constabulary, the members
of which shall be authorized to act in the capacity of uniformed court
officers, and shall have the responsibilities generally associated with such
position in and about the Town Court as hereinafter set forth. Town
Constables shall be appointed by the Town Board, but shall work under the
direct supervision of the Town Justices.
§ 37-12. Status as peace officers.
Persons holding the position of Town Constable shall have the status of, and
shall be granted and exercise the powers of, a "peace officer" under the
general laws of the State of New York.
§ 37-13. Powers and duties of Town Constables, generally.
Town Constables shall have those powers and responsibilities consistent
and generally associated with a court officer in the State of New York,
including but not necessarily limited to:
A. The Town of Ramapo Justice Court, like most local town and village
courts throughout the state, conducts its actual courtroom sessions
(both criminal and civil) on a regular, but generally less than full-time,
schedule. As such, the court does not require full-time courtroom
security, or the personnel costs associated with a staff of full-time court
security officers. That fact notwithstanding, the need for armed security
personnel in and about local courtrooms, in order to ensure that
weapons and other contraband that could pose a significant and
imminent danger not only to court personnel, but to those members of
the public who have business before the court, is more apparent today
than ever before. Relatively minor matters between parties have been
seen to erupt into violence in our courtrooms; and, recently, in one local
Rockland County Village court, a spectator secreted a firearm into the
courtroom and discharged it nearly striking the sitting Justice.
B. The use of full-time police officers for courtroom security is not only
costly, but takes trained officers away from the other duties for which
they were hired. The creation and use of a Town Constabulary,
consisting of part-time peace officers, rather than full-time police
officers, is a cost effective means by which to address a very real need
confronting the Town, without interfering with its other law
enforcement responsibilities.
§ 37-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 37-13
1:39
§ 37-14. Firearms and other training.
No person holding the position of Town Constable shall carry or otherwise
possess a firearm on Town property other than in conformity with state and
federal law, and after having successfully completed such initial training
and instruction, and any required in service of follow-up training and
instruction, required for a peace officer authorized to carry a firearm under
the laws of the State of New York.
A. Attending sessions of the Town Court to maintain order and decorum in
the courtroom;
B. Calming disruptive individuals;
C. Barring entry into secure areas of and about the courtroom;
D. Addressing and attending to disruptive prisoners, litigants and
spectators involved in court proceedings;
E. Escorting, guarding and delivering jurors, witnesses and other
participants of court proceedings to and from the courtroom;
F. Escorting, guarding and delivering the Judge and/or Clerk to and from
the courtroom, as may be required;
G. Delivering materials to sequestered juries;
H. Escorting court clerks with bank deposits to and from the court offices
and courthouse to the bank;
I. Using established search procedures and equipment to assure that no
weapons, contraband or other prohibited items or materials are
brought into the courthouse or courtroom;
J. Carrying, displaying and using a firearm, subject to any permit, training
and certification requirements and qualifications otherwise imposed by
law;
K. Effecting arrests as required and authorized.
§ 37-13 RAMAPO CODE § 37-14
1:40
ARTICLE VI
Police Officers
[Adopted 7-19-2018 by L.L. No. 4-2018]
§ 37-15. Statutory authority; legislative intent.
This article is adopted pursuant to the provisions of § 10(1)(ii)(a)(1) of the
Municipal Home Rule Law of the State of New York, which grants to local
governments the authority to enact local laws regarding the qualifications
of local officers which are not inconsistent with general state statutes.
Furthermore, this article recognizes that the New York State Legislature
amended Public Officers Law at § 3 exempting certain local officers from
a residency requirement therefore rendering said section of the Public
Officers Law to be a special rather than general law. Therefore, this article
properly sets forth residency requirements for police officers in the Town
of Ramapo. Nothing herein shall abrogate the requirements of New York
State Civil Service Law concerning the other qualifications necessary to be
employed as a police officer. Further, this article shall supersede § 3 of the
Public Officers Law of the State of New York and, to the extent required,
§ 23 of the Town Law of the State of New York in their application to the
Town of Ramapo for the position of a Town of Ramapo police officer.
§ 37-16. Residency requirement.
The person or persons holding the position of a Town of Ramapo police
officer at the same time of the initial administration of the oath of office as
a police officer in the Town of Ramapo shall have been a Town of Ramapo
resident for at least one year immediately before taking said initial oath
of office and shall be required to remain a Town of Ramapo resident at
all times for at least two years after taking said initial oath of office as a
Town of Ramapo police officer. Nothing herein shall preclude the Town of
Ramapo from hiring those applicants from special lists lawfully established
from time to time by the Rockland County Department of Personnel for
necessary individuals with specific language skills without regard to the
aforesaid residency requirements. The terms "resident" or "residency" as
used in this section shall be the same as defined as a "residence" under
New York State Election Law § 1-104(22). Nothing herein shall apply to any
newly hired police officers for the Town of Ramapo as a result of any merger
or disbandment of any police department within the County of Rockland,
New York.
§ 37-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 37-16
1:41
Chapter 42
PLANNING BOARD AND ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Consultant fees — See Ch. 122. Zoning — See Ch. 376.
§ 37-16 RAMAPO CODE § 37-16
1:42
ARTICLE I
Authority to Review Site Plans
[Adopted 9-8-1976 by L.L. No. 2-1976]
§ 42-1. Statement of findings; intent.
§ 42-2. Authority to review plans; other powers. [Amended 2-6-2012
by L.L. No. 2-2012]
The Planning Board of the Town of Ramapo is hereby authorized to review
and approve, approve with modification or disapprove site plans, prepared
to specifications set forth in the Zoning Ordinance of the Town of Ramapo,
showing the arrangement, layout and design of the proposed use of the land
shown on such plan and to have all of the authority provided for in the Town
Law, § 274-a. Included in such powers shall be the authority to recommend
to the Town Board rules and regulations for site plan review. The Planning
Board shall have all the powers set forth in the Town Law § 274-a.
A. In 1975 the State Legislature, pursuant to Chapter 425, authorized the
Town Board of the Town of Ramapo to delegate and empower the
Ramapo Planning Board to approve or disapprove plans for land
development.
B. In 1976 the State Legislature repealed the above statute and created a
new statute as an amendment to the Town Law, § 274-a, granting
similar authority to the Town Board to delegate and empower the
Ramapo Planning Board to approve, modify or disapprove plans for land
development. This article is intended to comply with the present
authority given to the Town Board by the State Legislature to delegate
such authority in the Planning Board. It is the intention of this article to
continue in the Planning Board the authority to review plans for land
development.
§ 42-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 42-2
1:43

ARTICLE II
Certification of Members
[Adopted 7-14-1993 by L.L. No. 5-1993]
§ 42-3. Title.
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Certification Law."
§ 42-4. Legislative intent.
The members of the Planning Board and Zoning Board of Appeals of the
Town of Ramapo discharge an important and complex responsibility.
Because of the complexity of the planning, zoning and legal issues with
which they must deal, as well as the rapid pace with which such areas
change, initial training and continuing education are necessary to ensure
that such individuals have access to all information necessary for them
to properly and knowledgeably accomplish their important function. While
desirous of ensuring that the members of such Boards receive necessary
training, the Town Board is cognizant of the time demanded of such
individuals to accomplish this civic function. Accordingly, while requiring
the members of such Boards to receive training, this article permits
accommodation of individuals who, because of time constraints, are unable
to satisfy its educational requirements within a specified period of time.
§ 42-5. Certification required.
§ 42-6. Validity of actions not affected.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, the failure of a member of the Planning
Board or Zoning Board of Appeals to obtain such certification or
recertification shall not affect said person's appointment to serve on such
Board, to entertain applications or to vote on such applications, and the
validity of such member's actions shall not be affected thereby.
A. All present members of the Planning Board and Zoning Board of
Appeals shall attend training classes offered by the Rockland Municipal
Planning Federation and complete such classes related to the function
of said Boards and receive certification from the Federation within one
year from the effective date of this article. Members appointed after the
effective date of this article shall be required to attend such classes and
receive certification from the Federation within one year from the date
of appointment.
B. Recertification of all members shall be required every two years
thereafter from the date of initial certification.
C. The Town Board, upon application of a member of the Planning Board
and/or Zoning Board of Appeals, may, for good cause shown, grant an
extension of the time within which a member of such Board must
receive certification or recertification, but such extension shall be for
no more than one year.
§ 42-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 42-7
1:45
§ 42-7. Removal for cause.
The Town Board of the Town of Ramapo is hereby authorized to remove a
member of the Planning Board and/or Zoning Board of Appeals for cause,
after public hearing and an opportunity to be heard. Removal for cause shall
include but not be limited to the following:
A. Failure of a member of the Planning Board and/or Zoning Board of
Appeals to receive certification from the Rockland Municipal Planning
Federation as provided in § 42-5A above.
B. Failure of a member of the Planning Board and/or Zoning Board of
Appeals to receive recertification from the Rockland Municipal
Planning Federation every two years after the date of his/her first
certification.
§ 42-7 RAMAPO CODE § 42-7
1:46
Chapter 46
POLICE DEPARTMENT
§ 42-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 42-7
1:47

ARTICLE I
Mutual Aid
[Adopted 2-11-1998 by L.L. No. 1-1998]
§ 46-1. Authorization to request assistance. [Amended 2-6-2012 by
L.L. No. 2-2012]
The Chief of Police of the Town of Ramapo or his/her designee, whenever
it is in the public interest, may request the chief executive officer of any
other legal government or the director of any local, state or federal agency,
or their respective designees, to detail, assign and make available for duty
and use in the Town of Ramapo any part of the forces, equipment and
supplies of said government or agency, including but not limited to the
police departments, police forces or parkway police forces employed by
such governments or agencies.
§ 46-2. Authorization to provide assistance. [Amended 2-6-2012 by
L.L. No. 2-2012]
The Chief of Police or his/her designee is hereby authorized to provide the
assistance of the regularly employed law enforcement officers, equipment
and/or supplies of the Town of Ramapo to any municipality within Rockland
County and the Town of Tuxedo and Village of Tuxedo Park requesting such
assistance to aid in coping with situations where there exists in such other
municipality a need for the service of additional law enforcement officers,
their equipment and/or supplies to protect the health, life and property of
such other municipality, its inhabitants and the visitors thereto.
§ 46-3. Statutory authority.
The assistance offered shall be in accordance with the provisions of § 209-m
of the General Municipal Law of the State of New York.
§ 46-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 46-3
1:49
Chapter 51
PROCUREMENT
§ 46-3 RAMAPO CODE § 46-3
1:50
ARTICLE I
Best Value Contracts
[Adopted 6-24-2015 by L.L. No. 2-2015]
§ 51-1. Title.
This article shall be known as the "Ramapo Best Value Contract Award Law"
§ 51-2. Legislative intent.
A. General Municipal Law § 103 provides local governments greater
flexibility in awarding contracts, including contracts for service work on
the basis of best value. The state legislation requires municipalities
with a population of less than $1,000,000 to pass a local law authorizing
the use of the best value award process.
B. Enactment of this legislation provides additional procurement options
to localities in ways that may expedite the procurement process and
result in cost savings. The best value standard for selecting goods and
service vendors, including janitorial and security contracts, is critical to
efforts to use strategic sourcing principles to modernize the supply
chain and ensure that taxpayers obtain the highest quality goods and
services at the lowest potential cost, while also ensuring fairness to all
competitors.
C. With the increased complexity of the goods and services that
municipalities must obtain in order to serve taxpayers, it is critical to
consider selection and evaluation criteria that measure factors other
than cost in the strictest sense.
D. Taxpayers are not well served when a public procurement results in low
unit costs at the outset, but ultimately engenders cost escalations due
to factors such as inferior quality, poor reliability and difficulty of
maintenance. Best value procurement links the procurement process
directly to the municipality's performance requirements, incorporating
selection factors such as useful lifespan, quality and options to
incentives for more timely performance and/or additional services.
E. Even if the initial expenditure is higher, considering the total value over
the life of the procurement may result in a better value and long-term
investment of public funds. Best value procurement also encourages
competition and, in turn, often results in better pricing, quality and
customer service. Fostering healthy competition ensures that bidders
will continue to strive for excellence in identifying and meeting
municipalities' needs, including such important goals as the
participation of small, minority and women-owned businesses, and the
development of environmentally preferable goods and service delivery
methods. Best value procurement will provide much-needed flexibility
in obtaining important goods and services at favorable prices, and will
reduce the time to procure such goods and services.
§ 51-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 51-3
1:51
§ 51-3. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BEST VALUE — The basis for awarding contracts for services to the offerer
which optimizes quality, cost and efficiency, among responsive and
responsible offerers. Such basis shall reflect, wherever possible, objective
and quantifiable analysis.
§ 51-4. Requirements.
A. Where the basis for award is the best value offer, the Director of
Purchasing shall document, in the procurement record and in advance
of the initial receipt of offers, the determination of evaluation criteria
which, whenever possible, shall be quantifiable, and the process to be
used in the determination of best value and the manner in which the
evaluation process and selection shall be conducted.
B. The Director of Purchasing shall select a formal competitive
procurement process in accordance with guidelines established by the
Town's purchasing policy and document its determination in the
procurement record. The process shall include, but is not limited to, a
clear statement of need; a description of the required specifications
governing performance and related factors; a reasonable process for
ensuring a competitive field; a fair and equal opportunity for offerers to
submit responsive offers; and a balanced and fair method of award.
Where the basis for the award is best value, documentation in the
procurement record shall, where practicable, include quantification of
the application of criteria to the rating of proposals and the evaluation
results or, where not practicable, such other justification which
demonstrates that best value will be achieved.
C. The solicitation shall prescribe the minimum specifications or
requirements that must be met in order to be considered responsive
and shall describe and disclose the general manner in which the
evaluation and selection shall be conducted. Where appropriate, the
solicitation shall identify the relative importance and/or weight of cost
and the overall technical criterion to be considered by the Town in its
determination of best value.
D. The Director of Purchasing shall develop procedures that will govern
the award of contracts on the basis of best value. These procedures
shall be included in the Town's purchasing policy and reviewed annually
by the Town board in conjunction with its annual review and approval of
the Town's purchasing policy.
§ 51-3 RAMAPO CODE § 51-4
1:52
Chapter 54
PUBLIC WORKS, DEPARTMENT OF
§ 54-1. Legislative intent. [Amended 8-5-1998 by L.L. No. 7-1998]
It is the legislative intent of this Town Board to consolidate and centralize,
by this chapter, the structure, functions and duties of the officials and
employees within the Central Garage, Sewer Department, Solid Waste
Department and Engineering Department so as to permit and foster the
orderly operation of the public works functions and responsibilities of the
government of the Town of Ramapo. Such consolidation is intended to
realize efficiencies and economies of administration and operation of the
functions presently performed by the above departments and thereby avoid
duplication of efforts. It is the finding of the Town Board of the Town of
Ramapo that such savings will include, among others, efficiency in the joint
use and maintenance of vehicles, consolidation of purchasing, additional
contingency resources for functions of all the departments, consolidation
of telephone and secretarial services and flexibility in assignment of
administrative responsibilities.
§ 54-2. Creation of department.
There is hereby created in the Town of Ramapo a department of the Town
government to be known as the "Department of Public Works."
§ 54-3. Director of Public Works.
A. The executive head of the Department shall be the Director of Public
Works, hereinafter referred to as the "Director," who will be appointed
by the Town Board of the Town of Ramapo for a term of office which
shall run from the date of his appointment until the first day of January
next succeeding the first biannual Town election held after his
appointment, and thereafter he shall hold office for a term of six years
and until his successor shall have qualified. The Director shall be
removable for cause only after a proceeding brought upon charges.
[Amended 8-5-1998 by L.L. No. 7-1998]
B. The salary for the Director shall be provided for in the annual budget by
the Town Board of the Town of Ramapo. The Director shall be an
engineer with a degree in engineering. [Amended 8-5-1998 by L.L.
No. 7-1998]
C. The Director shall have such powers as shall be necessary for the
proper administration and operation of the Department. In addition, the
Director shall be empowered to perform such other duties and
functions that are prescribed to be performed by him in any law,
ordinance or resolution of the Town Board or lawful direction of the
Supervisor. Furthermore, the Director can designate a head of one of
§ 51-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 54-3
1:53
§ 54-4. Divisions. [Amended 8-5-1998 by L.L. No. 7-1998]
The Department shall be divided into the following divisions under the
control and direction of the Director as follows:
§ 54-5. Appointment of employees.
All employees of the Department of Public Works shall be appointed by the
Town Board and shall hold the position to which appointed at the pleasure
of the Town Board; provided, however, that any employee in the classified
civil service may be removed only for cause. Notwithstanding the above, the
the divisions of the department to serve as Deputy Director when the
Director is absent.
D. The Director must reside either in the County of Rockland or an
adjoining county within the State of New York.
E. In addition to the powers set forth herein, the Director shall coordinate
with the Superintendent of Highways the temporary assignment of men
and/or equipment from the various divisions of their respective
departments so as to best achieve the maximum efficiency in the
delivery of Town services to the public.
F. In addition to the powers set forth herein, the Director shall coordinate
with the Superintendent of Highways all bids and purchase agreements
so as to achieve the most efficient purchasing power on behalf of the
Town as a whole.
A. Division of Engineering. This division shall be responsible for all
engineering services in connection with the functions of the
Department of Public Works, and the employees of the Engineering
Department are hereby reassigned to the Division of Engineering.
B. Division of Public Works. This division shall be responsible for all
collection, removal and disposal of solid waste in the Town. The
personnel of the Solid Waste Department shall be reassigned to the
Division of Public Works and the present Department of Solid Waste
shall now be the Division of Public Works. [Amended 2-6-2012 by L.L.
No. 2-2012]
C. Division of Sewers. This division shall be responsible for the
construction, maintenance, repair, operation and control of all pumping
stations and sanitary sewers within the Town. The employees of the
present Sewer Department shall be reassigned to the Division of
Sewers and the Sewer Department shall be known as the Division of
Sewers.
D. Division of Central Garage. This division shall be responsible for the
maintenance and repair of all Town-owned vehicles and equipment. The
employees assigned to the Central Garage shall be reassigned to the
Division of Central Garage. [Amended 2-6-2012 by L.L. No. 2-2012]
§ 54-3 RAMAPO CODE § 54-5
1:54
Director can appoint temporary, seasonal and emergency employees when
required.
§ 54-6. Existing departments and employees. [Amended 2-6-2012 by
L.L. No. 2-2012]
All property, equipment and budgetary appropriations of or for the Sewer
Department, Engineering Department, Solid Waste Department and Central
Garage Department are hereby reassigned to the Department of Public
Works. The employees of said departments shall be continued as employees
of the Department of Public Works with the same classification, salary,
benefits, pensions and retirement rights and privileges as they had
immediately prior to such transfer; provided, however, that nothing herein
contained shall be construed to deprive the Town Board of any power it now
has or may have under this chapter or otherwise have with respect to the
hiring, firing, disciplining and firing and salaries of such employees.
§ 54-7. Powers of Town Board.
Nothing herein contained shall be construed to delegate or transfer any
power of the Town Board contained in § 64 of the New York State Town
Law, provided for by the New York State Municipal Home Rule Law or other
powers which may be lawfully exercised by said Board.
§ 54-8. Powers of Town Supervisor.
Nothing herein contained shall be construed to delegate or transfer any
power of the Town Supervisor contained in § 29, 52 or 125 of the New York
State Town Law or any other powers which may be lawfully exercised by
said Supervisor.
Chapter 60
RECORDS
§ 54-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 54-8
1:55

ARTICLE I
Records Management
[Adopted 3-22-1995 by L.L. No. 4-1995]
§ 60-1. Title.
This article shall be cited and may be referred to hereafter as the "Records
Management Law of the Town of Ramapo."
§ 60-2. Legislative intent.
It is the intention of the Town Board of the Town of Ramapo to establish
a records management program with respect to the maintenance, storage
and legal disposition of Town records.
§ 60-3. Word usage and definitions.
A. For the purposes of this article, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meanings given herein. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense shall
include the future, words in the plural number include the singular
number, and words in the singular number include the plural number.
The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
B. As used in this article, the following words shall have the meanings
indicated:
ARCHIVES — Those official records which have been determined by
the Records Management Officer and Advisory Board to have sufficient
historical or other value to warrant their continued preservation by the
Town.[Amended 2-6-2012 by L.L. No. 2-2012]
INACTIVE RECORDS STORAGE AREA — An establishment maintained
by the Town primarily for the storage, servicing, security and
processing of records which must be preserved for varying periods of
time and need not be retained in active office space and equipment.
RECORDS — Any documents, books, papers, photographs, sound
recordings, microfilm or any other materials, regardless of physical
form or characteristics, made or received pursuant to law or ordinance
or in connection with the transaction of official Town business.
RECORDS ADVISORY BOARD — The board appointed by the Town
Board to provide assistance to the Records Management Officer.
RECORDS DISPOSITION —
The removal by the Town, in accordance with approved records
control schedules, of records no longer necessary for the conduct
of business by such agency through removal methods which may
include:
(1)
§ 60-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 60-3
1:57
§ 60-4. Records management program.
There shall be a records management program established under the aegis
of the Ramapo Town Clerk. The Town Clerk is designated as the Town's
Records Management Officer. The officer will be responsible for
administering the non-current and archival public records and storage
areas for the Town in accordance with local, state and federal laws and
guidelines.
§ 60-5. Powers and duties of Records Management Officer.
The Town Records Management Officer shall have all the necessary powers
to carry out the efficient administration, determination of value, use,
preservation, storage and disposition of the non-current and archival public
records kept, filed or received by the officers and departments of the Town
of Ramapo.
RECORDS MANAGEMENT — The planning, controlling, directing,
organizing, training, promotion and other managerial activities
involved in records maintenance, use and disposition, including records
preservation, disposal, records centers or other storage facilities.
RECORDS MANAGEMENT OFFICER — The Town Clerk.
SERVICING — Making information in records available to any Town
department for official use or to the public.
TOWN — Town of Ramapo.
The disposal of temporary records by destruction or donation;
or
(a)
The transfer of records to the inactive records storage area for
temporary storage of inactive records and permanent storage
of records determined to have historical or other sufficient
value warranting continued preservation; and
(b)
The transfer of records from one Town agency to any other Town
agency.
(2)
A. The Records Management Officer shall continually survey and examine
public records to recommend their classification so as to determine the
most suitable methods to be used for the maintaining, storing and
servicing of archival material:
(1) Obsolete and unnecessary records according to New York State
Archives Records Retention and Disposition Schedules (MU-1)
thereby subject to disposition;
(2) Information containing administrative, legal, fiscal, research,
historical or educational value which warrants its permanent
retention; or
(3) Records not subject to disposition according to state law.
§ 60-3 RAMAPO CODE § 60-5
1:58
B. The Records Management Officer shall establish guidelines for proper
records management in any department or agency of Town government
in accordance with local, state and federal laws and guidelines.
C. The Records Management Officer shall report annually to the Town
Board on the powers and duties herein mentioned, including but not
limited to the cost-benefit ratio of programs effectuated by the
program.
D. The Records Management Officer shall oversee all requests for records
storage equipment, microfilm equipment, etc., and coordinate and
participate in planning for the expansion of micrographics and
automated data processing systems.
E. The Records Management Officer shall establish an inactive records
storage area for the storage, processing and servicing of all non-current
and archival records for all Town departments and agencies.
F. The Records Management Officer shall perform the following functions
with respect to the Town. He shall:
(1) Advise and assist Town departments in reviewing and selecting
records to be transferred to the inactive records storage area for
storage and/or preservation.
(2) Continually survey and examine public records to determine the
most suitable methods to be used for the creating, maintaining,
storing and servicing of archival materials.
(3) Establish and maintain an adequate repository for the proper
storage, conservation, processing and servicing of archival records.
(4) Promulgate rules governing public access to and use of records in
the archives, subject to the approval of the Records Advisory
Board.
(5) Develop a confidentiality policy for archival records designated
confidential, provided such policy does not conflict with any federal
or state statutes.
(6) Provide information services to other Town of Ramapo offices.
(7) Develop a procedure whereby historically important records are to
be identified at the point of generation.
(8) Collect archival materials which are not official Town of Ramapo
records but which have associational value to the Town or a close
relationship to the existing archival collection. Such collecting shall
be subject to archive space, staff and cost limitations and to the
potential endangerment of such materials if they are not collected
by the archives.
§ 60-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 60-6
1:59
§ 60-6. Records Advisory Board.
There shall be a Records Advisory Board designated to work closely with
and provide advice to the Records Management Officer. The Board shall
consist of representatives appointed by the Town Supervisor. (It may consist
of the Town Auditor, the Town Historian, one or two representatives of the
Town Board or others who may be beneficial to the duties of a Records
Advisory Board.) The Board shall meet periodically and have the following
powers and duties. It shall:
§ 60-7. Custody of records.
The Records Management Officer shall maintain physical custody and
official responsibility of all records in his/her possession. Department heads
shall retain constructive control and authority over all department records,
regardless of their physical location.
§ 60-8. Replevin.
The Town Attorney may take steps to recover local government records
which have been alienated from proper custody and may, when necessary,
institute actions of replevin.
§ 60-9. Disposal of records.
No records shall be destroyed or otherwise disposed of by a department of
the Town unless approval has been obtained from the Records Management
Officer. No records shall be destroyed or otherwise disposed of by the
Records Management Officer without the express written consent of the
department head having authority.
A. Provide advice to the Town Records Management Officer on the
development of the records management program.
B. Review the performance of the program on an ongoing basis and
propose changes and improvements.
C. Review retention periods not covered by the SARA Schedule MU-1 or
retention period changes recommended by department heads.
D. Provide advice on the appraisal of records for archival value and be the
final sign-off entity as to what is or is not archival.
§ 60-6 RAMAPO CODE § 60-9
1:60
Chapter 69
TRAFFIC VIOLATIONS BUREAU
GENERAL REFERENCES
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 267.
§ 69-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Local Law Establishing a Traffic
Violations Bureau for the Town of Ramapo."
§ 69-2. Legislative intent.
The Town Board of the Town of Ramapo, wishing to assist the residents
of the Town and the Justice Court in the disposition of offenses relating to
traffic and parking violations, does hereby, pursuant to § 370 of the General
Municipal Law, create a Traffic Violations Bureau.
§ 69-3. Director; hours.
§ 69-4. Jurisdiction.
The Traffic Violations Bureau shall be authorized to dispose of any violations
of the traffic laws, ordinances, rules and regulations when such offenses
shall not constitute the traffic infraction known as speeding or a
misdemeanor or felony.
§ 69-5. Procedure.
A. The Justice Court Clerk is hereby designated as the Director of the
Traffic Violations Bureau.
B. Said Bureau shall maintain such hours as may be designated by the
Justice Court.
A. Any individual may plead guilty to an offense within the jurisdiction of
the Traffic Violations Bureau by a written document in such form as
prescribed by the Traffic Violations Bureau, waiving the right to trial,
and inclusion with said document of the payment of such fine as shall be
designated by the Justice Court for said offense, provided such fines are
within the limits established as penalties for such offense.
B. Within the time specified on the summons, a person may appear
personally, or by designated person, or by written power of attorney, in
such form as prescribed by the Traffic Violations Bureau, before the
Traffic Violations Bureau to answer the violation alleged. Said violation
may be satisfied by payment of the prescribed fine and a writing
waiving a court hearing. Fulfillment of said conditions shall
§ 60-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 69-5
1:61
§ 69-6. Failure to answer. [Amended 2-6-2012 by L.L. No. 2-2012]
If a person charged with a traffic violation does not answer the violation,
as prescribed in § 69-5, within a time specified on the notice of violation,
the Bureau shall cause a complaint to be entered against said person and
a warrant to be issued for said person's arrest and appearance before the
court, such summons to be predicated upon the personal service of said
summons upon the person charged with the infraction.
§ 69-7. Persons not eligible.
Any person who shall have been, within the preceding 12 months, guilty
of a number of parking violations in excess of a maximum number to be
established by the court, or of three or more violations other than parking
violations, shall not be permitted to appear and answer to a subsequent
violation before the Traffic Violations Bureau but must appear in court at a
time specified by the Bureau.
§ 69-8. Restrictions.
The Traffic Violations Bureau shall not be authorized to deprive a person of
his right to counsel or to prevent him from exercising his right to appear in
court to answer to, explain or defend any charge of a violation of any traffic
law, ordinance, rule or regulation.
§ 69-9. Establishment of fines.
The Justice Court shall designate the fines to be paid for offenses which may
be satisfied at the Bureau as provided in this chapter, provided such fines
are within the limits established as penalties for such offenses.
§ 69-10. Records; other duties.
Part II: General Legislation
Chapter 86
presumptively be considered a plea of guilty, which plea the Bureau
Director shall be authorized to enter.
C. Fulfillment of said conditions shall be deemed complete satisfaction for
the violation, and the violator shall be given a receipt which so states.
A. The Traffic Violations Bureau shall keep a record of all violations of
which each person has been guilty, whether such guilt was established
in court or in the Bureau, and also a record of all fines collected and the
disposition thereof.
B. The Bureau shall also perform such other or additional duties and keep
such other or additional records as shall be prescribed by the court and/
or the Town Board.
§ 69-5 RAMAPO CODE § 69-10
1:62
ALARM SYSTEMS
§ 86-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Automated Alarm Systems Law of the
Town of Ramapo."
§ 86-2. Legislative intent.
The Police Department of the Town of Ramapo has reported to the Town
Board extraordinary numbers of false alarms emanating from automated
alarm systems. These false alarms unnecessarily require that our police
and volunteer fire departments respond in an emergency fashion to signals
which should not have been created in the first place, depriving the citizens
of this Town from the sorely needed services of our emergency forces, and
expose the police and firemen to unnecessary hazards and risks. Therefore,
it is the intent of this chapter to reduce the occurrence of false alarms
and provide a mechanism whereby those responsible for the creation of
these false alarms are to be dealt with in an appropriate fashion. It is not
the intent to discourage the use of automated equipment, but rather to
encourage the use of automated equipment that fulfills the function it is
intended to perform.
§ 86-3. Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms shall have the
following meanings:
ALARM DEVICE — A mechanical, electrical or electronic device which,
when activated, will transmit a signal which is intended to create a response
from either a fire department or police department, or other emergency
service, whether or not the signal generated is audible, visible or electronic,
and whether such signal is automatic or otherwise.
ALARM INSTALLER — Any person, firm, corporation or business entity
who or which has installed and/or receives compensation for service or
maintenance of a burglar or fire alarm device from a resident upon whose
property the device has been installed.
ALARM USER — Any person, firm, corporation or business entity upon
whose premises an alarm device is installed or operating.
FALSE ALARM — A signal transmitted to either a fire or police department,
or a central alarm station, or an outside audible signal indicating that a fire
or criminal act or emergency is occurring, when in fact neither a criminal
act nor a fire or emergency is occurring.
POLICE DEPARTMENT — Police Department of the Town of Ramapo.
PREMISES — Any building, dwelling or residence on which an alarm device
has been installed.
§ 86-4. Registration of alarm device or system of alarm devices.
§ 69-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 86-4
1:63
§ 86-5. Alarm installer license.
Any alarm installer contracted to install an alarm device or system of alarm
devices must be licensed to perform home improvement pursuant to a
license issued by the Rockland County Office of Consumer Protection.
§ 86-6. False alarms.
It shall be unlawful for any alarm user or alarm installer to permit or
allow an alarm device to signal a false alarm, whether intentionally or
unintentionally, or whether due to malfunction as otherwise.
§ 86-7. Termination of outside audible signal.
If an alarm device activates an outside audible signal, such outside audible
signal cannot be broadcast for more than 30 minutes after initial activation.
§ 86-8. Penalties for offenses.
A. It shall be unlawful for any alarm installer to install an alarm device or
system of alarm devices or an alarm user to own, have or maintain the
same on a premises without registering the same with the Police
Department within 10 days after the installation of said alarm devices.
Said registration shall provide the following information:
(1) Name, home address and telephone number of the owner(s).
(2) Business address and telephone number of the owner(s).
(3) Name, address and telephone number of any person living within
the Town of Ramapo who shall be deemed to be a caretaker,
handyman or person watching the premises for the owner, if there
is any such person.
(4) Name, address and telephone number of the company which owns,
leases, rents, installs and/or maintains the automatic fire alarm
systems.
B. Each person submitting registration information shall receive an alarm
device system registration permit which must be prominently displayed
on the premises where the alarm device system is located.
C. All existing alarm users must register their alarm device or system of
alarm devices within 90 days of the effective date of this chapter.
A. A violation of §§ 86-4 and 86-5 shall be punishable by a fine of not less
than $100 nor more than $250.
B. A violation of §§ 86-6 and 86-7 shall be punishable by the following
penalties:
(1) For a first conviction: a fine of not less than $25 nor more than $50.
§ 86-4 RAMAPO CODE § 86-8
1:64
§ 86-9. Enforcement. [Amended 1-25-1995 by L.L. No. 1-1995]
The Police Department of the Town of Ramapo and/or the enforcement
official as designated in Chapter 376, Zoning, § 376-140 of the Code of
the Town of Ramapo, shall have the power, right and authority to issue an
appearance ticket, as the same is defined in Article 150 of the Criminal
Procedure Law of the State of New York, for the violation of any section or
provision of this chapter.
Chapter 89
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
(2) For a second or subsequent conviction within a twelve-month
period: a fine of not less than $50 nor more than $100 for each such
conviction.
§ 86-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 86-9
1:65

ARTICLE I
Consumption in Public
[Adopted 3-28-1979 by L.L. No. 2-1979 as Ch. 118 of the 1979 Code]
§ 89-1. Possession with intent to consume. [Amended 7-13-1983 by
L.L. No. 11-1983]
§ 89-2. Penalties for offenses.
Any person in violation of any provisions of this article shall be punished,
upon conviction, by a fine of not less than $20 nor more than $250 for each
violation and/or by a term of imprisonment not to exceed five days.
A. No person shall have, possess, carry or transport liquor, wine, beer or
other alcoholic beverages in or upon any public parking lot, shopping
center parking lot, public sidewalk, street or highway or park area in
the unincorporated portion of the Town of Ramapo in open containers
with the intent to consume the same in such public place or with the
intent to have the same consumed by another person in such public
place, and no person shall drink or otherwise consume liquor, wine,
beer or other alcoholic beverages in or upon any public parking lot,
shopping center parking lot, public sidewalk, street or highway or park
area in the unincorporated portion of the Town of Ramapo. [Amended
2-6-2012 by L.L. No. 2-2012]
B. An open bottle or open container in which there is an alcoholic
beverage in any vehicle shall be presumptive evidence that the same is
in possession of all occupants and in violation hereof.
§ 89-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 89-2
1:67
Chapter 93
ANIMALS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Noise — See Ch. 188.
§ 89-2 RAMAPO CODE § 89-2
1:68
ARTICLE I
Dogs
[Adopted 8-25-1982 by L.L. No. 6-1982]
§ 93-1. Title.
This article shall be cited and may be referred to hereinafter as the "Dog
Control Law of the Town of Ramapo."
§ 93-2. Legislative intent.
It is the intention of the Town Board of the Town of Ramapo by the adoption
of this article to preserve public peace and good order in the unincorporated
areas of the Town of Ramapo and to promote the public health, safety
and welfare of its people by enforcing regulations and restrictions on the
activities of dogs which are consistent with the rights and privileges of
dog owners and the rights and privileges of other citizens of the Town of
Ramapo.
§ 93-3. Definitions.
For the purposes of this article, the following terms shall have the following
meanings:
AT LARGE — Any dog that is unleashed and on property open to the public
or is on private property not owned or leased by the owner of the dog,
unless permission for such presence has been obtained. No dog shall be
deemed to be at large if it is a guide dog actually leading a blind person or
is a police work dog in use for police work or is accompanied by its owner
or other responsible person and is actively engaged in hunting or training
for hunting on unposted land or on posted land with the permission of the
owner of the land.
DOG — Any member of the species Canis familiaris.
DOG CONTROL OFFICER — Any individual appointed by the Town of
Ramapo to assist in the enforcement of this article.
HARBOR — To provide food or shelter to any dog.
OWNER — Any person who keeps, harbors or has custody, care or control
of a dog. Dogs owned by minors shall be deemed to be in the custody and
control of the parents or other head of household where the minor resides.
Any person harboring a dog for a period of one week shall be deemed to be
the owner of the dog for the purpose of enforcing this article.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, partnership, association or other
organized group of persons, municipality or other legal entity.
§ 93-4. Licensing requirements. [Amended 12-8-2010 by L.L. No.
6-2010]
§ 93-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 93-4
1:69
§ 93-5. (Reserved)5
A. All dogs in the Town must be licensed with the Town Clerk by the age of
four months and required to present a current certificate of vaccination
or, in lieu thereof, a statement certified by a licensed veterinarian
stating that, because of old age or another reason, the life of the dog
would be endangered by the administration of vaccine.
B. All dog licenses shall be for one year and will expire at the end of the
month one year from the date of issue.
C. Fees for licensing of dogs.
(1) The fee for a spayed or neutered dog shall be set by the Town Board
in the Standard Schedule of Fees. It shall include a state
assessment pursuant to § 110, Subdivision 3, of the New York State
Agriculture and Markets Law and additional funds for enumeration
as provided for by § 110, Subdivision 4(a), of the Agriculture and
Markets Law.
(2) The fee for an unspayed or unneutered dog shall be set by the Town
Board in the Standard Schedule of Fees. It shall include a state
assessment pursuant to § 110, Subdivision 3, of the New York State
Agriculture and Markets Law and additional funds for enumeration
as provided for by § 110, Subdivision 4(a), of the Agriculture and
Markets Law.
(3) Enumeration fee. When the Town Board determines the need for a
dog enumeration, a fee set by the Town Board in the Standard
Schedule of Fees shall be assessed to all dogs found unlicensed or
renewed at the time enumeration is conducted.
(4) Purebred licenses. The Town will not be issuing purebred or kennel
licenses. All dogs will be licensed individually as per the fee system
stated above.
(5) Service dogs. The Town requires licenses for all dogs living or
harbored within the Town; however, the Town fee for licensure of
all types of service dogs listed in § 110, Subdivision 2, of the
Agriculture and Markets Law, including but not limited to guide
dogs, service dogs, hearing dogs and detection dogs, is waived.
(6) Shelters. The Town of Ramapo does not allow the licensing of dogs
by a shelter. The shelter must notify the adoptive owners of their
responsibility to license any dog who will be living within the Town
with the Town Clerk within 30 days of adoption. Further, the shelter
must provide the Town with a list of adoptive owners monthly.
5. Editor's Note: Former § 93-5, Licensing fees, added 5-25-1983 by L.L. No. 4-1983 and
amended 6-24-1992 by L.L. No. 3-1992, was repealed 12-8-2010 by L.L. No. 6-2010.
§ 93-4 RAMAPO CODE § 93-6
1:70
§ 93-6. Prohibited acts.
It shall be unlawful for any owner of a dog in the unincorporated areas of
the Town of Ramapo to permit or allow such dog to engage in the following
enumerated acts:
A. Running at large. It shall be unlawful for any owner of a dog within the
limits of the Town of Ramapo to permit such dog, whether licensed or
not, to be at large elsewhere than on the premises of the owner or on
the premises of another person without the knowledge and consent of
such other person, unless such dog is on a leash or under the full and
immediate control of a person in charge of said dog.
B. Nuisance. It shall be unlawful for any owner of a dog in the Town of
Ramapo to permit or allow such dog to engage in habitual loud howling,
barking or whining so as to create a public nuisance or create an
unreasonable noise disturbance across real property boundaries.
C. Dangerous dogs. It shall be unlawful for any dog owner who knows or
has reason to know of any dangerous and vicious propensities of said
dog to permit the dog to run at large in the Town of Ramapo.
(1) If any dog shall attack any person who is peaceably conducting
himself in any place where he may lawfully be, such person or any
other person witnessing the attack may destroy such dog while so
attacking or while being pursued thereafter, and no liability in
damages or otherwise shall be incurred on account of such
destruction.
(2) If any dog shall attack, chase or worry any domestic animal, as
defined in § 108 of Article 7 of the Agriculture and Markets Law of
New York State, while such animal is in any place where it may
lawfully be, the owner or caretaker of such domestic animal or any
other person witnessing such attack may, for the purpose of
preventing the killing or injury of such domestic animal, destroy
such dog while so attacking, chasing or worrying or while being
pursued thereafter, and no liability in damages or otherwise shall
be incurred on account of such destruction.
(3) Any person may make a complaint of an attack upon a person or of
an attack, chasing or worrying of a domestic animal to a Dog
Control Officer of the Town of Ramapo. Such officer shall
immediately inform the complainant of his right to commence a
proceeding as provided in Subsection C(4) of this section, and if
there is reason to believe the dog is a dangerous dog, the officer
shall forthwith commence such proceeding himself.
(4) Any person may, and any Dog Control Officer as provided in
Subsection C(3) hereof shall, make a complaint under oath or
affirmation to any Municipal Judge or Justice of such attack,
chasing or worrying. Thereupon, the Judge or Justice shall
immediately determine if there is probable cause to believe the dog
§ 93-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 93-6
1:71
§ 93-7. Impoundment; redemption.
is a dangerous dog and, if so, shall issue an order to any Dog
Control Officer or peace officer directing such officer to
immediately seize such dog and hold the same pending judicial
determination as herein provided. Whether or not the Judge or
Justice finds there is probable cause for such seizure, he shall,
within five days and upon written notice of not less than two days to
the owner of the dog, hold a hearing on the complaint. If satisfied
that the dog is a dangerous dog, the Judge or Justice shall then
order the owner or any Dog Control Officer or peace officer to
destroy the dog immediately or shall order the owner to confine
securely such dog permanently or at such time as otherwise
specified in the order. If the owner fails to destroy or confine the
dog as required by such order, any Dog Control Officer or peace
officer shall destroy such dog on or off the premises of the owner.
(5) Nothing contained herein shall restrict the rights and powers
derived from the provisions of Title IV of Article 21 of the Public
Health Law relating to rabies and any rule and regulation adopted
pursuant thereto.
D. Additional prohibitions.
(1) Interference with enforcement officer. It shall be unlawful for any
person or persons to hinder, molest or interfere with any officer or
agent of the Town in the performance of any of the provisions of
this article.
(2) Violation of article. It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any
provision of this article whether or not he has any knowledge of or
intends any violation of said article.
A. The duly appointed Dog Control Officer or any peace officer shall seize
and impound any dog found at large in violation of this article. The Dog
Control Officer or peace officer shall deliver such dog to a pound or
shelter contracted for by the Town and notify the Ramapo Town Clerk of
the identity of the owner of the dog if the same can be established. If the
dog's owner can be properly identified, then the dog shall be held and
maintained for a period of 10 days for redemption or, if the owner
cannot be properly identified, for a period of five days. Thereafter, it
may be held and offered for adoption for an indefinite period or
humanely destroyed at the discretion of the Dog Control Officer.
[Amended 3-10-2004 by L.L. No. 5-2004]
B. The fact that a dog is without a current dog license tag attached to the
dog's collar or harness, as provided in Article 7, § 109, of the
Agriculture and Markets Law, shall be presumptive evidence that the
dog is unlicensed.
§ 93-6 RAMAPO CODE § 93-7
1:72
§ 93-8. Dog Control Officer.
§ 93-9. Appeal to court.
Any person aggrieved by any dog, as defined in § 93-3 of this article, may on
his or her own motion apply to any court having jurisdiction for all the relief
the law provides.
§ 93-10. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 2-6-2012 by L.L. No.
2-2012]
Any person committing an offense against or violating any section or
provision of this article shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine not
exceeding $25 for the first offense, $50 for the second offense within five
years and $100 or imprisonment for not more than 15 days, or both, for the
third and subsequent offenses within five years.
C. Any person claiming a dog from the pound or shelter must produce a
license for such dog and provide proof of payment of a redemption fee
of $10 per day to the Town Clerk and pay the cost of confinement. If the
dog is not licensed, a license must be provided and the owner will also
be subject to a fine as provided in § 93-10. [Amended 3-10-2004 by
L.L. No. 5-2004; 2-6-2012 by L.L. No. 2-2012]
A. The Town Board of the Town of Ramapo shall appoint one or more Dog
Control Officers for the purpose of assisting, within the appointing
municipality, with the control of dogs and the enforcement of this
article and the provisions promulgated pursuant thereto.
B. The appointed Dog Control Officer shall serve at the will of the Town
Board and shall be paid such compensation as duly ordinanced for such
services plus expenses, not exceeding, however, the amounts set forth
in the budget therefor.
C. Every Dog Control Officer shall have all the powers of a peace officer in
enforcing the provisions of this article and the applicable provisions of
Article 7 of the Agriculture and Markets Law.
§ 93-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 93-10
1:73

ARTICLE II
Waterfowl
[Adopted 6-8-1994 by L.L. No. 2-1994]
§ 93-11. Title.
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Waterfowl Law."
§ 93-12. Legislative intent.
Many public lands of the Town of Ramapo are inhabited by large numbers
of waterfowl. Said waterfowl have become a nuisance to the enjoyment of
Town lands, especially Town parkland and the Spook Rock Golf Course, by
some residents of the Town. The prohibiting of the feeding of waterfowl may
result in a reduction of the waterfowl which inhabit Town property.
§ 93-13. Prohibition of feeding of waterfowl.
No person shall feed any waterfowl on any Town of Ramapo property
except in designated areas as established by the Town Parks and Recreation
Department.
§ 93-14. Enforcement.
The Police Department of the Town of Ramapo and/or Code Enforcement
Officers of the Town of Ramapo shall have the power, right and authority
to issue an appearance ticket, as the same is defined in Article 150 of the
Criminal Procedure Law of the State of New York, for the violation of any
section of this article.
§ 93-15. Penalties for offenses.
Any person who violates this article shall be guilty of a violation and shall
be subject to a fine not to exceed $100 for the first violation and $250 for
each subsequent violation.
§ 93-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 93-15
1:75
Chapter 96
AQUIFER AND WELL FIELD PROTECTION ZONE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Stormwater management and sediment and
erosion control — See Ch. 237.
Streams and watercourses — See Ch. 240.
Zoning — See Ch. 376.
§ 96-1. Short title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Aquifer and Well Field
Protection Zone Law for the Town of Ramapo."
§ 96-2. Intent and legislative findings.
The Town Board, in adopting this chapter, is desirous of preventing the
introduction to the watershed of materials that pose a threat to the
watershed and hence public health and safety. These include chemicals,
petroleum products and by-products, salts, and hazardous substances.
Since many of the uses generating such products are prohibited by Chapter
376, Zoning, of the Code of the Town of Ramapo, this chapter requires the
identification of any potential point of introduction primarily through the
site plan review process. Many permitted uses use chemicals that can be
introduced through floor drains, septic systems, or even through the sewage
collection and treatment systems. With the advent of on-site stormwater
runoff control systems, there is a potential to introduce these materials to
the watershed if drainage facilities are not designed to prevent potential
contamination.
§ 96-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AQUIFER AND WELL FIELD PROTECTION ZONE — The area of the Town
of Ramapo as contained on the Town's Aquifer and Well Field Protection
Zone Map6 representing wells, streams, water bodies, watercourses and
buffers.
FLOOR DRAINS — Any opening in a floor or surface which receives spilled
materials.
HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCES — Any substance listed pursuant to Article
37 of the New York State Environmental Conservation Law and the Rules
and Regulations of the New York State Department of Environmental
Conservation as a "hazardous substance."
6. Editor's Note: Said map is on file in the office of Building, Planning and Zoning.
§ 93-15 RAMAPO CODE § 96-3
1:76
REGULATED ACTIVITIES — A list of activities that will require review by
the Department of Public Works and Building Inspector as part of site plan
review or by the Building Inspector in connection with an application for a
building permit.
§ 96-4. Establishment of zone.
In furtherance of the above legislative findings, an Aquifer and Well Field
Protection Zone is hereby established which shall include all property as
shown on the Town's Aquifer and Well Field Protection Zone Map.7
§ 96-5. Prohibited activities.
The following activities are expressly prohibited within the Aquifer and Well
Field Protection Zone:
§ 96-6. Regulated activities.
The following regulated activities are subject to review by the Department
of Public Works and Building Inspector pursuant to § 96-7 of this chapter:
A. Disposal wells.
B. Stockpiling of animal wastes.
C. Wastewater lagoons and pits: No open storage lagoons and pits are
permitted. All storage facilities must be inside buildings, watertight,
above ground, and must have received permits provided by New York
State Department of Environmental Protection.
D. Disposal of toxic chemicals, industrial sludge, and radioactive
materials.
E. Bulk fertilizer storage for agriculture and commercial uses are
prohibited unless they are within a completely enclosed structure
which will prevent any seepage and runoff.
F. Pesticides and herbicides shall be used only by NYS DEC permits and
shall only be stored in completely enclosed structures which will
prevent any seepage and runoff.
G. Storage tanks and pipelines for hazardous substances: all underground
facilities are prohibited; aboveground facilities must be provided with
containment structures and catchment areas.
H. Salt stockpiles including chloride salts and nitrate salts are prohibited
unless in a completely enclosed building or structure which will prevent
any seepage and runoff.
A. Any activity which involves:
7. Editor's Note: Said map is on file in the office of Building, Planning and Zoning.
§ 96-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 96-6
1:77
§ 96-7. Standards.
(1) Cleaning of metals with solvents.
(2) Repair or maintenance of internal combustion engines.
(3) Hazardous materials.
(4) Wastewaters not connected to publicly owned treatment facilities.
(5) Storage of internal combustion vehicles.
(6) Dispensing of fuels.
(7) Underground storage and piping.
A. The above regulated activities shall be reviewed to determine that the
activity will not:
(1) Alter the subsurface flow of groundwater to private wells and
existing and potential water supply wells.
(2) Degrade the quality of groundwater through the introduction of
sewage wastes, stormwater runoff, liquid chemicals, petroleum
products, dissolved metals or other toxic substances.
(3) Increase the long-term risk of groundwater contamination through
the siting, establishment, or expansion of uses which store,
transport, or utilize significant quantities of material which is
potentially harmful to groundwater quality.
(4) Increase the long-term risk of groundwater contamination of
relatively small quantities of material which over a period of time
may accumulate in groundwater.
(5) Increase the risk of groundwater contamination through the
removal of soils, sand, stone, or gravel which provide a protective
mantel for groundwater which is part of the geologic deposits
comprising the Town's aquifer.
B. In matters requiring site development plan approval, the Department of
Public Works and Building Inspector shall provide a report to the
Planning Board as to their review of the regulated activities. The
Planning Board of the Town of Ramapo, in making a determination on
an application for site development plan approval, shall consider the
findings of the above report.
C. In matters requiring a building permit but no site development plan
approval, the Building Inspector shall require compliance with these
standards in the building permit review.
§ 96-6 RAMAPO CODE § 96-8
1:78
§ 96-8. Enforcement.
The enforcement official as designated in § 376-140 of Chapter 376, Zoning,
of the Code of the Town of Ramapo, as may be amended, shall have the
power, right and authority to issue an appearance ticket, as the same is
defined in Article 150 of the Criminal Procedure Law of the State of New
York, for the violation of any section of this chapter. In addition, the Town
of Ramapo may institute an appropriate action or proceeding in any court
of competent jurisdiction pursuant to § 268 of the Town Law of the State of
New York.
§ 96-9. Penalties for offenses.
Any person violating any section or provision of this chapter shall be guilty
of a Class 3 violation as defined in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article
II, Penalties, of the Code of the Town of Ramapo, and shall be punished
according to the provisions thereunder.
Chapter 100
BINGO
§ 100-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and cited as the "Bingo Ordinance of the Town
of Ramapo."
§ 100-2. Bingo permitted; restrictions.
It is resolved and ordained that it shall be lawful for any authorized
organization, as defined in § 476 of Article 14-H of the General Municipal
Law, upon obtaining the required license, to conduct the game of bingo
within the territorial limits of the Town of Ramapo, subject to the provisions
of this chapter, Article 14-H of the General Municipal Law, Article 19-B of
the Executive Law and the following restrictions:
A. No person, firm, association, corporation or organization, other than a
licensee under the provisions of this chapter, shall conduct such game
or shall lease or otherwise make available for conducting bingo a hall or
other premises for any consideration whatsoever, direct or indirect.
B. No bingo games shall be held, operated or conducted on or within any
leased premises if rental under such lease is to be paid wholly or partly
on the basis of a percentage of the receipts or net profits derived from
the operation of such game.
C. No authorized organization licensed under the provisions of this
chapter shall purchase, lease or receive any supplies or equipment
specifically designed or adapted for use in the conduct of bingo games
from other than a supplier licensed under the Bingo Control Law or
§ 96-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 100-2
1:79
§ 100-3. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 2-26-1975]
Any person, association or corporation who or which shall commit any of
the following offenses shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall forfeit any
license issued under said Article 14-H for one year thereafter:
from another authorized organization. [Amended 2-6-2012 by L.L.
No. 2-2012]
D. The entire net proceeds of any game shall be exclusively devoted to the
lawful purposes of the organization permitted to conduct the game.
E. No prize shall exceed the sum or value of $1,000. [Amended 2-6-2012
by L.L. No. 2-2012]
F. No series of prizes on any one bingo occasion shall aggregate more
than $3,000. [Amended 2-6-2012 by L.L. No. 2-2012]
G. No person except a bona fide member of any such organization shall
participate in the management or operation of such game.
H. No person shall receive any remuneration for participating in the
management or operation of any game of bingo.
I. The unauthorized conduct of a bingo game and any willful violation of
any provision of any local law or ordinance shall constitute and be
punishable as a misdemeanor.
J. Bingo games may be held on any day of the week provided for in the
license issued hereunder.
K. No person licensed to sell bingo supplies or equipment, or his or her
agents, shall conduct, participate in, or assist in the conduct of bingo.
Nothing herein shall prohibit a licensed distributor from selling,
offering for sale, or explaining a product to an authorized organization,
or installing or servicing bingo equipment, upon the premises of a bingo
game licensee. [Added 2-6-2012 by L.L. No. 2-2012]
L. Limited period bingo shall be conducted in accordance with the
provisions of Article 14-H of the General Municipal Law and the rules
and regulations of the State Racing and Wagering Board. [Added
2-6-2012 by L.L. No. 2-2012]
A. Making any false statement in any application for any license
authorized to be issued under Article 14-H of the General Municipal
Law. [Amended 2-6-2012 by L.L. No. 2-2012]
B. Paying or receiving, for the use of any premises for conducting bingo, a
rental in excess of the amount specified as the permissible rent in the
license provided for in Subdivision 2 of § 480 of the General Municipal
Law.
§ 100-2 RAMAPO CODE § 100-3
1:80
§ 100-4. When effective.
This chapter shall be effective:
Chapter 104
BLASTING AND EXPLOSIVES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire prevention — See Ch. 144.
Landscapers — See Ch. 173.
Noise — See Ch. 188.
§ 104-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Blasting and Explosive Control Law for
the Town of Ramapo."
C. Failing to keep such books and records as shall fully and truly record all
transactions connected with the conducting of bingo or the leasing of
premises to be used for the conduct of bingo.
D. Falsifying or making any false entry in any books or records so far as
they relate in any manner to the conduct of bingo, to the disposition of
the proceeds thereof and to the application of the rents received by any
authorized organization.
E. Diverting or paying any portion of the net proceeds of any game of
bingo to any person, association or corporation, except in furtherance
of one or more of the lawful purposes defined in Article 14-H of the
General Municipal Law. [Amended 2-6-2012 by L.L. No. 2-2012]
F. Violating any of the provisions of Article 14-H of the General Municipal
Law or any terms of any license issued under said Article.8 [Amended
2-6-2012 by L.L. No. 2-2012]
A. Upon the approval of the same by a majority of the qualified electors of
the Town of Ramapo voting on a proposition therefor duly submitted at
a special election held within the Town as provided by law;9 and
B. Upon publishing, posting or upon personal service as provided in § 133
of the Town Law.
8.
9. Editor's Note: This proposition was approved 11-5-1974 by a majority of the qualified
electors.
§ 100-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 104-2
1:81
§ 104-2. Legislative intent.
This chapter is intended to establish and impose restrictions upon the
use of blasting and explosive material within the Town of Ramapo for the
protection of the public as well as the environment.
§ 104-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
EXPLOSIVES — Gunpowder, powders used for blasting, high explosives,
blasting materials, detonating fuses, detonators and other detonating
agents, smokeless powder and any chemical compound or any mechanical
mixture containing any oxidizing and combustible units, or other
ingredients in such proportions, quantities or packing that ignition by fire,
friction, concussion, percussion or detonation of any part thereof may and
is intended to cause an explosion. This chapter shall not include gasoline,
kerosene, naphtha, turpentine, benzine, acetone, ethyl ether, benzol and
quantities of black powder not exceeding five pounds for use in firing
antique firearms or artifacts or replicas thereof. Fixed ammunition and
primers for small arms, safety fuses and matches shall not be deemed to
be explosives when the individual units contain any of the above-mentioned
articles or substances in such limited quantity, of such nature and so packed
that it is impossible to produce an explosion of such units that could cause
injury of 1ife, limb or property.[Amended 2-6-2012 by L.L. No. 2-2012]
MAGAZINE — Any building or other structure, other than an explosives
factory, used to store explosives.
PERSON — Includes any natural person, partnership, association or
corporation.
§ 104-4. Permit.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to use or store
explosives in any location within the unincorporated area of the Town of
Ramapo without first filing an application with and obtaining a permit from
the Building, Planning and Zoning Department of the Town of Ramapo. This
permit, when granted, shall not be transferable and may only be used for
the particular location specified on the permit.
§ 104-5. Application requirements.
A. An application for a such a permit must be accompanied by proof of a
New York State Explosive Handlers License, Blasters License and,
where applicable, a New York State Magazine License.
B. An application to the Building, Planning and Zoning Department for
such a permit shall be accompanied by a fee as provided in the
Standard Schedule of Fees of the Town of Ramapo, which shall include
a refundable deposit as provided in the Standard Schedule of Fees
§ 104-2 RAMAPO CODE § 104-5
1:82
§ 104-6. Conduct of blasting.
returnable upon completion and removal of all blasting materials, with
written notice of such removal being given to the Building Inspector.
Each permit shall expire on the first anniversary of the date of issuance
of the permit or upon written notice of removal of all blasting materials
being provided to the Building Inspector, whichever is earlier.
[Amended 2-6-2012 by L.L. No. 2-2012]
C. No permit shall be issued unless a certificate of insurance is filed with
the Building, Planning and Zoning Department evidencing proof of a
valid insurance policy for liability and damage insurance in an amount
not less than $5,000,000. The insurance certificate shall include the
name of the insurance company, the amount, the name of the insured,
the proper corporate name and the corporate address of the insured
and the name and address of the agent or broker through whom it was
placed and who is responsible for attesting to the existence of such
coverage.
A. All blasting operations shall be conducted so as not to endanger the
health, safety and welfare of persons and the safety of property. Such
operations must be conducted under the direct control and supervision
of a person duly licensed by the State of New York pursuant to § 458 of
the Labor Law of the State of New York.
B. Directive 495 of the National Fire Protection Association, as amended,
is hereby adopted as the standard for all blasting to be conducted
within the Town of Ramapo. All blasting must be conducted in
accordance with the standards set forth in Directive 495 of the National
Fire Protection Association, as amended. The provisions of Article 16 of
the Labor Law of the State of New York, as well as Industrial Code
Rules contained in Title 12, Part 39 of the New York Code of Rules and
Regulations, are recognized as applicable to the possession, handling,
storage and transportation of explosives within the jurisdiction of the
Town of Ramapo.
C. Whenever blasting is being conducted within the Town of Ramapo, the
holder of a permit must notify the Fire Inspector, in writing, at least 48
hours in advance of blasting and must specify the location and intended
time of such blasting. The permit holder must also provide the Building
Inspector at that time with an affidavit as specified in Subsection D of
this section.
D. Whenever blasting is being conducted within the Town of Ramapo the
permit holder must notify all property owners whose property falls
within a radius of 750 feet from the blasting site at least 48 hours in
advance of blasting. Notice to said property owners must be written
notice and must be personally served on an owner or occupier of such
property. If personal service cannot be achieved the permit holder must
affix the notice on the property in the place most likely to give notice to
an owner or occupier of said property. The permit holder must supply
§ 104-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 104-6
1:83
§ 104-7. Penalties for offenses.
Any person committing a violation of this chapter shall be guilty of a
violation punishable by a fine not to exceed $5,000. The continuation of an
offense against the provisions of this chapter shall constitute, for each day
the offense is continued, a separate offense against the provisions of this
chapter.
Chapter 109
BUILDINGS AND PROPERTY, NUMBERING OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire prevention — See Ch. 144.
§ 109-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Numbering of Buildings and Property
Law for the Unincorporated Town of Ramapo."
§ 109-2. Legislative intent.
This chapter is intended to establish and impose regulations requiring
the display of street address numbers of buildings and property in the
unincorporated Town of Ramapo in order to make the location of such
property readily identifiable to police, volunteer fire companies, paramedics
and other emergency agencies, volunteer or otherwise, of the Town of
Ramapo, towns and villages of the County of Rockland and agencies of the
County of Rockland in order to accomplish the purposes as intended in the
adoption, within the County of Rockland, of an Enhanced 911 System.
§ 109-3. Assignment of numbers.
The Executive of the County of Rockland, the Office of E-911 of the County
of Rockland and/or the Building Inspector of the Town of Ramapo shall
have authority to assign numbers to every parcel of real property within
the unincorporated Town of Ramapo as exists as of the effective date of
the Building Inspector with an affidavit detailing the property located
within 750 feet of the blasting site and the date, time and method of
service upon all such properties.
E. Whenever blasting is being conducted within the Town of Ramapo, the
permit holder shall be responsible for placing signs at the nearest
street intersection or intersections providing access to all properties
within 600 feet of the blast site at least 24 hours before the
commencement of blasting. Such signs shall state the date and
approximate time of each proposed blast.
§ 104-6 RAMAPO CODE § 109-3
1:84
this chapter. On and after the effective date of this chapter, numbers shall
be assigned to new parcels, created by subdivision or otherwise, by the
Building Inspector of the Town of Ramapo. The owner or occupier of every
parcel of real property within the unincorporated Town of Ramapo as exists
as of the effective date of this chapter shall be notified in writing of the
number assigned to the parcel of real property. For this purpose, notice
given prior to the effective date of this chapter by the Executive of the
County of Rockland with respect to any parcel of real property within the
unincorporated Town of Ramapo, pursuant to the adoption of numbers
with respect to the Enhanced 911 System, shall be deemed notice for the
purposes hereunder.
§ 109-4. Location of display of numbers. [Amended 2-6-2012 by L.L.
No. 2-2012]
Each owner, agent of the owner or occupier of real property within the
unincorporated Town of Ramapo having received notice of the number
assigned to his/her parcel of real property shall, within 30 days after such
notice, or the effective date of this chapter, whichever occurs last, be
responsible for displaying, and maintaining the display of, the number of
said parcel of real property in accordance with this chapter as follows:
A. Commercial property (nonresidential). In the event the parcel contains
one building with but one number assigned to it, the number of the
parcel of real property shall be conspicuously displayed on the face of
the building, the face being any side which faces a street, and shall be
readily readable from the street without the aid of any artificial lens or
lenses. In the event the parcel contains more than one building and
more than one number is assigned to the parcel, the numbers of the
parcel of real property shall be conspicuously displayed on the
respective faces of each such building, the face being that side which
faces any street, and shall be readily readable from the street without
the aid of any artificial lens or lenses. In addition to the foregoing, in the
event the parcel contains a pylon or sign designed to advertise the
activities conducted on the parcel, such pylon or sign shall contain the
number, or range of numbers, assigned to the parcel and the numbers
shall be readily readable from the street without the aid of any artificial
lens or lenses.
B. Residential property.
(1) Buildings set back less than 50 feet from the street. The number of
the parcel of real property shall be conspicuously displayed on the
face of the primary residential building, the face being any side
which faces a street, in the event the primary residential building
face shall be less than 50 feet distant from the road pavement of
the street fronting the property and shall be readily readable from
the street without the aid of any artificial lens or lenses.
(2) Buildings set back 50 feet or more from the street. In the event the
primary residential building is more than 50 feet distant from the
§ 109-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 109-4
1:85
§ 109-5. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 2-6-2012 by L.L. No.
2-2012]
Any owner, agent of the owner or occupier of real property within the
unincorporated Town of Ramapo who violates any of the provisions of this
chapter shall be guilty of a violation and shall be subject to a fine not to
exceed $250 and/or imprisonment not to exceed 15 days for each such
violation. Each day on which such violation continues shall constitute a
separate violation.
Chapter 112
BUILDINGS, UNSAFE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire prevention — See Ch. 144. Building permits — See Ch. 376, Art. XIV.
§ 112-1. Legislative intent.
It is the intent of this chapter to provide for a rapid and efficient means of
removal or securing or repair of unsafe structures after examination, notice
and hearing.
§ 112-2. Investigation procedure. [Amended 2-6-2012 by L.L. No.
2-2012]
The Building Inspector of the Town of Ramapo is hereby authorized to be
and shall be the enforcement officer for this chapter. When, in his opinion,
he shall deem any structure unsafe or dangerous to the public, he shall
cause a further examination thereof to be made by a licensed architect
or professional engineer, provided that the inspection is performed by a
Town employee. Upon concurrence with the Building Inspector's opinion,
he shall promptly give notice, as hereinafter provided, of such condition to
the owner or occupants thereof and order the repair, removal, securing or
demolition of the structure in accordance with this chapter.
§ 112-3. Notice and order.
road pavement of the street fronting the property, the number of
the parcel of real property shall be conspicuously displayed on
a gatepost, mailbox, fence or other appropriate structure (i.e., a
sign) within 20 feet of the road pavement of the street fronting the
property and shall be readily readable from the street without the
aid of any artificial lens or lenses.
C. The color of the displayed number must contrast with its background
color. The numbers must be at least four inches in height and if possible
made of a reflective material for nighttime visibility.
§ 109-4 RAMAPO CODE § 112-3
1:86
§ 112-4. Service of notice and order.
The notice and order shall be served by the Building Inspector in any one of
the following manners:
§ 112-5. Appeals.
A. The notice referred to in § 112-2 shall contain at least the following
information and such other information as the Building Inspector may
determine:
(1) The location of the structure, giving the tax lot and block and street
address, if any.
(2) A brief statement setting forth the particulars in which and the
reasons why said structure is deemed unsafe or dangerous.
(3) That, in the event that the order set forth in § 112-3B is not
complied with within the time specified, the land upon which the
structure is located will be assessed for all costs and expenses
incurred by the Town of any nature in order to secure compliance
with the order, said costs and expenses to be collected in the same
manner and time as Town taxes.
B. The order shall contain at least the following information:
(1) The removal, securing, demolishing or repairing of the structure,
together with a generalized statement of what is required to
accomplish any of the foregoing.
(2) The time within which the requirements of § 112-3B(1) shall be
completed, which time shall not be more than 30 days after the
service of notice and order, which may be extended by the Building
Inspector for good cause shown. [Amended 2-6-2012 by L.L. No.
2-2012]
A. By personal service upon the owner of said land as the same is shown
on the last complete assessment roll of the Town.
B. By mailing to such owner as shown on the assessment roll, by certified
or registered mail, return receipt requested, a copy of said notice and
order and by securing or affixing a copy of the same upon the structure.
C. By delivery of a copy thereof to any adult person in charge of or residing
in said structure and by securing or affixing a copy of said notice and
order upon the same.
A. Any person affected by the notice and order as set forth in § 112-3 may
request, and shall be granted, a hearing before the Zoning Board of
Appeals upon payment of the Board's fee, which shall give preference to
such application; provided, nevertheless, that any person so affected
shall file a verified petition with the Director of Building, Planning and
Zoning or his designee and the Building Inspector no later than seven
§ 112-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-5
1:87
§ 112-6. Information to be included in petition of appeal.
The petition shall contain the following information under oath:
§ 112-7. Evacuation orders.
§ 112-8. Action upon failure to comply.
In the event that said owner or any party in interest fails to demolish, repair,
remove or secure the structure as directed in the order and notice of the
days after service of the notice and order. [Amended 2-6-2012 by L.L.
No. 2-2012]
B. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall set a time and place for hearing and
give the petitioner seven days' written notice thereof. At the hearing,
the petitioner shall be given an opportunity to be heard and to give
reasons why the Building Inspector's order should be modified or
overruled.
C. In the event that the order is not rescinded, the owner of the property
shall comply with said order, or as said order may be modified, within
five days after the filing of the decision of the Zoning Board of Appeals
with the Director of Building, Planning and Zoning or his designee. A
copy of said decision shall be mailed by ordinary mail. [Amended
2-6-2012 by L.L. No. 2-2012]
A. The name and address of the true owner of the property.
B. The reasons for the request of the hearing.
C. Supporting documentation from a licensed architect or engineer,
setting forth the grounds upon which the notice and order described in
§ 112-3 should be overruled or modified.
D. The name and address of the owner or his personal representative upon
whom service of all other papers, including the decision, may be made.
E. Such other information as may be relevant to the petitioner's case.
A. If the Building Inspector determines that there is actual or immediate
danger of failure or collapse of the structure or for any other reason
determines that use or occupancy will endanger life or limb of the
occupants, he shall require the building or structure or portion thereof
to be vacated forthwith, by posting at each entrance of said building or
structure a notice stating "This building is unsafe, and use or occupancy
is hereby prohibited by the Building Inspector."
B. Any person, firm or corporation or agents who or which shall fail to
comply with said order or who or which shall remove said notice
without the consent of the Building Inspector shall be guilty of a Class 4
violation as set forth in Chapter 1 of the Revised Code of the Town of
Ramapo.
§ 112-5 RAMAPO CODE § 112-8
1:88
Building Inspector within the time indicated thereon, or as the same may be
modified by the Zoning Board of Appeals, the Town of Ramapo may at any
time thereafter enter upon the lands and property and cause the building or
structure to be repaired, demolished, removed or secured, and all costs and
expenses incurred therewith by the Town shall forthwith become a lien upon
and against the property or premises so affected and collected as described
in § 112-3A(3). No demolition shall take place without the express approval
of the Town Board.
§ 112-9. Effect of statutory provisions.
All powers authorized by § 130 of the Town Law, Subdivision 16, are hereby
incorporated by reference, but to the extent that this chapter differs in form,
content or procedure from any general law, this chapter shall control.
§ 112-10. Penalties for offenses.
Any person violating any section of this chapter, except § 112-7B, shall
be guilty of a Class 3 violation as defined in Chapter 1 of the Revised
Code of the Town of Ramapo. The remedies contained within this chapter
shall further not be exclusive, but shall be in addition to any other remedy
provided by law, nor shall the invoking of any remedy or procedure
contained within this chapter bar the pursuit of any and all other remedies,
and the same are intended to be cumulative.
§ 112-11. Continuing offenses.
Each week or any portion thereof during which a violation of this chapter
shall exist shall constitute a separate and distinct Class 3 violation.
Chapter 122
CONSULTANT FEES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Planning Board and Zoning Board of
Appeals — See Ch. 42.
Zoning — See Ch. 376.
§ 122-1. Referral of applications to consultants.
In performing reviews of applications or petitions for site plan, subdivision,
special permits, variances and amendments to the Zoning Law, the Planning
Board, Zoning Board of Appeals and the Town Board may refer such
applications to such planning consultants as they may deem reasonably
necessary to review such applications. If such referral by the Planning
Board or the Zoning Board of Appeals is to a person or organization with
whom or which the Town does not have a current agreement for the
§ 112-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 122-1
1:89
provision of services, then such referral shall be subject to the approval of
the Town Board.
§ 122-2. Escrow deposit.
§ 122-3. Statement of services.
The applicant, upon written request, shall receive a statement setting forth
the nature of services, the date such services were rendered, the time spent
thereon (if such services are rendered on a timed basis) and the name of the
party rendering such services.
§ 122-4. Consideration of application.
An application for approval, or for any intermediate approval process, or for
any action covered by this chapter by the Planning Board, Zoning Board of
Appeals or Town Board shall not be deemed complete for any purpose until
such time as the funds required by the agency before which the application
is pending shall have been paid to the Town.
A. In addition to the application fees required to be paid by an applicant,
the applicant shall also deliver to the Town funds to be placed into the
Town's Trust and Agency Account, without interest accruing to the
applicant, to reimburse the Town for any and all fees paid by the Town
in connection with the review by any planning consultant of such
application before the Planning Board, Zoning Board of Appeals or
Town Board. The amount of escrow deposit shall be pursuant to the
Schedule of Fees adopted by the Town Board.
B. The applicant shall be required by the Town, from time to time, to
deliver additional funds to the Town for deposit in the escrow account if
such additional funds are required to pay for professional consultation
services rendered to the Town or anticipated to be rendered. Such
additional funds shall be delivered to the Town before any further
consideration of the applicant's application takes place.
C. The Planning Board, Zoning Board of Appeals or Town Board shall not
make any final determination on an application until all application
review fees imposed on the applicant have been paid to the Town.
D. Escrow funds may be refunded to the applicant only when the applicant
formally withdraws the application from consideration by the
appropriate board or when the applicant receives a final determination
from the appropriate board; in either case, all reimbursable charges
incurred by the Town shall be first deducted from the escrow account,
leaving an unencumbered balance that is not required by the permitting
authority to pay consulting costs attributable to the application.
E. The imposition of escrow account fees is in addition to and not in place
of other fee schedules currently in force.
§ 122-1 RAMAPO CODE § 122-4
1:90
Chapter 125
CONTRACTORS
§ 122-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 122-4
1:91

ARTICLE I
Plumbing, Heating and Air-Conditioning Work
[Adopted 12-14-1988 by L.L. No. 12-1988
§ 125-1. Findings.
The Town Board of the Town of Ramapo hereby finds that the health, safety
and welfare of the residents of the Town require that all plumbing, heating
and air-conditioning work requiring a permit under any applicable laws be
done by a contractor licensed by the County of Rockland.
§ 125-2. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the following terms shall be defined as
follows:
AIR CONDITIONING — The process of cooling, cleaning, humidifying and
circulating air throughout houses or public structures.
HEATING — Installing, erecting, altering, extending, repairing or
maintaining any device, system or equipment for heating buildings or
structures, private and public. This definition shall include all piping
carrying gas, oil or water.
PERSON — An individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation or
other legal entity.
PLUMBING — The practice, materials and fixtures used in the installation,
maintenance, extension and alteration of all piping fixtures, appliances,
equipment and the appurtenances in connection with any of the following:
gas distribution system, sanitary drainage or storm drainage facilities, the
venting system and the public or private water supply systems within or
adjacent to any building or structure; also the practice and materials used in
the installation, maintenance, extension or alteration of stormwater, liquid
waste or sewage and water supply systems of any premises or structure
and their connection with any point of public disposal or other acceptable
terminal.
§ 125-3. Work to be performed by licensed contractor. [Amended
2-6-2012 by L.L. No. 2-2012]
No air-conditioning, plumbing or heating work for which a permit is
required under any applicable law or regulation shall be inspected by the
Town of Ramapo Building, Planning and Zoning Department or Town of
Ramapo Division of Sewers unless said work is being done by a person who
is a contractor licensed to perform said work by the County of Rockland.
§ 125-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 125-3
1:93

ARTICLE II
Apprenticeship Training Programs
[Adopted 2-22-2006 by L.L. No. 2-2006]
§ 125-4. Intent and purpose.
The Town of Ramapo hereby establishes a policy to promote apprenticeship
training as authorized by § 816-b of the New York Labor Law.
§ 125-5. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meaning indicated:
APPRENTICESHIP AGREEMENT — As defined in New York State Labor
Law Article 23.
CONSTRUCTION CONTRACT — Any contract to which the Town of Ramapo
shall be signatory which involves the construction, reconstruction,
improvement, rehabilitation, installation, alteration, renovation, demolition
or otherwise providing for any building, facility or physical structure of any
kind with a contract value in excess of $250,000.
CONTRACTOR or SUBCONTRACTOR — A contractor or subcontractor
which directly employs labor under a construction contract for which an
apprenticeship program has been approved by the New York State
Commissioner of Labor in accordance with Article 23 of the New York Labor
Law.
§ 125-6. Requirements.
§ 125-7. Enforcement.
The Town Attorney's office is hereby authorized, empowered and directed
to promulgate such rules and regulations that are lawful, necessary and
appropriate for the implementation and enforcement of any provisions of
this article.
A. The Town of Ramapo hereby requires any contractor, prior to entering
into a construction contract with the Town of Ramapo, or any
subcontractor entering into a contract with a contractor who has a
construction contract with the Town of Ramapo, to have apprenticeship
agreements appropriate for the type and scope of work to be
performed, which have been registered with and approved by the New
York State Commissioner of Labor in accordance with Article 23 of the
New York Labor Law, anything in § 103 of the New York General
Municipal Law to the contrary notwithstanding.
B. A subcontractor who is entitled to receive less than $250,000 from a
construction contract is exempt from having an apprenticeship
program.
§ 125-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 125-8
1:95
§ 125-8. Applicability.
This article shall apply to construction contracts advertised for bids on or
after the effective date of this article. law.
§ 125-8 RAMAPO CODE § 125-8
1:96
Chapter 133
ELECTRICAL STANDARDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Contractors — See Ch. 125. Fire protection — See Ch. 144.
§ 133-1. Legislative intent.
The Town Board in 1968 adopted an ordinance establishing an electrical
code for the unincorporated area of the Town of Ramapo.10 Pursuant to
said ordinance, the Town appointed the inspectors of the New York Board
of Fire Underwriters as Electrical Inspectors for the Town of Ramapo. The
Town wishes to broaden the class of persons entitled to act as electrical
inspectors of the Town to include others properly experienced and licensed
in the judgment of the Town.
§ 133-2. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Electrical Code of the Town of Ramapo."
§ 133-3. Electrical Inspector.
The Chief Inspector, and each of the duly appointed inspectors of the New
York Board of Fire Underwriters, and other qualified and duly licensed
inspectors as may be determined by the Town Board pursuant to resolution
with the advice of the Building Inspector, Town Engineer and Town Attorney,
upon application to the Town, hereinafter referred to as "Inspector," are
hereby authorized and deputized as agents of the Town of Ramapo to make
inspections and reinspections of all electrical installations heretofore and
hereafter described, and to approve or disapprove the same. In no event,
however, will the cost or expense of such inspections and reinspections be
a charge against the Town of Ramapo.
§ 133-4. Insurance requirements. [Added 3-25-2009 by L.L. No.
2-2009]
Prior to any person serving as an Electrical Inspector, such person shall
file with the office of the Building Inspector a certificate of insurance
evidencing proof of a valid insurance policy of general liability insurance
with limits of no less than $2,000,000/$5,000,000. In addition, the Town of
Ramapo shall be named as an additional insured with respect to the above
policy.
§ 133-5. Duties of Electrical Inspector.
10.Editor's Note: Said 1968 ordinance was repealed by Section 7 of L.L. No. 3-2004, which
section is not codified herein.
§ 125-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 133-5
1:97
§ 133-6. Violations.
It shall be a violation of this chapter for any person, firm or corporation to
install or caused to be installed, or to alter electrical wiring for light, heat
or power, in or on properties in the Town of Ramapo until an application
for inspection has been filed with the New York Board of Fire Underwriters
or other approved Electrical Inspector. It shall be a violation of this chapter
for a person, firm or corporation to connect or cause to be connected
electrical wiring in or on properties for light, heat or power, to any source
of electrical energy supply, prior to the issuance of a temporary certificate,
or a certificate of compliance by the New York Board of Fire Underwriters
or other approved Electrical Inspector.
§ 133-7. Penalties for offenses; corrective action.
A. It shall be the duty of the Inspector to report in writing to the Building
Inspector of the Town of Ramapo whose duty shall be to enforce all
provisions of this code, all violations or deviations from or omissions of
the electrical provisions of the State Building Code applicable to the
Town of Ramapo and all local laws, rules and regulations insofar as any
of the same apply to electrical wiring. The Inspector shall make
inspections and reinspections of electrical installations in and on
properties in the Town of Ramapo upon the written request of an
authorized official of the Town of Ramapo or as herein provided. The
Inspector is authorized to make inspections and reinspections of
electrical wiring, installations, devices, appliances and equipment, in or
on properties within the unincorporated areas of the Town of Ramapo
where he deems it necessary for the protection of life and property. In
the event of an emergency, it is the duty of the Inspector to make
electrical inspections upon the oral request of an official or officer of
the Town of Ramapo.
B. It shall be the duty of the Inspector to furnish written reports to the
proper officials of the Town of Ramapo and owners and/or lessees of
property where defective electrical installations and equipment are
found upon inspection. The Inspector shall authorize the issuing of a
certificate of compliance when electrical installations and equipment
are in conformity with this chapter.
C. The Inspector shall direct that a copy of the certificate of compliance be
sent to the Town of Ramapo to the attention of the Building Inspector.
No certificate of occupancy shall be issued by the Building Inspector
until a certificate of compliance has been filed with the Building
Inspector.
A. Any person, firm, entity or corporation and/or principal of a corporation
found to be in violation of any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of
a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof be fined in an amount not
exceeding $200 for each violation and/or up to 30 days' imprisonment
§ 133-5 RAMAPO CODE § 133-7
1:98
Chapter 140
FIREARMS
§ 140-1. Title.
This chapter shall be cited and may be referred to hereinafter as the
"Discharge of Firearms Law of the Town of Ramapo."
§ 140-2. Legislative intent and purpose.
The Town Board of the Town of Ramapo hereby adopts regulations
governing the discharge of firearms. These provisions are adopted to
protect the health, safety and welfare of the residents of the Town of
Ramapo, pursuant to the provisions of § 130(27) of the Town Law.
§ 140-3. Definitions. [Added 2-6-2012 by L.L. No. 2-2012]
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
FIREARM — Any gun or other instrument which by force of gunpowder or
other explosive expels a missile or projectile capable of killing, wounding
or otherwise inflicting physical damage upon humans, fish, wildlife or other
animals.
§ 140-4. Discharge of firearms in certain areas prohibited.
The areas described below are hereby declared to be areas wherein the
discharge of a firearm is deemed hazardous to the general public or nearby
residents and, therefore, prohibited:
for the active officer. Each week in which such violation shall continue
shall be deemed a separate offense.
B. In the event that any person, firm, entity or corporation and/or principal
of a corporation shall continue a violation and the Town Board shall
make a finding that such violation is detrimental to the health, safety or
general welfare of the inhabitants of the Town, the Town Board may
direct the Town Attorney to apply to the Supreme Court directing that
the violation be corrected or removed and that all costs and expenses
incurred by the Town of Ramapo in connection with such proceeding,
including the actual cost of correction or removal of the condition
causing the violation, shall be assessed against the offender and shall
be added to the next year's tax roll and become a lien against said
property. The Town Board may direct, by resolution, that the Town may
correct violations creating emergency conditions of danger by forthwith
entering the property and correcting the violation and assessing the
cost of same to the violator as set forth above.
§ 133-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 140-4
1:99
§ 140-5. Exemptions.
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to:
§ 140-6. Posting.
The areas designated wherein the discharge of firearms is declared
prohibited shall be posted with no fewer than 12 signs giving notice of such
prohibition.
§ 140-7. Penalties for offenses.
Any person, firm or corporation discharging a firearm in those areas of the
Town of Ramapo declared by this chapter to be a prohibited area shall be
guilty of a violation and shall be liable for each violation to a fine not to
exceed $250 or imprisonment for a period not in excess of 15 days.
Chapter 144
FIRE PREVENTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alarm systems — See Ch. 86.
Blasting and explosives — See Ch. 104.
Unsafe buildings — See Ch. 112.
Contractors — See Ch. 125.
Electrical standards — See Ch. 133.
A. Prohibited area is that portion of the Town of Ramapo, exclusive of land
within any incorporated village, which lies east of a line extending
southwesterly from the boundary of the Town of Haverstraw with the
Town of Ramapo along the center line of Route No. 202 to the easterly
boundary of the Village of Pomona; then a line 500 feet west of Route
No. 202 extending from the westerly boundary of the Village of Pomona
to the boundary of the Village of Suffern with the Town of Ramapo.
[Amended 12-22-1971 by L.L. No. 8-1971]
B. Lands owned by the Town of Ramapo except wherein a pistol, rifle or
target range is operated and maintained by the Town of Ramapo Police
Department.
A. A law enforcement officer in the performance of his official duties.
B. The authorized use of a pistol, rifle or target range regularly operated
and maintained by any duly organized membership corporation and
wholly on premises owned, rented or leased by said corporation, but not
within 500 feet of any dwelling except with the permission of the owner
of said dwelling, and provided that said use will be conducted with all
due regard for the safety of the surrounding community.
C. The lawful use of a firearm in the defense of person or property.
§ 140-4 RAMAPO CODE § 140-7
1:100
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 144-1. Title.
This chapter shall be cited and may be referred to hereinafter as the "Fire
Prevention Chapter of the Town of Ramapo."
§ 144-2. Legislative intent.
The intent of this chapter is to prescribe minimum requirements necessary
to establish a reasonable level of life safety and property protection from
the hazards created by fire and explosion. This chapter is designed to
supplement and expand upon the requirements of the New York State
Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code. Should there be a discrepancy
between this chapter and the New York State Uniform Code, the more
restrictive provision shall apply.
§ 144-3. Applicability; waiver of existing conditions. [Amended
2-6-2012 by L.L. No. 2-2012; 9-29-2016 by L.L. No. 3-2016]
The provisions of this chapter shall apply equally to new and existing
conditions within the unincorporated area of the Town of Ramapo.
§ 144-4. Appeals.
The Bureau of Fire Prevention shall function as a Board of Appeals for all
matters covered by this chapter. The Bureau of Fire Prevention shall consist
of the Building Inspector of the Town who shall serve as Chief of the Bureau
of Fire Prevention and two members representing each Fire Department
within the unincorporated area of the Town.
§ 144-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 144-4
1:101

ARTICLE II
Enforcement
§ 144-5. Enforcement officers. [Amended 2-6-2012 by L.L. No.
2-2012]
The chapter hereby adopted and the New York State Uniform Fire
Prevention and Building Code shall be enforced by the Chief of the Bureau
of Fire Prevention, Chief Fire Inspector or Assistant or Deputy Fire
Inspectors of the Town of Ramapo.
§ 144-6. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 2-6-2012 by L.L. No.
2-2012]
Any person who shall violate any provision or section of this chapter or
who shall fail to comply therewith or who shall fail to obey any order or
direction of the Chief of the Bureau of Fire Prevention, Chief Fire Inspector,
or Assistant or Deputy Fire Inspectors or who shall build or construct in
violation of any statement of specifications or plans submitted shall, and
severally, if there is more than one, for each and every such violation or
noncompliance respectively, be liable to a fine of not more than $5,000 or
imprisonment not exceeding 15 days, or both such fine and imprisonment.
Each day that said violation or failure to comply continues shall be deemed
a separate offense.
§ 144-7. Issuance of appearance tickets. [Amended 2-6-2012 by L.L.
No. 2-2012]
The enforcement officials as designated in § 144-5 shall have the power,
right and authority to issue an appearance ticket, as the same is defined in
Article 150 of the Criminal Procedure Law of the State of New York.
§ 144-8. Institution of additional proceedings. [Amended 2-6-2012
by L.L. No. 2-2012]
Nothing contained herein shall be deemed to restrict or prevent the
appropriate agency or the Town from instituting other and different
proceedings, including injunctive relief and civil penalties.
§ 144-9. Right of entry. [Amended 2-6-2012 by L.L. No. 2-2012]
A. The Chief of the Bureau of Fire Prevention, Chief Fire Inspector, or
Assistant or Deputy Fire Inspectors may at all reasonable hours enter
any building or premises for the purpose of making any inspection or
investigation which under the provisions of this chapter may be deemed
necessary.
B. The Chief of the Bureau of Fire Prevention, Chief Fire Inspector, or
Assistant or Deputy Fire Inspectors shall be permitted by the owner,
lessee, manager or operator of any building or premises to enter and
§ 144-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 144-9
1:103
§ 144-10. Inspection of buildings and premises. [Amended 2-6-2012
by L.L. No. 2-2012]
§ 144-11. Exemption from liability. [Amended 2-6-2012 by L.L. No.
2-2012]
inspect his building or premises at the time and for the purpose stated
in this section.
A. It shall be the duty of the Chief of the Bureau of Fire Prevention, Chief
Fire Inspector, or Assistant or Deputy Fire Inspectors to inspect or
cause to be inspected by any inspector all buildings and premises,
except the interiors of dwellings, as often as may be necessary for the
purpose of ascertaining and causing to be corrected any conditions
liable to cause fire or endanger life from fire or any violations of the
provisions or intent of this chapter and of any other ordinances
affecting the fire hazard.
B. The Chief of the Bureau of Fire Prevention, Chief Fire Inspector, or
Assistant or Deputy Fire Inspectors, upon the complaint of any person
or whenever he shall deem it necessary, shall inspect any buildings and
premises within his jurisdiction.
C. The Chief of the Bureau of Fire Prevention, Chief Fire Inspector, or
Assistant or Deputy Fire Inspectors shall investigate the cause, origin
and circumstances of every fire occurring in the unincorporated Town
of Ramapo which is of an unknown cause or of a suspicious nature or
involves the loss of life or injury to persons or has caused substantial
property damage. Such investigation shall be made as soon as possible
upon the occurrence of any such fire, and if it appears that the fire is
the result of arson the Fire Inspector shall immediately notify the
proper authorities designated by law to investigate such matters.
A. The Chief of the Bureau of Fire Prevention, Chief Fire Inspector, or
Assistant or Deputy Fire Inspectors, and all inspectors charged with the
enforcement of this chapter, while acting for the Town of Ramapo, shall
not thereby be rendered liable personally and are hereby relieved from
all personal liability for any damage that may accrue to persons or
property as a result of any act required or permitted in the discharge of
official duties. Any suit instituted against any officer or employee
because of an act performed in the lawful discharge of duties and under
the provisions of this chapter shall be defended by the legal
representative of the Town until the final termination of the
proceedings. The Chief of the Bureau of Fire Prevention, Chief Fire
Inspector, or Assistant or Deputy Fire Inspectors, or any subordinates,
shall not be liable for costs in any action, suit or proceeding that may be
instituted in pursuance of the provisions of this chapter, and any
official, officer or employee acting in good faith and without malice shall
be free from any liability for acts performed under any of its provisions
§ 144-9 RAMAPO CODE § 144-11
1:104
or by reason of any act or omission in the performance of the official
duties in connection herewith.
B. The Chief of the Bureau of Fire Prevention, Chief Fire Inspector, or
Assistant or Deputy Fire Inspectors shall not be liable under this
chapter for any damage to persons or property by reason of the
inspection or reinspection of buildings, structures or equipment
authorized herein or failure to inspect or reinspect such buildings,
structures or equipment or by reason of the approval or disapproval of
any building, structure or equipment authorized herein.
§ 144-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 144-11
1:105

ARTICLE III
Dangerous or Hazardous Conditions
§ 144-12. Removal of dangerous conditions or materials.
A. Whenever the Chief of the Bureau of Fire Prevention, Chief Fire
Inspector, or Assistant or Deputy Fire Inspectors shall find, in any
building or structure or upon any premises, dangerous or hazardous
conditions or materials as set forth below, they shall order such
dangerous condition or materials to be removed or remedied:
[Amended 2-6-2012 by L.L. No. 2-2012]
(1) Any condition which is liable to cause or contribute to the spread of
fire in any premises, building or structure or endanger any person.
(2) Any condition which would interfere with the efficiency or use of
any fire-protection equipment.
(3) Any obstruction to a fire escape, stairway, passageway, door or
window, in a premises, which is likely to interfere with the
emergency egress of occupants or the operation of the Fire
Department in case of fire or other emergency.
(4) Any accumulation of dust or waste materials in air-conditioning or
ventilating systems.
(5) Any accumulation of grease in kitchen facilities, including, but not
limited to, exhaust ducts, cooking equipment or oil, grease or dirt
upon, under or around any mechanical equipment.
(6) Any accumulation of rubbish waste, paper, shavings or other
combustible material which results in a dangerous condition.
(7) Any condition arising from the defective installation or improper
use of electrical wiring, equipment or appliances.
(8) Any condition arising from defective or improperly installed
equipment for handling, storing or using combustibles, explosives
or otherwise hazardous materials.
(9) Any condition caused by the presence of dangerous or unlawful
amounts of combustible, explosive or otherwise hazardous
materials.
(10) Any building or structure which lacks sufficient exit facilities,
automatic fire-extinguishing system, fire alarm system or fireextinguishing
equipment and thereby creates a hazardous
condition.
(11) Any building or structure which, for the want of repairs or by
reason of age or dilapidated condition or by reason of fire or any
other cause, creates a hazardous condition.
§ 144-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 144-12
1:107
§ 144-13. Service of orders.
The service of orders for the correction of violations of this chapter shall
be made upon the owner, occupant or other person responsible for the
conditions, either by delivering a copy of the same to such person or by
delivering the same to and leaving it with any person in charge of the
premises or, in case no such person is found upon the premises, by affixing
a copy thereof in a conspicuous place on the door to the entrance of said
premises. Whenever it may be necessary to serve such order upon the
owner of the premises, such order may be served either by delivering to
and leaving with said person a copy of said order or, if such owner is absent
from the jurisdiction of the officer making the order, by sending such copy
by certified mail to the owner's last known post office address.
(12) All equipment, materials, processes or operations which are in
violation of the provisions and intent of this chapter.
B. Where identification of buildings and structures containing hazardous
materials is required in accordance with the New York State Uniform
Fire Prevention and Building Code, the National Fire Protection
Association Hazardous Materials Identification System (NFPA 704)
shall be utilized.
C. The chief of any department providing firefighting services for a
property within this Town shall promptly notify the Chief of the Bureau
of Fire Prevention of any fire or explosion involving any structural
damage, fuel burning appliance, chimney, or gas vent. [Added
9-29-2016 by L.L. No. 3-2016]
§ 144-12 RAMAPO CODE § 144-13
1:108
ARTICLE IV
General Fire Safety Requirements
§ 144-14. Exit requirements.
§ 144-15. Electrical appliances, fixtures and wiring.
All electrical appliances, fixtures and wiring shall be installed in accordance
with the current edition of the National Electrical Code (NFPA 70). All
electrical appliances, fixtures and wiring shall be maintained so as not to
be a fire hazard nor a source of ignition for combustible or hazardous
substances, materials or devices.
§ 144-16. Smoking. [Amended 2-6-2012 by L.L. No. 2-2012]
Where smoking is considered a fire hazard, the Chief of the Bureau of Fire
Prevention, Chief Fire Inspector or Assistant or Deputy Fire Inspectors shall
be authorized to order the owner in writing to post "No Smoking" signs
in conspicuous designated locations where smoking is prohibited. In areas
where smoking is permitted, noncombustible ash trays shall be provided.
§ 144-17. Bonfires and outdoor rubbish fires.
A. Adequate exits shall be provided in all buildings, structures and
premises within the Town to ensure safe egress in case of fire or other
emergency. The location, number, type and other considerations of exits
shall be provided in accordance with requirements of the New York
State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code and the most current
edition of the National Fire Protection Association Life Safety Code
(NFPA 101).
B. No furnishings, decorations or other objects shall be so placed as to
obstruct exits, access thereto, egress therefrom or visibility thereof.
C. Exit lights, emergency lighting and panic hardware shall be provided in
accordance with the requirements listed in Table 1.11
A. Permit required. No person shall kindle or maintain any bonfire or
rubbish fire or authorize any such fire to be kindled or maintained
without a permit or other proper authorization. During construction or
demolition of buildings or structures, no waste materials or rubbish
shall be disposed of by burning on the premises or in the immediate
vicinity without having obtained a permit or other proper authorization.
B. Location restricted. No person shall kindle or maintain any bonfire or
rubbish fire or authorize any such fire to be kindled or maintained on
any private land unless the location is not less than 50 feet from any
structure or the fire is contained in any approved waste burner located
safely not less than 15 feet from any structure.
11.Editor's Note: Table 1 is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 144-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 144-17
1:109
§ 144-18. Fire lanes and fire zones.
§ 144-19. Key boxes.
C. Attendance of open fires. Bonfires and rubbish fires shall be constantly
attended by a competent person until such fire is extinguished. This
person shall have a garden hose connected to the water supply or other
fire-extinguishing equipment readily available for use.
D. Authority to prohibit. The Chief of the Bureau of Fire Prevention, Chief
Fire Inspector, or Assistant or Deputy Fire Inspectors are permitted to
prohibit any or all bonfires and outdoor rubbish fires when atmospheric
conditions or local circumstances make such fires hazardous.
[Amended 2-6-2012 by L.L. No. 2-2012]
A. The Chief of the Bureau of Fire Prevention, Chief Fire Inspector, or
Assistant or Deputy Fire Inspectors, in cooperation with the Chief of
Police and the Fire Chief, are authorized, pursuant to the authority
granted under § 1660-a of the Vehicle and Traffic Law of the State of
New York and § 130, Subdivision 5 of the Town Law of the State of New
York, to determine and establish appropriate fire lanes and fire zones at
parking areas, driveways, private streets and roadways of all premises
except one-, two- and three-family dwellings. [Amended 2-6-2012 by
L.L. No. 2-2012]
B. Fire lanes shall be provided for all buildings that are set back more than
100 feet from a public road or exceed 30 feet in height and are set back
over 50 feet from a public road. Where buildings are protected
throughout with an approved automatic sprinkler system, the
provisions of this section may be modified by the Fire Inspector.
C. Fire lanes shall be not less than 20 feet of unobstructed width, able to
withstand live loads of fire apparatus and have a minimum of 13 feet six
inches of vertical clearance.
D. Fire zones and fire lanes shall be marked with freestanding signs that
have the words "No Parking - No Standing - Fire Lane (or Zone)."
E. No motor vehicle shall park, stand or remain unattended in an
established fire zone or fire lane. Fire zones and lanes shall be
maintained free of all obstructions at all times.
F. More restrictive provisions for fire lanes may be imposed by the Chief of
the Bureau of the Fire Prevention, Chief Fire Inspector, or Assistant or
Deputy Fire Inspectors. [Amended 2-6-2012 by L.L. No. 2-2012]
A. When a structure is protected by an automatic fire alarm system or firesuppression
system and access to or within the structure is unduly
difficult because of secured openings and where immediate access is
necessary for lifesaving or fire-fighting purposes, the Chief of the
Bureau of Fire Prevention, the Chief Fire Inspector, or Assistant or
Deputy Fire Inspectors of the Town of Ramapo may require the
§ 144-17 RAMAPO CODE § 144-19
1:110
§ 144-20. Fire-protection markings.
installation of a key box on the premises. [Amended 2-6-2012 by L.L.
No. 2-2012]
B. All new business, mercantile, industrial, storage, assembly, institutional
and three- or more story multiple residences constructed, altered or
changed in use after the effective date of this chapter shall have
installed a key box in an approved location. Such key boxes shall be
installed prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy.
C. The key box shall be of the type approved by the Chief of the Bureau of
Fire Prevention, Chief Fire Inspector, or Assistant or Deputy Fire
Inspectors, and, in order to maintain uniformity throughout Rockland
County, order forms for said key box must be obtained from the Fire
Inspector. [Amended 2-6-2012 by L.L. No. 2-2012]
D. The key box shall contain:
(1) Keys to locked points of ingress, whether on the interior or exterior
of such structures.
(2) Keys to locked mechanical rooms.
(3) Keys to locked electrical rooms.
(4) Keys to elevator controls.
(5) Keys to other areas as directed by the Fire Inspector or Fire Chief.
(6) The layout of the building showing the locations of the above.
(7) Other information as requested by the Fire Inspector or Fire Chief.
A. Premises identification. New and existing buildings shall have approved
address numbers placed in a position to be plainly legible and visible
from the street or road fronting the property, in accordance with
Chapter 109, Buildings and Property, Numbering of. [Amended
2-6-2012 by L.L. No. 2-2012]
B. Shaftways to be marked. Every outside opening accessible to the Fire
Department that opens directly on any hoistway or shaftway
communicating between two or more floors in a building shall be plainly
marked with the word "shaftway" in red letters at least six inches high
on a white background. Such warning signs shall be so placed as to be
readily discernible from the outside of the building.
C. Stairway marking. Stairways serving four or more stories shall be
provided with signs indicating floor level, roof access or no roof access
and re-entry locations in accordance with the National Fire Protection
Association Life Safety Code (NFPA 101).
D. Identification of lightweight construction.
§ 144-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 144-20
1:111
§ 144-21. Vacant buildings.
§ 144-22. Open flame cooking outside multiple residences.
The use of grills, barbecues or other devices for cooking food utilizing
propane or producing an open flame shall be prohibited within 10 feet of
any building used as a multiple dwelling. The storage of propane or any
other fuel used for such devices inside any building shall also be prohibited.
§ 144-23. Security gates.
Where the use of security gates is permitted, such gates shall provide
unobstructed view of at least 50% of the door(s), window(s) or other
building opening which is protected by the security gate when the security
gate is in place.
(1) Upon inspection and identification of a building, other than a oneor
two-family dwelling, of truss, wood I-beam or other lightweighttype
construction, the owner/occupant shall be notified by the Fire
Inspector of the requirements of this code.
(2) Upon notification, the owner/operator will be required to affix
permanently an approved twelve-inch by eighteen-inch reflective
truss construction identification logo on the building. The exact
location shall be identified by the Fire Inspector. The identification
logos shall be properly installed within 10 days of receipt of written
notice.
(3) The Fire Inspector should notify the local Fire Chief of any building
with lightweight construction. This information should be provided
to the Rockland County Fire Control Center to be included in the
Rockland County computer dispatch system database.
A. Every person owning or having control of any vacant building shall
remove all combustible waste and refuse therefrom and lock, barricade
or otherwise secure all windows, doors and other openings in the
building to prohibit entry by unauthorized persons.
B. Buildings that are vacant shall maintain all required fire-detection and -
suppression systems in service.
§ 144-20 RAMAPO CODE § 144-23
1:112
ARTICLE V
Nursing Homes
§ 144-24. Applicability. [Amended 2-6-2012 by L.L. No. 2-2012]
For the purpose of these regulations, nursing homes, rest homes and
boarding homes for the aged are those buildings primarily used for the
lodging and boarding of three or more persons who are in need of skilled
nursing care or who, by reason of age, illness, disease, injury, convalescence
or physical or mental infirmity, are unable to provide for their own needs
and safety; any home, institution, hotel or other residential facility or
accommodation that holds itself out, advertises or otherwise in any form
or manner represents that it is a facility for the aging, senior citizens, or
elderly citizens or which is in fact a home, institution, hotel, facility or
accommodation wherein the guests, tenants, patrons or other inhabitants
are 55 years of age or more shall be deemed a private proprietary home for
adults.
§ 144-25. Minimum requirements.
A. All institutional buildings for the care of our ill and aged, whether old or
new construction, in addition to the requirements of other
governmental agencies, must comply with the following minimum
requirements:
(1) Buildings shall be structurally sound and maintained in general
good order and condition.
(2) Two or more approved exits shall be provided from each occupied
floor and basement and located as remote from each other as
practicable, as directed by the Bureau of Fire Prevention, Chief
Fire Inspector or Assistant or Deputy Fire Inspectors. [Amended
2-6-2012 by L.L. No. 2-2012]
(3) Exit doors shall have no locks preventing opening from the inside
and, when deemed necessary by the Bureau of Fire Prevention,
Chief Fire Inspector or Assistant or Deputy Fire Inspectors, shall
open outward and be equipped with panic hardware. There shall be
no obstructions at any exit door. [Amended 2-6-2012 by L.L. No.
2-2012]
(4) Exits shall be equipped with signs of eight-inch letters, lighted at
all times by a keyless socket, and where not visible from all
occupied portions of the building, additional similarly lighted
directional signs shall be provided.
(5) Where fire escapes are provided as a means of egress, they shall be
constructed of incombustible material, approved by the Bureau of
Fire Prevention, Chief Fire Inspector or Assistant or Deputy Fire
Inspectors, maintained free of rust and disrepair and free of snow
§ 144-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 144-25
1:113
and, wherever practicable, shall be erected at a right angle to the
building. [Amended 2-6-2012 by L.L. No. 2-2012]
(6) All glazed openings under or adjacent to fire passageways or fire
escapes shall be protected with one-fourth-inch wire glass to effect
a minimum degree of safety for exterior means of egress.
(7) All halls and stairways, including those to the cellar and attic, shall
be enclosed with approved, fire-resistive partitions and with selfclosing,
rated fire doors.
(8) Fire doors must be closed at all times. The use of fusible link
devices is not permitted.
(9) Where the layout of hallways is circuitous or is of such length as to
justify, in the opinion of the Bureau of Fire Prevention, Chief Fire
Inspector or Assistant or Deputy Fire Inspectors, a fire-retarded
dividing partition, the same shall be installed. [Amended
2-6-2012 by L.L. No. 2-2012]
(10) Corridor fire-cutoff doors must be kept closed at all times, unless
held open by an automatic release device approved by the Bureau
of Fire Prevention, Chief Fire Inspector or Assistant or Deputy Fire
Inspectors. Automatic release devices consist of, but are not limited
to, those which are activated by a smoke detection system, heat
detection system, sprinkler alarm, fire alarm pull box or power
failure. [Amended 2-6-2012 by L.L. No. 2-2012]
(11) In all converted existing buildings of Type 3, 4 or 5 construction,
New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code, the
basement or cellar ceiling shall be fire retarded with wire lath and
cement plaster, half-inch fire board with sealed seams or other
approved surface fire retardant providing a minimum of one hour's
resistance to fire. [Amended 2-6-2012 by L.L. No. 2-2012]
(a) Fire-retardant materials, either brushed or sprayed, must be
an approved Class A fire-retardant coating, as defined in
Pamphlet No. 703, Chapter 2, of the Standards of the National
Fire Protection Association.
(b) Any such fire-retardant material shall have a flame spread and
smoke development classification of not more than 25, as
defined in such standards.
(c) Where fire-retarding materials are used, a notarized statement
shall be furnished to the Bureau of Fire Prevention, Chief Fire
Inspector or Assistant or Deputy Fire Inspectors by the owner
or administrative head, said statement confirming that the fireretarding
material has been applied in conformance with the
manufacturer's specifications.
(12) All vertical openings shall be effectively fire stopped.
§ 144-25 RAMAPO CODE § 144-25
1:114
(13) The manner in which heating and air conditioning shall be provided
is subject to the approval of the Building Inspector. [Amended
2-6-2012 by L.L. No. 2-2012]
(14)No electrical appliance producing heat shall be used, except
pressing irons, which shall be equipped with a signal light which
will remain lit when current is on, toasters and such other
appliances as may be approved for use with service quarters.
(15) No space heater of any type shall be used.
(16) Inspection shall be done by the New York Board of Fire
Underwriters or such other agency as is designated by the Director
of Building, Planning and Zoning. [Amended 2-6-2012 by L.L.
No. 2-2012]
(17) Only lamp cords bearing Underwriters' Laboratories labels, not
exceeding eight feet in length, shall be used, and such cords shall
be replaced when worn or damaged.
(18) No lighting, other than electric, shall be provided.
(19) Automatic emergency lighting shall be installed in all existing
structures to provide adequate light in halls, corridors, stairs,
dining rooms, recreation rooms, chapels and such other areas and
for such other services as may be required by the Bureau of Fire
Prevention, Chief Fire Inspector or Assistant or Deputy Fire
Inspectors. [Amended 2-6-2012 by L.L. No. 2-2012]
(20) In all new buildings or future converted structures, automatic
emergency generators shall be installed in compliance with the
New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code and
shall adequately provide power to supply emergency lighting and
for such other services as may be required by the Bureau of Fire
Prevention, Chief Fire Inspector or Assistant or Deputy Fire
Inspectors. [Amended 2-6-2012 by L.L. No. 2-2012]
(21) Kitchens.
(a) Kitchens and serving pantries must be cut off from the
remainder of the premises with fire-resistive walls and ceilings
of a two-hour minimum rating in new construction or a onehour
minimum rating for existing construction.
(b) Door openings between kitchens and/or pantries and the
dining rooms they serve shall be protected by Underwriters'
Laboratories labeled Class B self-closing fire doors and
assemblies in new construction or Class C in existing
construction.
(c) Serving counter openings must be protected by automatic twohour
rated self-closing doors in new construction or one-hour
rated in existing construction.
§ 144-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 144-25
1:115
(d) If kitchens and pantries are protected by an automatic
sprinkler system, fire-resistance rating of walls and ceilings
may be reduced to one hour and doors to Class C in new
construction.
(e) View panels will be permitted in fire doors, provided that they
are protected by one-fourth-inch clear wire glass of not more
than 100 square inches in area.
(22)Range hoods.
(a) Hoods equal to the length and breadth of the ranges and
cooking equipment shall be provided. They shall be not more
than seven feet above the floor and shall not be within 18
inches of any combustible material. They shall be provided
with filters.
(b) Hoods shall be provided with mechanical exhaust ducts, which
shall be connected to an independent chimney or stack,
insulated from contact with combustible material and
terminating above the roof.
(c) Exhaust ducts must be provided with an adequate number of
access doors for easy inspection and cleaning.
(d) Hoods, ducts, chimneys and stacks must be cleaned as often as
may be necessary, but not less than twice a year. A record shall
be kept available for the Inspector, showing date of cleaning
and by whom cleaned.
(e) Hoods, ducts, chimneys and stacks shall be equipped with an
approved automatic fire-extinguishing system. Where deep
fryers are used, they shall also be so protected. Automatic
extinguishing systems must also be provided with a manual
device for activating the same. All systems must meet the
requirements of the New York Rating Organization and the
National Fire Protection Association, in addition to the
requirements of the Bureau of Fire Prevention.
(f) Gas for cooking equipment shall be provided with an automatic
shutoff device activated by the extinguishing system. Such
shutoff device must be designed so that it can only be reset
manually. Such automatic shutoff devices shall also be
provided for deep fat fryers but not for the electric range.
(g) Electric wiring under hoods shall be in conduit, and all fixtures
shall be of a vapor-proof type.
(h) Plans for automatic extinguishing systems and shutoff devices
must be submitted to the Chief Fire Inspector for approval
prior to installation. [Amended 2-6-2012 by L.L. No.
2-2012]
§ 144-25 RAMAPO CODE § 144-25
1:116
(23) Smoking shall be permitted only under strict supervision.
(24) At least one attendant shall be maintained, awake and alert at all
hours of the day and night, who shall make regular and frequent
rounds of the building to ensure the prompt detection of fire.
(25) Capacity shall be limited to the number of patients, inmates or
guests determined by the Bureau of Fire Prevention, Chief Fire
Inspector or Assistant or Deputy Fire Inspectors. [Amended
2-6-2012 by L.L. No. 2-2012]
(26) An ambulatory patient shall be considered as one who, without aid,
is physically and mentally capable of walking a normal path to
safety, including the ascent and descent of stairs.
(27) Ambulatory patients may be on all floors above grade if the
building is of Type 1 or 2 construction, as defined in the New York
State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code, and built
expressly for the purpose of being operated as a nursing home, rest
home or boarding home for the aged. In buildings of Type 3, 4 or 5
construction, as defined in the New York State Uniform Fire
Prevention and Building Code, ambulatory patients or guests may
be on the first or second floor only. [Amended 2-6-2012 by L.L.
No. 2-2012]
(28) Nonambulatory and helpless patients are restricted to the first
floor only, unless the building is Type 1 or Type 2 construction.
[Amended 2-6-2012 by L.L. No. 2-2012]
(29) Halls, aisles, stairways and areas adjacent to exits shall be free of
obstruction at all times.
(30) Storage must be maintained in a neat and orderly manner and must
be confined to essential materials. Where the same constitutes a
hazard, in the opinion of the Chief Fire Inspector, a fire-resistive
enclosure must be provided. [Amended 2-6-2012 by L.L. No.
2-2012]
(31) There shall be no storage of flammable liquids in the building,
except those needed for patient treatment stored in such places
and in such quantities as may be authorized by the Bureau of Fire
Prevention, Chief Fire Inspector or Assistant or Deputy Fire
Inspectors. [Amended 2-6-2012 by L.L. No. 2-2012]
(32) Oxygen storage rooms must be of fire-resistive construction with
adequate ventilation directly to the exterior. All lighting fixtures
and switches must be of the approved explosion-proof type for
those locations.
(33)No gasoline power mowers, tractors or other gasoline-driven
equipment shall be stored in any part of a nursing home, rest home
or boarding home for the aged.
§ 144-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 144-25
1:117
(34) All curtains and drapes must be flame-proofed and a certificate
furnished to the Bureau of Fire Prevention, Chief Fire Inspector or
Assistant or Deputy Fire Inspectors. [Amended 2-6-2012 by L.L.
No. 2-2012]
(35) Fire alarm pull stations shall be installed throughout the buildings
with annunciator panels in areas of twenty-four-hour supervision
and shall have a reasonable and distinctive signal audible
throughout the building. Said system must be supervised closed
circuit and provided with a trouble bell to be located in an area of
twenty-four-hour supervision.
(36) Fire alarm and detection systems shall be provided with emergency
standby power.
(37) Coded fire alarm systems shall be provided where deemed
necessary by the Chief Fire Inspector. [Amended 2-6-2012 by
L.L. No. 2-2012]
(38) Gas meters and regulating equipment must be located on the
exterior of the building.
(39) The telephone number of the Fire Department shall be prominently
posted over all telephones, and all personnel shall be instructed to
immediately call the Fire Department upon discovery of smoke or
fire, regardless of the apparent extent or significance.
(40) Fire extinguishers, as may be required by the Chief Fire Inspector,
shall be provided, properly hung and maintained as directed.
[Amended 2-6-2012 by L.L. No. 2-2012]
(41) All extinguishers shall be serviced annually and bear a tag showing
the date and name of the person rendering the service.
(42) Tests of systems.
(a) Plans shall be formulated for the protection of the occupants in
the event of fire and for their evacuation in an emergency, and
all employees shall be instructed as to their duties under such
plan. A log book shall be maintained containing certified
monthly recordings of the following tests:
[1] Personnel fire drill. (All tours must participate, and they
shall be assigned specific duties or post to be affected in
the event of fire.)
[2] Emergency lighting and generator.
[3] Fire-detection system.
[4] Fire alarm system.
[5] Staff instruction with fire extinguisher.
§ 144-25 RAMAPO CODE § 144-25
1:118
(b) All of the tests may be made on the same date but must be
certified by separate signed entries. Failure to comply will
constitute a violation upon the owner.
(43) Wherever unusual or extraordinary conditions exist which
constitute a fire hazard endangering occupants, such conditions
shall be corrected in a manner satisfactory to the Bureau of Fire
Prevention, Chief Fire Inspector or Assistant or Deputy Fire
Inspectors. [Amended 2-6-2012 by L.L. No. 2-2012]
(44) All new or renovation work shall have noncombustible wall and
ceiling surfaces. All existing combustible wall and ceiling surfaces
must be fire retarded to the specifications of Subsection A(11).
(45) Plans for all new or renovation work shall be submitted to the office
of the Bureau of Fire Prevention, Chief Fire Inspector or Assistant
or Deputy Fire Inspectors for approval prior to construction and
other agencies which may have jurisdiction. [Amended 2-6-2012
by L.L. No. 2-2012]
§ 144-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 144-25
1:119

ARTICLE VI
Schools and Day-Care Centers
§ 144-26. Connection of alarm system with Fire Department system.
It shall hereafter be the obligation of the authorities in charge of the
operation of any religious school, private school, nursery school or day-care
center located in an area within which a Fire Department or fire company
is responsible for fire protection and within which there is no electrically
or electronically operated fire alarm reporting system provided for public
use to cause the internal fire alarm, fire-detection or fire-protection system
of each building which contains classroom, dormitory, laboratory, physical
education, dining or recreational facilities, for student or child use, to be
interconnected by direct wire with the fire alarm reporting location or
system which is provided for such Fire Department or fire company to
receive alarms from the public so that, upon activation of such internal fire
alarm, fire-detection or fire-protection system, a signal will be automatically
transmitted to such fire alarm reporting location or system.
§ 144-27. Withholding of certificate of occupancy.
As to all religious schools, private schools, nursery schools and day-care
centers built or occupied after the effective date of this chapter, the Building
Inspector shall have the right to withhold a certificate of occupancy from
said school or day-care center until there has been full compliance with this
chapter.
§ 144-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 144-27
1:121

ARTICLE VII
Fire-Protection Equipment
§ 144-28. Scope.
The provisions of this Article VII shall apply to new and existing conditions,
except that the provisions of § 144-30 shall not apply where equivalent or
more stringent legal requirements are enforced by the Building, Planning
and Zoning Department or other municipal departments.
§ 144-29. Specification of equipment for premises.
§ 144-30. Sprinklers and fire-detection systems.
A. The Chief of the Bureau of Fire Prevention, Chief Fire Inspector, or
Assistant or Deputy Fire Inspectors shall survey each place of assembly,
business, education, industry, health, mercantile, storage, multipleresidence
occupancy, public and private schools, nursery schools and
day-care centers and shall specify suitable fire-extinguishing
equipment, systems or appliances and fire-detecting devices as shall be
necessary to provide reasonable safety to persons and property.
[Amended 2-6-2012 by L.L. No. 2-2012]
B. Such devices or appliances may consist of automatic fire alarm systems,
automatic sprinklers or water spray systems, standpipes and hoses,
fixed or portable fire extinguishers of a type suitable for the likely
probable class of fire, exit lights, emergency lighting units, panic
hardware or other equipment. For special storage or hazardous
processes, appliances of more than one type or special systems may be
required. Automatic fire alarm and sprinkler systems shall be defined in
Section 606.3 of the New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and
Building Code.
A. In accordance with Table 1,12 all buildings and structures occupied for
purposes other than residential buildings with fewer than six units that
exceed 5,000 square feet of total floor area, or a place of assembly with
an occupant load of more than 100 persons, except assembly spaces
used expressly for religious purposes, shall be fully protected by an
automatic sprinkler system.
B. Requirements for existing buildings.
(1) Approved automatic sprinkler systems shall be installed and
maintained in operable condition, as specified in this chapter, in all
of the following existing buildings:
(a) All places of public assembly where the maximum number of
occupants permitted is determined to be 200 or greater.
12.Editor's Note: Table 1 is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 144-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 144-30
1:123
§ 144-31. Color coding of siamese connections.
In order to ensure that firefighters utilize the proper siamese connection, all
siamese connections and/or the protective covers installed on the siamese
connection shall be color coded as follows:
§ 144-32. Portable fire extinguishers.
Portable fire extinguishers, installed and maintained in accordance with
National Fire Protection Association Standard No. 10, the Standard for
Portable Fire Extinguishers, shall be provided in all occupancies as required
by Table 1.13
§ 144-33. Protection of cooking equipment and ductwork.
(b) All educational buildings which are three or more stories in
height.
(c) All institutional-type occupancies (i.e., nursing homes,
hospitals, homes for aged, etc.)
(d) All multiple residences of a transient nature, including
rooming houses and boardinghouses, which contain six or
more units.
(e) Any building, regardless of its nature or classification, in which
an unusually hazardous condition exists.
(2) Where the installation of approved automatic sprinkler systems is
required in existing buildings pursuant to Subsection B(1) above,
such sprinkler systems must be installed within two years of the
effective date of this chapter.
C. All sprinkler systems shall be installed and maintained in accordance
with the most current edition of the National Fire Protection
Association Standard for Sprinkler Systems (NFPA 13) or the
appropriate NFPA standard for special occupancies.
D. All sprinkler system components shall be tested and inspected in
accordance with National Fire Protection Association Standard for the
Inspection, Testing and Maintenance of Water-Based Fire Protection
Systems (NFPA 25). Copies of all service, repair, inspection and testing
reports shall be forwarded to the Fire Inspector within 10 days of such
service, repair, inspection or testing.
A. Red: siamese supplying a standpipe (fire hose) system.
B. Green: siamese supplying a sprinkler system.
C. Yellow: siamese supplying a combination standpipe and sprinkler
system.
13.Editor's Note: Table 1 is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 144-30 RAMAPO CODE § 144-33
1:124
§ 144-34. Special extinguishing systems.
Wherever deemed necessary for the protection of a special hazard, the Fire
Inspector may require the installation of a special extinguishing system.
Any such special extinguishing system shall be installed and maintained
in accordance with the most current applicable National Fire Protection
Association standards.
§ 144-35. Access to fire-protection equipment.
§ 144-36. Strobe lights.
A. All commercial cooking appliances, exhaust removal systems, ductwork
and related equipment shall be protected by an automatic fireextinguishing
system installed and maintained in compliance with
current applicable National Fire Protection Association standards.
B. These systems shall be inspected by an approved service firm on a
semiannual basis. To ensure proper inspection, a uniform inspection
form, provided by the Fire Inspector, shall be utilized with a copy of the
completed form forwarded to the Fire Inspector within 10 days of the
inspection.
A. The parking of any vehicle within 15 feet of any fire hydrant or Fire
Department siamese connection shall be prohibited.
B. No shrubs, dumpsters or other items that may obstruct the view of and/
or access to any fire hydrant or Fire Department siamese connection
shall be permitted.
A. In order to notify responding firefighters of conditions within a building
or structure equipped with sprinkler systems or fire alarm systems or
containing hazardous materials or other hazards to firefighters,
identification strobe lights shall be installed on the exterior of the
building as follows:
(1) Red strobe light: located above the Fire Department siamese
connection of a sprinklered building to indicate activation of the
water flow alarm.
(2) Yellow strobe light: installed to indicate activation of a pull station,
smoke detector, heat detector or other alarm device.
(3) Blue strobe light: installed to indicate the presence of hazardous
materials, conditions or other danger to firefighters.
B. The exact location of these lights shall be determined by the Fire
Inspector.
§ 144-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 144-36
1:125

ARTICLE VIII
Fire Hydrants
§ 144-37. Blocking of access prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to cover, obscure or in any way block free
access within a radius of 15 feet of any fire hydrant located within the Town
of Ramapo.
§ 144-38. Hydrants to be free of obstructions.
It shall be the duty and obligation of any owner, occupant or tenant of any
real property located within the Town of Ramapo to maintain a clear and
unobstructed path for a radius of 15 feet in every direction from the fire
hydrant and to maintain said area clear from all obstructions, including, but
not limited to, dirt, debris, shrubbery and snow.
§ 144-39. Maintenance of hydrants.
It shall be the duty and obligation of any owner, tenant or occupant of any
property which abuts a public road or right-of-way to maintain a clear and
unobstructed path of 15 feet of the property line and to maintain said area.
§ 144-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 144-39
1:127

ARTICLE IX
Certificate of Compliance
§ 144-40. When required; procedure for issuance.
A. A certificate of compliance to ensure compliance with all provisions of
this chapter and the New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and
Building Code shall be required for all uses and occupancies of property
other than one- or two-family dwellings, at the intervals required by 19
NYCRR 1203.3h, as amended. [Amended 3-10-1999 by L.L. No.
6-1999; 9-29-2016 by L.L. No. 3-2016]
(1) An annual certificate of compliance to ensure compliance with the
smoke-detecting requirement of the New York State Uniform Fire
Prevention and Building Code shall be required for all two-family
dwellings.
B. Before a certificate of compliance may be issued, a Fire Inspector shall
make such inspections or tests as are necessary to assure that the
provisions of this chapter and the New York State Uniform Fire
Prevention and Building Code are being complied with.
C. Any certificate of compliance required under the provisions of this
section shall be issued by the Building, Planning and Zoning
Department upon the approval of the Fire Inspector, and such
certificate shall be posted or displayed in a conspicuous place on the
premises.
D. The Town Board may require applicants to submit written applications
supplying under affidavit such information as the Town Board, upon the
recommendation of the Fire Inspector, may require.
E. Fees for certificates of compliance for new or changed uses and annual
inspection fees payable each year for the various specific uses subject
to inspection by the Fire Inspector shall be established from time to
time by resolution of the Town Board.
§ 144-40 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 144-40
1:129
Chapter 149
FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Stormwater management and sediment and
erosion control — See Ch. 237.
Streams and watercourses — See Ch. 240.
§ 149-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Floodplain and Flood
Hazard Management Law of the Town of Ramapo."
§ 149-2. Findings.
The Town Board of the Town of Ramapo finds that the potential and/
or actual damages from flooding and erosion may be a problem to the
residents of the Town of Ramapo and that such damages may include
destruction or loss of private and public housing, damage to public facilities,
both publicly and privately owned, and injury to and loss of human life. In
order to minimize the threat of such damages and to achieve the purposes
and objectives hereinafter set forth, this chapter is adopted.
§ 149-3. Statement of purpose.
A. It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety, and
general welfare, and to minimize public and private losses due to flood
conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to:
(1) Regulate uses which are dangerous to health, safety and property
due to water or erosion hazards, or which result in damaging
increases in erosion or in flood heights or velocities;
(2) Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which
serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of
initial construction;
(3) Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and
natural protective barriers which are involved in the
accommodation of floodwaters;
(4) Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which
may increase erosion or flood damages;
(5) Regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally
divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards to other
lands; and
(6) Qualify and maintain for participation in the National Flood
Insurance Program.
§ 144-40 RAMAPO CODE § 149-3
1:130
§ 149-4. Definitions.
B. Objectives. The objectives of this chapter are:
(1) To protect human life and health;
(2) To minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control
projects;
(3) To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with
flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general
public;
(4) To minimize prolonged business interruptions;
(5) To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water
and gas mains, electric, telephone, sewer lines, streets and bridges
located in areas of special flood hazard;
(6) To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use
and development of areas of special flood hazard so as to minimize
future flood blight areas;
(7) To provide that developers are notified that property is in an area of
special flood hazard; and
(8) To ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard
assume responsibility for their actions.
A. Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter
shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in
common usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application.
B. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
APPEAL — A request for a review of the local administrator's
interpretation of any provision of this chapter or a request for a
variance.
AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING — A designated AO, AH or VO Zone on
a community's Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) with a one-percentor-
greater annual chance of flooding to an average annual depth of one
foot to three feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where
the path of flooding is unpredictable and where velocity flow may be
evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow.
AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD — The land in the floodplain
within a community subject to a one-percent-or-greater chance of
flooding in any given year. This area may be designated as Zone A,
AE, AH, AO, A1-A30, A99, V, VO, VE, or V1-V30. It is also commonly
referred to as the "base floodplain" or "one-hundred-year floodplain."
For purposes of this chapter, the term "special flood hazard area
§ 149-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 149-4
1:131
(SFHA)" is synonymous in meaning with the phrase "area of special
flood hazard."
BASE FLOOD — The flood having a one-percent chance of being
equaled or exceeded in any given year.
BASEMENT — That portion of a building having its floor subgrade
(below ground level) on all sides.
BUILDING — See "structure."
CELLAR — Has the same meaning as "basement."
CRAWL SPACE — An enclosed area beneath the lowest elevated floor,
18 inches or more in height, which is used to service the underside
of the lowest elevated floor. The elevation of the floor of this enclosed
area, which may be of soil, gravel, concrete or other material, must
be equal to or above the lowest adjacent exterior grade. The enclosed
crawl space area shall be properly vented to allow for the equalization
of hydrostatic forces which would be experienced during periods of
flooding.
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved
real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures,
mining, dredging, filling, paving, excavation or drilling operations or
storage of equipment or materials.
ELEVATED BUILDING — A nonbasement building i) built, in the case of
a building in Zones A1-A30, AE, A, A99, AO, AH, B, C, X or D, to have the
top of the elevated floor, or in the case of a building in Zones V1-30, VE,
or V, to have the bottom of the lowest horizontal structural member of
the elevated floor, elevated above the ground level by means of pilings,
columns (posts and piers), or shear walls parallel to the flow of the
water; and ii) adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural
integrity of the building during a flood of up to the magnitude of the
base flood. In the case of Zones A1-A30, AE, A, A99, AO, AH, B, C, X
or D, "elevated building" also includes a building elevated by means
of fill or solid foundation perimeter walls with openings sufficient to
facilitate the unimpeded movement of floodwaters. In the case of Zones
V1-V30, VE or V, "elevated building" also includes a building otherwise
meeting the definition of "elevated building," even though the lower
area is enclosed by means of breakaway walls that meet the federal
standards.
FEDERAL EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY — The federal
agency that administers the National Flood Insurance Program.
FLOOD BOUNDARY AND FLOODWAY MAP (FBFM) — An official map
of the community published by the Federal Emergency Management
Agency as part of a riverine community's Flood Insurance Study. The
FBFM delineates a regulatory floodway along watercourses studied in
detail in the Flood Insurance Study.
FLOOD ELEVATION STUDY — An examination, evaluation and
determination of the flood hazards and, if appropriate, corresponding
§ 149-4 RAMAPO CODE § 149-4
1:132
water surface elevations, or an examination, evaluation and
determination of flood-related erosion hazards.
FLOOD HAZARD BOUNDARY MAP (FHBM) — An official map of a
community, issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency,
where the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard have been
designated as Zone A but no flood elevations are provided.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM) — An official map of a
community, on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency has
delineated both the areas of special flood hazard and the risk premium
zones applicable to the community.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY — See "flood elevation study."
FLOOD or FLOODING —
FLOODPLAIN or FLOOD-PRONE AREA — Any land area susceptible to
being inundated by water from any source (see definition of "flooding").
FLOODPROOFING — Any combination of structural and nonstructural
additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or
eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water
and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents.
FLOODWAY — Has the same meaning as "regulatory floodway."
FUNCTIONALLY DEPENDENT USE — A use which cannot perform its
intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity
to water, such as a docking or port facility necessary for the loading
and unloading of cargo or passengers, shipbuilding, and ship repair
facilities. The term does not include long-term storage, manufacturing,
sales, or service facilities.
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE — The highest natural elevation of the
ground surface, prior to construction, next to the proposed walls of a
structure.
A general and temporary condition of partial or complete
inundation of normally dry land areas from:
(a) The overflow of inland or tidal waters;
The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface
waters from any source.
(b)
(1)
"Flood" or "flooding" also means the collapse or subsidence of
land along the shore of a lake or other body of water as a result
of erosion or undermining caused by waves or currents of water
exceeding anticipated cyclical levels or suddenly caused by an
unusually high water level in a natural body of water, accompanied
by a severe storm, or by an unanticipated force of nature, such as a
flash flood or an abnormal tidal surge, or by some similarly unusual
and unforeseeable event which results in flooding as defined in
Subsection (1)(a) above.
(2)
§ 149-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 149-4
1:133
HISTORIC STRUCTURE — Any structure that is:
LOCAL ADMINISTRATOR — The person appointed by the community
to administer and implement this chapter by granting or denying
development permits in accordance with its provisions. This person is
often the Building Inspector, Code Enforcement Officer, or employee of
an engineering department.
LOWEST FLOOR — Lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement or cellar). An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, usable
solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or storage in an area
other than a basement area is not considered a building's lowest floor;
provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure
in violation of the applicable nonelevation design requirements of this
chapter.
MANUFACTURED HOME — A structure, transportable in one or more
sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be
used with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the
required utilities. The term does not include a "recreational vehicle."
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A parcel (or
contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured
home lots for rent or sale.
MEAN SEA LEVEL — For purposes of the National Flood Insurance
Program, the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929, the
North American Vertical Datum of 1988 (NAVD 88), or other datum, to
Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a
listing maintained by the Department of the Interior) or
preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as
meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National
Register;
(1)
Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the
Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered
historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the
Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district;
(2)
Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states
with historic preservation programs which have been approved by
the Secretary of the Interior; or
(3)
Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in
communities with historic preservation programs that have been
certified either:
By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary
of the Interior; or
(a)
Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without
approved programs.
(b)
(4)
§ 149-4 RAMAPO CODE § 149-4
1:134
which base flood elevations shown on a community's Flood Insurance
Rate Map are referenced.
MOBILE HOME — Has the same meaning as "manufactured home."
NEW CONSTRUCTION — Structures for which the start of construction
commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain management
regulation adopted by the community and includes any subsequent
improvements to such structure.
ONE-HUNDRED-YEAR FLOOD — Has the same meaning as "base
flood."
PRINCIPALLY ABOVEGROUND — That at least 51% of the actual cash
value of the structure, excluding land value, is aboveground.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — A vehicle which is:
REGULATORY FLOODWAY — The channel of a river or other
watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order
to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water
surface elevation more than a designated height as determined by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency in a Flood Insurance Study or
by other agencies as provided in § 149-11B of this chapter.
START OF CONSTRUCTION — The date of permit issuance for new
construction and substantial improvements to existing structures,
provided that actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction,
rehabilitation, addition placement, or other improvement is within 180
days after the date of issuance. The actual start of construction means
the first placement of permanent construction of a building (including
a manufactured home) on a site, such as the pouring of a slab or
footings, installation of pilings or construction of columns. Permanent
construction does not include land preparation (such as clearing,
excavation, grading, or filling), or the installation of streets or
walkways, or excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations,
or the erection of temporary forms, or the installation of accessory
buildings such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units
or not part of the main building. For a substantial improvement, the
actual "start of construction" means the first alteration of any wall,
ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that
alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.
(1) Built on a single chassis;
Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest
horizontal projections;
(2)
Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a lightduty
truck; and
(3)
Not designed primarily for use as a permanent dwelling but as
temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or
seasonal use.
(4)
§ 149-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 149-4
1:135
§ 149-5. Applicability: areas of special flood hazard. [Amended
8-21-2014 by L.L. No. 6-2014; 12-6-2017 by L.L. No. 3-2017]
STRUCTURE — A walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid
storage tank that is principally aboveground, as well as a manufactured
home.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE — Damage of any origin sustained by a
structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before
damaged condition would equal or exceed 50% of the market value of
the structure before the damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Any reconstruction, rehabilitation,
addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals
or exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure before the start of
construction of the improvement. The term includes structures which
have incurred substantial damage, regardless of the actual repair work
performed. The term does not, however, include either:
VARIANCE — A grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter
which permits construction or use in a manner that would otherwise be
prohibited by this chapter.
VIOLATION — The failure of a structure or other development to be
fully compliant with the community's floodplain management
regulations.
Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing
violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code
specifications which have been identified by the local code
enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to
assure safe living conditions; or
(1)
Any alteration of an historic structure, provided that the alteration
will not preclude the structure's continued designation as an
historic structure.
(2)
A. This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the
jurisdiction of the Town of Ramapo, Rockland County.
B. Basis for establishing the areas of special flood hazard. The areas of
special flood hazard for the Town of Ramapo, Community Number
365340, are identified and defined on the following documents
prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency:
(1) Flood Insurance Rate Map Panel Numbers 36087C0058G;
36087C0059G; 36087C0062G; 36087C0063G; 36087C0064G;
36087C0066G; 36087C0067G; 36087C0068G; 36087C0069G;
36087C0078G; 36087C0079G; 36087C0084G; 36087C0086G;
36087C0087G; 36087C0088G; 36087C0089G; 36087C0091G;
36087C0092G; 36087C0093G; 36087C0094G; 36087C0132G;
36087C0151G; 36087C0152G; 36087C0154G; 36087C0156G;
36087C0157G, whose effective date is March 3, 2014, and any
§ 149-4 RAMAPO CODE § 149-5
1:136
§ 149-6. Interpretation and conflict with other laws.
§ 149-7. Penalties for noncompliance.
No structure in an area of special flood hazard shall hereafter be
constructed, located, extended, converted, or altered and no land shall be
excavated or filled without full compliance with the terms of this chapter
and any other applicable regulations. Any infraction of the provisions of
this chapter by failure to comply with any of its requirements, including
infractions of conditions and safeguards established in connection with
conditions of the permit, shall constitute a violation. Any person who
violates this chapter or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall,
upon conviction thereof, be fined no more than $250 or imprisoned for not
more than 15 days or both. Each day of noncompliance shall be considered
a separate offense. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the Town of
Ramapo from taking such other lawful action as necessary to prevent
or remedy an infraction. Any structure found not compliant with the
requirements of this chapter for which the developer and/or owner has
subsequent revisions to these map panels do not affect areas under
our community's jurisdiction.
(2) A scientific and engineering report entitled, "Flood Insurance
Study, Rockland County, New York, All Jurisdictions," dated March
3, 2014.
(3) Letter of Map Revision, Case Number 13-02-1859P, effective
October 16, 2014, amending Panel 36087C0068G of the Flood
insurance Rate Map and Flood Insurance Study Profile 106P.
(4) Letter of Map Revision, Case Number 17-02-0104P, effective
December 7, 2017, amending Panel 36087C0156G of the Flood
Insurance Rate Map, Flood Insurance Study Profile 95P and
Floodway Data Table 10 of the Flood Insurance Study, effective
March 3, 2014. [Amended 4-25-2018 by L.L. No. 3-2018]
C. The above documents are hereby adopted and declared to be a part of
this chapter. The Flood Insurance Study and/or maps are on file at the
Office of the Building Inspector, Ramapo Town Hall, 237 Route 59,
Suffern, New York 10901.
A. This chapter includes all revisions to the National Flood Insurance
Program through October 27, 1997, and shall supersede all previous
laws adopted for the purpose of flood damage prevention.
B. In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter
shall be held to be minimum requirements, adopted for the promotion
of the public health, safety, and welfare. Whenever the requirements of
this chapter are at variance with the requirements of any other lawfully
adopted rules, regulations, or ordinances, the most restrictive, or that
imposing the higher standards, shall govern.
§ 149-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 149-7
1:137
not applied for and received an approved variance under § 149-13 will
be declared noncompliant and notification sent to the Federal Emergency
Management Agency.
§ 149-8. Warning and disclaimer of liability.
The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and
engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare
occasions. Flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes.
This chapter does not imply that land outside the area of special flood
hazard or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or
flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the
Town of Ramapo, any officer or employee thereof, or the Federal Emergency
Management Agency, for any flood damages that result from reliance on this
chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder.
§ 149-9. Designation of local administrator.
The Building Inspector is hereby appointed local administrator to
administer and implement this chapter by granting or denying floodplain
development permits in accordance with its provisions.
§ 149-10. Floodplain development permit purpose; fees; application
requirements.
A. Purpose. A floodplain development permit is hereby established for all
construction and other development to be undertaken in areas of
special flood hazard in this community for the purpose of protecting its
citizens from increased flood hazards and ensuring that new
development is constructed in a manner that minimizes its exposure to
flooding. It shall be unlawful to undertake any development in an area
of special flood hazard, as shown on the Flood Insurance Rate Map
enumerated in § 149-5, without a valid floodplain development permit.
Application for a permit shall be made on forms furnished by the local
administrator and may include, but not be limited to, plans, in
duplicate, drawn to scale and showing: the nature, location,
dimensions, and elevations of the area in question; existing or proposed
structures, fill, storage of materials, drainage facilities; and the location
of the foregoing.
B. Fees. All applications for a floodplain development permit shall be
accompanied by the required fee in accordance with the Standard
Schedule of Fees of the Town of Ramapo. In addition, the applicant shall
be responsible for reimbursing the Town of Ramapo for any additional
costs necessary for review, inspection and approval of this project. The
local administrator may require a deposit of no more than $500 to cover
these additional costs.
§ 149-7 RAMAPO CODE § 149-10
1:138
C. Application for a permit. The applicant shall provide the following
information as appropriate. Additional information may be required on
the permit application form.
(1) The proposed elevation, in relation to mean sea level, of the lowest
floor (including basement or cellar) of any new or substantially
improved structure to be located in Zones A1-A30, AE or AH, or
Zone A if base flood elevation data are available. Upon completion
of the lowest floor, the permitee shall submit to the local
administrator the as-built elevation, certified by a licensed
professional engineer or surveyor.
(2) The proposed elevation, in relation to mean sea level, to which any
new or substantially improved nonresidential structure will be
floodproofed. Upon completion of the floodproofed portion of the
structure, the permitee shall submit to the local administrator the
as-built floodproofed elevation, certified by a professional engineer
or surveyor.
(3) A certificate from a licensed professional engineer or architect that
any utility floodproofing will meet the criteria in § 149-12D,
Utilities.
(4) A certificate from a licensed professional engineer or architect that
any nonresidential floodproofed structure will meet the
floodproofing criteria in § 149-12F, nonresidential structures.
(5) A description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered
or relocated as a result of proposed development. Computations by
a licensed professional engineer must be submitted that
demonstrate that the altered or relocated segment will provide
equal or greater conveyance than the original stream segment. The
applicant must submit any maps, computations or other material
required by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA)
to revise the documents enumerated in § 149-5B, when notified by
the local administrator, and must pay any fees or other costs
assessed by FEMA for this purpose. The applicant must also
provide assurances that the conveyance capacity of the altered or
relocated stream segment will be maintained.
(6) A technical analysis, by a licensed professional engineer, if required
by the local administrator, which shows whether proposed
development to be located in an area of special flood hazard may
result in physical damage to any other property.
(7) In Zone A, when no base flood elevation data are available from
other sources, base flood elevation data shall be provided by the
permit applicant for subdivision proposals and other proposed
developments (including proposals for manufactured home and
recreational vehicle parks and subdivisions) that are greater than
either 50 lots or five acres.
§ 149-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 149-11
1:139
§ 149-11. Duties of local administrator.
Duties of the local administrator shall include, but not be limited to the
following.
A. Permit application review. The local administrator shall conduct the
following permit application review before issuing a floodplain
development permit:
(1) Review all applications for completeness, particularly with the
requirements of § 149-10C, Application for a permit, and for
compliance with the provisions and standards of this chapter.
(2) Review subdivision and other proposed new development,
including manufactured home parks, to determine whether
proposed building sites will be reasonably safe from flooding. If a
proposed building site is located in an area of special flood hazard,
all new construction and substantial improvements shall meet the
applicable standards of § 149-12, General standards, and, in
particular, § 149-12A, Subdivision proposals.
(3) Determine whether any proposed development in an area of special
flood hazard may result in physical damage to any other property
(e.g., stream bank erosion and increased flood velocities). The local
administrator may require the applicant to submit additional
technical analyses and data necessary to complete the
determination. If the proposed development may result in physical
damage to any other property or fails to meet the requirements of
§ 149-12, General standards, no permit shall be issued. The
applicant may revise the application to include measures that
mitigate or eliminate the adverse effects and resubmit the
application.
(4) Determine that all necessary permits have been received from
those governmental agencies from which approval is required by
state or federal law.
B. Use of other flood data.
(1) When the Federal Emergency Management Agency has designated
areas of special flood hazard on the community's Flood Insurance
Rate Map (FIRM) but has neither produced water surface elevation
data (these areas are designated Zone A or V on the FIRM) nor
identified a floodway, the local administrator shall obtain, review
and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data
available from a federal, state or other source, including data
developed pursuant to § 149-10C(7), as criteria for requiring that
new construction, substantial improvements or other proposed
development meet the requirements of this chapter.
(2) When base flood elevation data are not available, the local
administrator may use flood information from any other
§ 149-11 RAMAPO CODE § 149-11
1:140
authoritative source, such as historical data, to establish flood
elevations within the areas of special flood hazard, for the purposes
of this chapter.
C. Alteration of watercourses.
(1) Notification to adjacent communities and the New York State
Department of Environmental Conservation prior to permitting any
alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submittal of evidence
of such notification to the Regional Administrator, Region II,
Federal Emergency Management Agency.
(2) Determine that the permit holder has provided for maintenance
within the altered or relocated portion of said watercourse so that
the flood-carrying capacity is not diminished.
D. Construction stage.
(1) In Zones A1-A30, AE and AH, and also Zone A if base flood
elevation data are available, upon placement of the lowest floor or
completion of floodproofing of a new or substantially improved
structure, obtain from the permit holder a certification of the asbuilt
elevation of the lowest floor or floodproofed elevation, in
relation to mean sea level. The certificate shall be prepared by or
under the direct supervision of a licensed land surveyor or
professional engineer and certified by same. For manufactured
homes, the permit holder shall submit the certificate of elevation
upon placement of the structure on the site. A certificate of
elevation must also be submitted for a recreational vehicle if it
remains on a site for 180 consecutive days or longer (unless it is
fully licensed and ready for highway use).
(2) Any further work undertaken prior to submission and approval of
the certification shall be at the permit holder's risk. The local
administrator shall review all data submitted. Deficiencies detected
shall be cause to issue a stop-work order for the project unless
immediately corrected.
E. Inspections. The local administrator and/or the developer's engineer or
architect shall make periodic inspections at appropriate times
throughout the period of construction in order to monitor compliance
with permit conditions and enable said inspector to certify, if requested,
that the development is in compliance with the requirements of the
floodplain development permit and/or any variance provisions.
F. Stop-work orders.
(1) The local administrator shall issue, or cause to be issued, a stopwork
order for any floodplain development found ongoing without a
development permit. Disregard of a stop-work order shall subject
the violator to the penalties described in § 149-7 of this chapter.
§ 149-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 149-11
1:141
§ 149-12. General standards.
The following standards apply to new development, including new and
substantially improved structures, in the areas of special flood hazard
shown on the Flood Insurance Rate Map designated in § 149-5B.
(2) The local administrator shall issue, or cause to be issued, a stopwork
order for any floodplain development found noncompliant
with the provisions of this chapter and/or the conditions of the
development permit. Disregard of a stop-work order shall subject
the violator to the penalties described in § 149-7 of this chapter.
G. Certificate of compliance.
(1) In areas of special flood hazard, as determined by documents
enumerated in § 149-5B, it shall be unlawful to occupy or to permit
the use or occupancy of any building or premises, or both, or part
thereof hereafter created, erected, changed, converted or wholly or
partly altered or enlarged in its use or structure until a certificate
of compliance has been issued by the local administrator stating
that the building or land conforms to the requirements of this
chapter.
(2) A certificate of compliance shall be issued by the local
administrator upon satisfactory completion of all development in
areas of special flood hazard.
(3) Issuance of the certificate shall be based upon the inspections
conducted as prescribed in § 149-11E, Inspections, and/or any
certified elevations, hydraulic data, floodproofing, anchoring
requirements or encroachment analyses which may have been
required as a condition of the approved permit.
H. Information to be retained. The local administrator shall retain and
make available for inspection copies of the following:
(1) Floodplain development permits and certificates of compliance;
(2) Certifications of as-built lowest floor elevations of structures,
required pursuant to § 149-11D(1) and D(2), and whether or not the
structures contain a basement;
(3) Floodproofing certificates required pursuant to § 149-11D(1), and
whether or not the structures contain a basement;
(4) Variances issued pursuant to § 149-13, Variance procedures; and
(5) Notices required under § 149-11C, Alteration of watercourses.
A. Subdivision proposals. The following standards apply to all new
subdivision proposals and other proposed development in areas of
special flood hazard (including proposals for manufactured home and
recreational vehicle parks and subdivisions):
§ 149-11 RAMAPO CODE § 149-12
1:142
(1) Proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood
damage;
(2) Public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and
water systems shall be located and constructed so as to minimize
flood damage; and
(3) Adequate drainage shall be provided to reduce exposure to flood
damage.
B. Encroachments.
(1) Within Zones A1-A30 and AE, on streams without a regulatory
floodway, no new construction, substantial improvements or other
development (including fill) shall be permitted unless:
(a) The applicant demonstrates that the cumulative effect of the
proposed development, when combined with all other existing
and anticipated development, will not increase the water
surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any
location; or
(b) The Town of Ramapo agrees to apply to the Federal Emergency
Management Agency (FEMA) for a conditional FIRM revision,
FEMA approval is received and the applicant provides all
necessary data, analyses and mapping and reimburses the
Town of Ramapo for all fees and other costs in relation to the
application. The applicant must also provide all data, analyses
and mapping and reimburse the Town of Ramapo for all costs
related to the final map revision.
(2) On streams with a regulatory floodway, as shown on the Flood
Boundary and Floodway Map or the Flood Insurance Rate Map
adopted in § 149-5B, no new construction, substantial
improvements or other development in the floodway (including fill)
shall be permitted unless:
(a) A technical evaluation by a licensed professional engineer
shows that such an encroachment shall not result in any
increase in flood levels during occurrence of the base flood; or
(b) The Town of Ramapo agrees to apply to the Federal Emergency
Management Agency (FEMA) for a conditional FIRM and
floodway revision, FEMA approval is received and the
applicant provides all necessary data, analyses and mapping
and reimburses the Town of Ramapo for all fees and other
costs in relation to the application. The applicant must also
provide all data, analyses and mapping and reimburse the
Town of Ramapo for all costs related to the final map revisions.
C. Standards for all structures. The following standards apply to new
development, including new and substantially improved structures, in
§ 149-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 149-12
1:143
the areas of special flood hazard shown on the Flood Insurance Rate
Map designated in § 149-5B.
(1) Anchoring. New structures and substantial improvement to
structures in areas of special flood hazard shall be anchored to
prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement during the base
flood. This requirement is in addition to applicable state and local
anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces.
(2) Construction materials and methods.
(a) New construction and substantial improvements to structures
shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment
resistant to flood damage.
(b) New construction and substantial improvements to structures
shall be constructed using methods and practices that
minimize flood damage.
(c) Enclosed areas below the lowest floor.
[1] For enclosed areas below the lowest floor of a structure
within Zones A1-A30, AE or AH, and also Zone A if base
flood elevation data are available, new and substantially
improved structures shall have fully enclosed areas below
the lowest floor that are useable solely for parking of
vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a
basement and which are subject to flooding, designed to
automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior
walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters.
Designs for meeting this requirement must either be
certified by a licensed professional engineer or architect
or meet or exceed the following minimum criteria:
[a] A minimum of two openings having a total net area of
not less than one square inch for every square foot of
enclosed area subject to flooding; and
[b] The bottom of all such openings no higher than one
foot above the lowest adjacent finished grade.
[2] Openings may be equipped with louvers, valves, screens or
other coverings or devices provided they permit the
automatic entry and exit of floodwaters. Enclosed areas
subgrade on all sides are considered basements and are
not permitted.
D. Utilities.
(1) New and replacement electrical equipment, heating, ventilating,
air conditioning, plumbing connections, and other service
equipment shall be located at least two feet above the base flood
elevation or be designed to prevent water from entering and
§ 149-12 RAMAPO CODE § 149-12
1:144
accumulating within the components during a flood and to resist
hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and stresses. Electrical wiring
and outlets, switches, junction boxes and panels shall be elevated
or designed to prevent water from entering and accumulating
within the components unless they conform to the appropriate
provisions of the electrical part of the Building Code of New York
State or the Residential Code of New York State for location of such
items in wet locations;
(2) New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system;
(3) New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed
to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters. Sanitary sewer
and storm drainage systems for buildings that have openings below
the base flood elevation shall be provided with automatic backflow
valves or other automatic backflow devices that are installed in
each discharge line passing through a building's exterior wall; and
(4) On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid
impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding.
E. Residential structures.
(1) Elevation. The following standards apply to new and substantially
improved residential structures located in areas of special flood
hazard, in addition to the requirements in § 149-12A, Subdivision
proposals, § 149-12B, Encroachments, § 149-12C, Standards for all
structures, and § 149-12D, Utilities.
(a) Within Zones A1-A30, AE and AH and also Zone A if base flood
elevation data are available, new construction and substantial
improvements shall have the lowest floor (including basement)
elevated to or above two feet above the base flood elevation.
(b) Within Zone A, when no base flood elevation data are available,
new construction and substantial improvements shall have the
lowest floor (including basement) elevated at least three feet
above the highest adjacent grade.
(c) Within Zone AO, new construction and substantial
improvements shall have the lowest floor (including basement)
elevated above the highest adjacent grade at least as high as
two feet above the depth number specified in feet on the
community's Flood Insurance Rate Map enumerated in
§ 149-5B (at least two feet if no depth number is specified).
(d) Within Zones AH and AO, adequate drainage paths are
required to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed
structures on slopes.
§ 149-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 149-12
1:145
F. Nonresidential structures. The following standards apply to new and
substantially improved commercial, industrial and other nonresidential
structures located in areas of special flood hazard, in addition to the
requirements in § 149-12A, Subdivision proposals, § 149-12B,
Encroachments, § 149-12C, Standards for all structures, and § 149-12D,
Utilities.
(1) Within Zones A1-A30, AE and AH, and also Zone A if base flood
elevation data are available, new construction and substantial
improvements of any nonresidential structure shall either:
(a) Have the lowest floor, including basement or cellar, elevated to
or above two feet above the base flood elevation; or
(b) Be floodproofed so that the structure is watertight below two
feet above the base flood elevation, including attendant utility
and sanitary facilities, with walls substantially impermeable to
the passage of water. All structural components located below
the base flood level must be capable of resisting hydrostatic
and hydrodynamic loads and the effects of buoyancy.
(2) Within Zone AO, new construction and substantial improvements of
nonresidential structures shall:
(a) Have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated above the
highest adjacent grade at least as high as two feet above the
depth number specified in feet on the community's FIRM (at
least two feet if no depth number is specified); or
(b) Together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, be
completely floodproofed to that level to meet the floodproofing
standard specified in § 149-12F(1)(b).
(3) If the structure is to be floodproofed, a licensed professional
engineer or architect shall develop and/or review structural design,
specifications, and plans for construction. A floodproofing
certificate or other certification shall be provided to the local
administrator that certifies the design and methods of construction
are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting
the provisions of § 149-12F(1)(b), including the specific elevation
(in relation to mean sea level) to which the structure is to be
floodproofed.
(4) Within Zones AH and AO, adequate drainage paths are required to
guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures on
slopes.
(5) Within Zone A, when no base flood elevation data are available, the
lowest floor (including basement) shall be elevated at least three
feet above the highest adjacent grade.
§ 149-12 RAMAPO CODE § 149-12
1:146
§ 149-13. Variance procedure.
G. Manufactured homes and recreational vehicles. The following
standards in addition to the standards in § 149-12, General standards,
§ 149-12C, Standards for all structures, and § 149-12D, Utilities, apply,
as indicated, in areas of special flood hazard to manufactured homes
and to recreational vehicles which are located in areas of special flood
hazard.
(1) Recreational vehicles.
(a) Recreational vehicles placed on sites within Zones A1-A30, AE
and AH shall either:
[1] Be on site fewer than 180 consecutive days;
[2] Be fully licensed and ready for highway use; or
[3] Meet the requirements for manufactured homes in
§ 149-12G(2), (3) and (4).
(b) A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its
wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quickdisconnect-
type utilities and security devices and has no
permanently attached additions.
(2) A manufactured home that is placed or substantially improved in
Zones A1-A30, AE and AH shall be elevated on a permanent
foundation such that the lowest floor is elevated to or above two
feet above the base flood elevation and is securely anchored to an
adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse
and lateral movement.
(3) Within Zone A, when no base flood elevation data are available,
new and substantially improved manufactured homes shall be
elevated such that the manufactured home chassis is supported by
reinforced piers or other foundation elements of at least equivalent
strength that are no less than 36 inches in height above grade and
are securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation
system to resist flotation, collapse or lateral movement.
(4) Within Zone AO, the floor shall be elevated above the highest
adjacent grade at least as high as two feet above the depth number
specified on the Flood Insurance Rate Map enumerated in § 149-5B
(at least two feet if no depth number is specified).
A. Appeals board.
(1) The Zoning Board of Appeals as established by the Town of Ramapo
shall hear and decide appeals and requests for variances from the
requirements of this chapter.
§ 149-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 149-13
1:147
(2) The Zoning Board of Appeals shall hear and decide appeals when it
is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision, or
determination made by the local administrator in the enforcement
or administration of this chapter.
(3) Those aggrieved by the decision of the Zoning Board of Appeals
may appeal such decision to the Supreme Court pursuant to Article
78 of the Civil Practice Law and Rules.
(4) In passing upon such applications, the Zoning Board of Appeals,
shall consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors,
standards specified in other sections of this chapter and:
(a) The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the
injury of others;
(b) The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion
damage;
(c) The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to
flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual
owner;
(d) The importance of the services provided by the proposed
facility to the community;
(e) The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where
applicable;
(f) The availability of alternative locations for the proposed use
which are not subject to flooding or erosion damage;
(g) The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and
anticipated development;
(h) The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive
plan and floodplain management program of that area;
(i) The safety of access to the property in times of flood for
ordinary and emergency vehicles;
(j) The costs to local governments and the dangers associated
with conducting search and rescue operations during periods
of flooding;
(k) The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and
sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave
action, if applicable, expected at the site; and
(l) The costs of providing governmental services during and after
flood conditions, including search and rescue operations,
maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as
sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems and streets and
bridges.
§ 149-13 RAMAPO CODE § 149-13
1:148
(5) Upon consideration of the factors of § 149-13A(4) and the purposes
of this chapter, the Zoning Board of Appeals may attach such
conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to
further the purposes of this chapter.
(6) The local administrator shall maintain the records of all appeal
actions including technical information and report any variances to
the Federal Emergency Management Agency upon request.
B. Conditions for variances.
(1) Generally, variances may be issued for new construction and
substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half acre or
less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing
structures constructed below the base flood level, providing items
(a) through (l) in § 149-13A(4) have been fully considered. As the lot
size increases beyond the one-half acre, the technical justification
required for issuing the variance increases.
(2) Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic
structures upon determination that:
(a) The proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the
structure's continued designation as an historic structure; and
(b) The variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic
character and design of the structure.
(3) Variances may be issued by a community for new construction and
substantial improvements and for other development necessary for
the conduct of a functionally dependent use provided that:
(a) The criteria of § 149-13B(1), (4), (5) and (6) of this section are
met; and
(b) The structure or other development is protected by methods
that minimize flood damages during the base flood and create
no additional threat to public safety.
(4) Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any
increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would
result.
(5) Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the
variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard,
to afford relief.
(6) Variances shall only be issued upon receiving written justification
of:
(a) A showing of good and sufficient cause;
(b) A determination that failure to grant the variance would result
in exceptional hardship to the applicant; and
§ 149-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 149-13
1:149
Chapter 162
HOME BUYERS PROTECTION
§ 162-1. Title.
This chapter shall be cited and may be referred to hereinafter as the "Home
Buyers Protection Law" of the Town of Ramapo.
§ 162-2. Legislative intent.
(c) A determination that the granting of a variance will not result
in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety,
extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on
or victimization of the public or conflict with existing local laws
or ordinances.
(7) Notification requirements.
(a) Any applicant to whom a variance is granted for a building with
the lowest floor below the base flood elevation shall be given
written notice over the signature of a community official that:
[1] The issuance of a variance to construct a structure below
the base flood level will result in increased premium rates
for flood insurance up to amounts as high as $25 for $100
of insurance coverage; and
[2] Such construction below the base flood level increases
risks to life and property.
(b) Such notification shall be maintained with the record of all
variance actions as required in § 149-11H of this chapter.
A. The Town Board of the Town of Ramapo has concluded a series of public
hearings held by a legislative subcommittee of said Town Board with
respect to the recent Golan Heights failure. It is apparent that there is
an inordinate exposure to loss of contract deposits and other moneys
placed with builders in connection with the construction and purchase
of homes because of the builder's financial failures. It is also apparent
that such losses have an adverse effect on the residential building
construction industry and the orderly development of the Town, which
is more fully set out in the subcommittee's findings.
B. The Town of Ramapo hereby determines that the enacting of this
chapter, pursuant to the powers granted by the Municipal Home Rule
Law and the Town Law of the State of New York, will contribute to the
public welfare and safety, to the orderly development of the Town of
Ramapo and to the protection of future home buyers in the Town of
Ramapo and reinforce public confidence in the financially responsible
builders and controls constructing homes in the Town of Ramapo.
§ 149-13 RAMAPO CODE § 162-3
1:150
§ 162-3. Applicability.
This chapter shall apply to any person, firm or corporation building any
form of residence for resale within the unincorporated area of the Town of
Ramapo.
§ 162-4. Escrow deposit or guaranty bond. [Amended 10-12-1977 by
L.L. No. 6-1977]
§ 162-5. Building permit application.
Upon application for a building permit to construct any residence within the
Town of Ramapo, the applicant shall furnish to the Building Inspector, in
addition to all other requirements of the law:
A. Any sums of money paid prior to the closing of title of real property,
regardless of how characterized or labeled, be it as down payments,
extras or otherwise, for the sale of real property and appurtenances
thereto intended to be improved by a residence dwelling on property
situate within the unincorporated area of the Town of Ramapo and
which improvement is to be made by the seller of the property or his
agent or general contractor shall be held in escrow by the seller or
buyer's attorney or lending institution or such other agent as the
parties shall agree. The sum of money so held shall not be released or
delivered to the seller unless and until the Building Inspector shall have
issued a certificate of occupancy.
B. In lieu of the escrow account referred to in Subsection A, the seller or
his agent may deliver to the purchaser a deposit guaranty bond written
on a solvent surety or insurance company licensed to do business in the
State of New York whereby such bond shall provide that if the seller
shall deliver the deed pursuant to the written contract, the obligation of
the surety will become void, but otherwise to be firmly bound to the
purchaser for the repayment of any sums paid to the seller. Said bond
shall be unequivocal and provide for no exceptions except the default of
the purchaser and be in a form and content satisfactory to the Town
Attorney's office.
A. A copy of the contract of sale if one exists; and
B. A copy of the escrow agreement in conformity with this chapter, unless
said agreement is incorporated within the contract; or
C. In lieu of Subsections A and B hereof, a letter from the applicant
indicating that the parcel has not yet been contracted for sale but, upon
the entry into contract, the down payment will be held in escrow in
conformity with this chapter.
§ 162-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 162-6
1:151
§ 162-6. Liability.
This chapter shall not be construed to make the Town or any agency or
department of the Town a party to a contract of sale of real property nor an
arbiter or guarantor of the terms of such a contract.
§ 162-7. Penalties for offenses.
Each and every violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall be
punishable by a fine not to exceed $500 or by imprisonment for not more
than six months, or by both.
Chapter 173
LANDSCAPERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Noise — See Ch. 188.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 204.
Stormwater management and sediment and
erosion control — See Ch. 237.
Streams and watercourses — See Ch. 240.
Trees — See Ch. 258.
§ 173-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited hereinafter as the
"Landscaper Licensing Law of the Town of Ramapo."
§ 173-2. Legislative intent.
The Town Board of the Town of Ramapo hereby determines that, to protect
the public health, safety and welfare of the residents of the unincorporated
area of the Town of Ramapo, the public interest requires registration and
licensing of landscapers operating within the Town so as to control their
activities, as such activities relate to the use of Town streets and the
removal of landscape materials from real property within the Town.
§ 173-3. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meaning given herein. The word "shall" is
always mandatory and not merely directory.
LANDSCAPE MATERIAL — Includes grass clippings, prunings, leaves, tree
branches, trunks, stumps, roots, rocks, sand and any other natural materials
indigenous to gardens, lawns, shrubbery and trees.
LANDSCAPER — Includes any person who engages in the tending, planting,
preparation, installation, maintenance, managing, mowing, creating or
§ 162-6 RAMAPO CODE § 173-3
1:152
laying out of lawns, gardens, flower beds, vegetable beds, shrubbery, trees
or landscaping, of every nature and description, on real property on which
such person does not reside.
PERSON — Includes any individual, association of individuals, firm,
partnership or corporation.
PRIVATE PROPERTY — Includes all real property, improved or unimproved,
owned by any person, association of persons, corporation, including
municipal corporations, or otherwise, which is not otherwise defined as a
"public highway" or "public place" herein.
PUBLIC HIGHWAY — Includes any street open to the public which has been
accepted for dedication by the Town of Ramapo, or has been maintained
continuously by the Town in accordance with the provisions of the Town Law
of the State of New York, for its full width from property line to property
line, including the sidewalk area, if any, whether or not the same shall have
been installed.
PUBLIC PLACE — Includes any real property available to, or open to use by,
all residents of the Town of Ramapo.
§ 173-4. Permit required; exceptions.
No person who is a landscaper who operates a business for profit shall
conduct any such business and remove any landscape material of any kind
from the premises of any person or cart or transport the same through or
upon any street, avenue, parkway or highway within the Town unless he
shall have first obtained a permit from the Town Clerk and shall have agreed
to conform to the provisions of this chapter with respect to the conduct of
the business of a landscaper, except that no permit shall be required for:
§ 173-5. Application for permit; fee; expiration of permit.
A. Any person engaged under contract by the Town for the purpose of said
service of removing landscape material as part of an overall contract
with the Town to remove materials of any kind from private premises;
or
B. Any person under the age of 18 years.
A. All landscapers shall apply for a permit, as required by this section, to
the Town Clerk no later than March 1 of any given year and pay therefor
a fee in accordance with the Standard Schedule of Fees of the Town of
Ramapo for each motor vehicle used by the landscaper in the conduct of
his business as a gardener. [Amended 2-6-2012 by L.L. No. 2-2012]
B. With each permit, the applicant shall complete an application, which
shall be filed, in writing, with the Town Clerk and shall specify the
following: [Amended 2-6-2012 by L.L. No. 2-2012]
§ 173-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 173-5
1:153
§ 173-6. Transferability. [Amended 2-6-2012 by L.L. No. 2-2012]
Permits issued pursuant to this chapter shall not be assignable or
transferable. Any vehicle certificate issued pursuant to this chapter shall
be conspicuously affixed to each motor vehicle and shall not be removed
therefrom. Upon the filing of an affidavit, or such other proof as may be
required by the Town Clerk, a substitute or replacement certificate may be
issued, upon the payment of a fee in accordance with the Standard Schedule
of Fees of the Town of Ramapo.
§ 173-7. Restrictions.
(1) Name and address of the landscaper and the address of said
individual or, if a firm, the office of the corporation, partnership or
association, together with a telephone number therefor.
(2) The names of all principals of the business entity conducting
business as the gardener.
C. The applicant, moreover, shall attach to his application for a permit a
copy of a valid home improvement license duly issued by the Rockland
County Home Improvement Licensing Board or a certification that the
applicant has fulfilled the licensing requirements set forth in the laws of
Rockland County. [Added 2-6-2012 by L.L. No. 2-2012]
D. Each permit issued pursuant to this section shall be issued as of the
date of the granting thereof and shall expire on February 28 in the year
next succeeding such date, unless sooner suspended or revoked.
A. No landscaper shall operate any power or manual lawn mower or any
other gardening equipment between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 8:00
a.m., local time, the following day. [Amended 2-6-2012 by L.L. No.
2-2012]
B. Burning of any landscape material is prohibited.
C. All landscape material shall be removed by the landscaper and disposed
of in an authorized manner at an authorized disposal site, except as
provided in § 173-8.
D. No one shall blow or rake leaves, grass or other debris onto the public
highway or right-of-way or onto adjoining property. As a precondition to
the issuance of a permit, a landscaper will be required to furnish proof
that he, she or it has a permit to deposit leaves, grass clippings and
other debris at a duly licensed depository or has a plan for disposal of
leaves, grass clippings or other debris which has been approved by the
Director of the Department of Public Works. [Amended 2-6-2012 by
L.L. No. 2-2012]
E. No one shall spill or dump oil, gasoline or other petroleum products or
any pesticides on the public highway or right-of-way. No equipment
§ 173-5 RAMAPO CODE § 173-7
1:154
§ 173-8. Disposal of leaves. [Amended 2-6-2012 by L.L. No. 2-2012]
During the period from October 1 to December 31 annually, a landscaper
holding a permit issued by the Town hired by a residential property owner
may place leaves in Town-approved biodegradable bags on property
adjacent to Town highways for pickup by the Town unless the landscaper is
depositing said leaves in a storage area on the homeowner's property for
purposes of composting or is mulching said leaves.
§ 173-9. Enforcement.
The Police Department of the Town of Ramapo and/or the enforcement
official as designated in Chapter 376, Zoning, § 376-140 of the Code of
the Town of Ramapo shall have the power, right and authority to issue an
appearance ticket as the same is defined in Article 150 of the Criminal
Procedure Law of the State of New York for the violation of any section or
provision of this chapter.
§ 173-10. Penalties for offenses.
shall be filled or refilled except over a drop cloth or other device
designed to catch and retain any accidental spillage.
A. The Town Board may, following a hearing before such Town Board,
revoke the permit or permits granted to any person, firm or corporation
under the authority of this chapter or any law, ordinance, rule or
regulation relating to landscaping. [Amended 2-6-2012 by L.L. No.
2-2012]
B. In addition to any other penalties that may be invoked under this
chapter, any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions
of this chapter shall be guilty of a Class 4 violation as defined in Chapter
1, § 1-15 et seq., of the Revised Code of the Town of Ramapo and shall
be punished according to the provisions thereunder. In the case of
continuing violation of this chapter, each week that such violation exists
shall constitute a separate and distinct Class 4 violation. [Amended
2-6-2012 by L.L. No. 2-2012]
C. In addition to the above-provided penalties and punishment, the Town
Board may also maintain an action in the name of the Town in any court
of competent jurisdiction to compel compliance with or to restrain by
injunction the violation of this chapter.
D. Any person who takes part in or assists in any violation of this chapter
shall also be subject to the penalties provided herein.
§ 173-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 173-10
1:155
Chapter 178
LITTERING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Property maintenance — See Ch. 204. Solid waste — See Ch. 235.
§ 178-1. Title.
This chapter shall be cited and may be referred to hereinafter as the
"Littering Law of the Town of Ramapo."
§ 178-2. Legislative intent.
It is the intention of the Town Board of the Town of Ramapo by the adoption
of this chapter to prevent the maintenance of any parcel of real property in
the unincorporated areas of the Town of Ramapo in a cluttered or unclean
condition which renders it aesthetically offensive or creates the potential
for a public nuisance or a public health hazard.
§ 178-3. Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meanings given herein. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and
words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
GARBAGE — Putrescible animal and vegetable wastes resulting from the
handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food.
LITTER — Garbage, refuse and rubbish, as defined herein, and all other
waste material which, if thrown or deposited as herein prohibited, tends to
create a danger to the public health, safety and welfare; this includes the
abandoning of vehicles or the stripping and junking of any vehicles.
PARK — A park, reservation, playground, beach, recreation center or any
other public area in the Town, owned or used by the Town and devoted to
active or passive recreation.
PERSON — Any individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company or organization of any kind.
PUBLIC PLACE — All publicly owned property, including any and all streets,
sidewalks, highways, basements, boulevards, alleys or other public ways;
any and all public parks, squares, spaces, grounds, buildings and school
property; posts, hydrants, trees, street lamps, utility poles and traffic signs;
and anything affixed thereto and thereover.
§ 173-10 RAMAPO CODE § 178-3
1:156
REFUSE — All putrescible and nonputrescible solid wastes (except body
wastes), including garbage, rubbish, ashes, street cleanings, dead animals,
abandoned automobiles, automobile parts and solid market and industrial
wastes.
RUBBISH — Nonputrescible solid wastes consisting of both combustible
and noncombustible wastes, such as paper, wrappings, cigarettes,
cardboard, tin cans, yard clippings, wood, glass, bedding, crockery and
similar materials.
TOWN — The Town of Ramapo.
§ 178-4. Littering prohibited.
No person shall throw, deposit or place or permit to be deposited or
scattered in or upon any street, lot, sidewalk or other public place, or upon
any private property within the Town, any litter or other material of any
kind, except in public or private receptacles for collection or in official Town
dumps.
§ 178-5. Placement in receptacles.
Persons placing litter in public or private receptacles shall do so in such a
manner as to prevent it from being carried or deposited by the elements
upon any street, lot, sidewalk or other public place or upon any private
property.
§ 178-6. Premises to be maintained free of litter; storage of motor
vehicle parts.
§ 178-7. Sweeping litter into public places prohibited; sidewalks to
be kept free of litter.
No person shall sweep into or deposit in any gutter, street or other public
place within the Town the accumulation of litter from any building or lot
or from any public or private sidewalk or driveway. Persons owning or
occupying property or places of business shall keep the sidewalk in front of
their premises free of litter.
A. The owner or person in control of any private property shall, at all
times, maintain the premises free of litter; provided, however, that this
section shall not prohibit the storage of litter in private receptacles for
collection.
B. All gas stations, service stations, auto repair shops and stores engaged
in the sale of auto parts and/or the repair of motor vehicles shall
construct a durable container, shed or solidly fenced-in area for the
storage of all miscellaneous motor vehicle parts, such as tires, mufflers,
batteries, etc., such list not being all inclusive. No storage outside these
areas shall be permitted. The container and its location must be
approved by the Building Inspector or his representative and be at least
six feet in height and its contents not visible from the street.
§ 178-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 178-8
1:157
§ 178-8. Littering on park property prohibited.
No person shall throw, deposit or place or permit to be deposited or
scattered in or upon any park property or upon any pond, lake, stream or
other body of water in a park or elsewhere within the Town any litter or
other material of any kind. All such material is to be deposited in public
receptacles, where available, and where receptacles are not available, litter
is to be removed from the park by the person responsible for its presence
and properly disposed of elsewhere. All litter or other such material shall be
placed in receptacles in such a manner as to prevent it from being carried
or deposited by the elements upon any part of the park or upon any street
or other public place.
§ 178-9. Notice of violation.
The enforcement official as designated in Chapter 376, Zoning, § 376-140 of
the Code of the Town of Ramapo shall have the power, right and authority
to serve a notice of violation upon the owner or the agent thereof of any
property which is determined to be in violation of this chapter. Such notice
shall be served personally or by certified mail, return receipt requested,
upon the last known owner of said property, as shown on the last complete
tax assessment roll of the Town. The notice shall give such owner 10 days
after service of the notice to correct such violation, during which time the
owner shall properly remove or cause to be removed such litter or other
material from said property.
§ 178-10. Failure to comply with notice.
A. In the event that all such litter or other material shall not be removed
within the time specified in the notice to remove, the Town Board shall
hold a hearing, upon five days' public notice, to determine whether the
continued deposit of such materials is aesthetically offensive or
constitutes a public nuisance or a public health hazard. Notice of such
hearing shall be given to the owner of the property in the manner
specified in § 178-9 hereinabove at least five days prior to such hearing.
B. If after such hearing the Town Board deems the continued deposit of
such materials to be aesthetically offensive or to constitute a public
nuisance or a public health hazard, it shall give notice of such findings
by certified mail addressed to the owner of record of such property at
the address shown on the last complete tax assessment roll. Such notice
shall further state that if at least 10 days elapse from the service
thereof and the violation has not been fully corrected, the Town Board
will cause the violation to be corrected, and that the entire expense of
such correction shall be assessed against such property.
C. If a period of at least 10 days elapses from the service of the notice
required by § 178-10B hereinabove and the violation has not been fully
corrected, the Town Board shall proceed to take whatever action is
necessary to cause the litter or other material to be removed from such
property. The total expense of such removal shall be assessed against
§ 178-8 RAMAPO CODE § 178-10
1:158
§ 178-11. Enforcement. [Amended 1-14-1987 by L.L. No. 1-1987]
The Police Department of the Town of Ramapo and/or the enforcement
official as designated in Chapter 376, Zoning, § 376-140 of the Code of
the Town of Ramapo shall have the power, right and authority to issue an
appearance ticket, as the same is defined in Article 150 of the Criminal
Procedure Law of the State of New York, for the violation of any section of
this chapter.
§ 178-12. Penalties for offenses.
such property by the Town Board in the manner provided in § 178-10D
hereinbelow.
D. The Town Board shall serve personally or by certified mail upon the
owner of record of such property at the address shown on the last
complete tax assessment roll a written notice stating that, at a time and
place specified therein, it will assess the expense of such removal
against such property. Such notice shall be served at least eight days
previous to the time specified therein. If directed against a corporation,
it may be served upon the corporation at its principal place of business,
upon an agent of the corporation within the Town or upon the Secretary
of State. Notice served upon the Secretary of State shall be served at
least 12 days previous to the time specified therein. At the time and
place so specified, the Town Board shall hear the parties interested and
shall thereupon finally determine the assessment, stating therein the
name of each owner and the amount so assessed. The amount so
assessed shall constitute a lien on the real property on which it is levied
until paid or otherwise canceled pursuant to law and shall be collected
in the manner fixed by law for the collection of Town taxes.
A. Any person who shall refuse or neglect to comply with the conditions of
any notice as provided for by this chapter shall be guilty of a violation of
this chapter. In addition to any other penalty or remedy herein
provided, each and every violation of this chapter shall be deemed a
Class 4 violation, as defined in Chapter 1, § 1-15 et seq., of the Revised
Code of the Town of Ramapo and shall be punished according to the
provisions thereunder. [Amended 2-6-2012 by L.L. No. 2-2012]
B. In the case of continuing violation of this chapter, each week that such
violation exists shall constitute a separate and distinct Class 4 violation.
[Amended 2-6-2012 by L.L. No. 2-2012]
C. In addition to all other remedies provided for herein, the Town Board
may also enforce obedience to this chapter by injunction or by any other
remedy available to it by virtue of the judicial process.
§ 178-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 178-12
1:159
Chapter 188
NOISE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alarm systems — See Ch. 86.
Animals — See Ch. 93.
Blasting and explosives — See Ch. 104.
Landscapers — See Ch. 173.
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 199.
§ 188-1. Title.
This chapter shall be cited and may be referred to hereinafter as the "Noise
Pollution Control Law of the Town of Ramapo."
§ 188-2. Legislative intent.
It is the intention of the Town Board of the Town of Ramapo by the adoption
of this chapter to establish and impose restrictions upon the creation of
excessive, unnecessary or unusually loud noise within the limits of the Town
of Ramapo in pursuance of and for the purpose of securing and promoting
the public health, comfort, convenience, safety, welfare, prosperity and the
peace and quiet of the Town of Ramapo and its inhabitants.
§ 188-3. Definitions.
A. All terminology defined herein which relates to the nature of sound and
the mechanical detection and recordation of sound is in conformance
with the terminology of the American National Standards Institute or its
successor body.
B. As used in this chapter, unless the context otherwise clearly indicates,
the words and phrases used in this chapter are defined as follows:
A-WEIGHTED SOUND LEVEL [DB(A)] — The sound pressure level in
decibels as measured on a sound meter using the A-weighting network
slow response. The level so read is designated dB(A).
COMMERCIAL DISTRICT — An area where offices, clinics and the
facilities needed to serve them are located; an area with local shopping
and service establishments; a tourist-oriented area where hotels,
motels and gasoline stations are located; a business strip along a main
street containing offices, retail businesses and commercial enterprises;
and other commercial enterprises and activities which do not involve
the manufacturing, processing or fabrication of any commodity.
"Commercial district" shall include but shall not be limited to any parcel
of land zoned commercial under Chapter 376, Zoning, of this Code.
COMMERCIAL PURPOSE — Includes the use, operation or
maintenance of any sound-amplifying equipment for the purpose of
§ 178-12 RAMAPO CODE § 188-3
1:160
advertising any business, any goods or any services or for the purpose
of attracting the attention of the public to or advertising for or soliciting
the patronage of customers to or for any performance, show,
entertainment, exhibition or event or for the purpose of demonstrating
any such sound equipment.
CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITIES — Any and all activity incidental to the
erection, demolition, assembling, altering, installing or equipping of
buildings, structures, roads or appurtenances thereto, including land
clearing, grading, excavating and filling.
CONTINUOUS NOISE — A steady, fluctuating or impulsive noise which
exists, essentially without interruption, for a period of 10 minutes or
more, with an accumulation of an hour or more over a period of eight
hours.
DECIBEL (DB) — A unit of level which denotes the ratio between two
quantities which are proportional to power. The number of decibels
corresponding to the ratio of two amounts of power is 10 times the
logarithm to the base 10 of this ratio.
DEVICE — Any mechanism which is intended to produce or which
actually produces sound when operated or handled.
EMERGENCY — Any occurrence or set of circumstances involving
actual or imminent physical trauma or property damage which
demands immediate action.
EMERGENCY WORK — Any work performed for the purpose of
preventing or alleviating the physical trauma or property damage
threatened or caused by an emergency.
FLUCTUATING NOISE — The sound pressure level of a fluctuating
noise which varies more than six dB(A) during the period of observation
when measured with the slow meter characteristic of a sound-level
meter.
IMPULSIVE SOUND — A sound of short duration, usually less than
one second, with an abrupt onset and rapid decay. Examples of sources
of impulsive sound include explosions, drop forge impacts and the
discharge of firearms.
INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT — An area in which enterprises and activities
which involve the manufacturing, processing or fabrication of any
commodity are located. "Industrial district" shall include but shall not
be limited to any parcel of land zoned as an industrial district under
Chapter 376, Zoning, of this Code.
MOTOR VEHICLE — Any vehicle, such as but not limited to a passenger
vehicle, truck, truck-trailer, trailer or semitrailer, propelled or drawn
by mechanical power, and shall include motorcycles, snowmobiles,
minibikes, go-carts and any other vehicle which is self-propelled.
§ 188-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 188-3
1:161
NOISE — Any sound which annoys or disturbs humans or which causes
or tends to cause an adverse psychological or physiological effect on
humans.
NOISE DISTURBANCE — Any sound which endangers or injures the
safety or health of humans or animals or annoys or disturbs a
reasonable person of normal sensitivities or endangers or injures
personal or real property.
NOISE SENSITIVE ZONE — Any area designated pursuant to this
chapter for the purpose of ensuring exceptional quiet.
NONCOMMERCIAL PURPOSE — The use, operation or maintenance
of any sound equipment for other than a commercial purpose.
"Noncommercial purpose" shall mean and include but shall not be
limited to philanthropic, political, patriotic and charitable purposes.
PERSON — Any individual, association, partnership or corporation,
including any officer, employee, department, agency or instrumentality
of the state or any political subdivision of a state.
REAL PROPERTY BOUNDARY — A line along the ground surface, and
its vertical extension, which separates the real property owned by
one person from that owned by another person, but not including
intrabuilding real property divisions.
RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT — An area of single- or multiple-family
dwellings and shall include areas where multiple-unit dwellings, highrise
apartments and high-density residential districts are located.
"Residential district" shall also include but is not limited to hospitals,
nursing homes, homes for the aged, schools, courts and similar
institutional facilities.
SOUND — An oscillation in pressure, particle displacement, particle
velocity or other physical parameter in a medium with internal forces
that causes compression and rarefaction of that medium. The
description of "sound" may include any characteristics of such sound,
including duration, intensity and frequency.
SOUND-LEVEL METER — An instrument, including a microphone, an
amplifier, an output meter and frequency weighting networks for the
measure of sound levels.
SOUND REPRODUCTION DEVICE — Any device that is designed to be
used or is actually used for the production or reproduction of sound,
including but not limited to any musical instrument, radio, television,
tape recorder, phonograph, loudspeaker, public address system or any
other sound-amplifying device.
UNREASONABLE NOISE — Any excessive or unusually loud sound
or any sound which either annoys, disturbs, injures or endangers the
comfort, repose, health, peace or safety of a reasonable person of
normal sensitivities or which causes injury to animal life or damage
to property or business. Standards to be considered in determining
§ 188-3 RAMAPO CODE § 188-3
1:162
§ 188-4. Prohibited acts.
No person shall make, continue or cause or suffer to be made or continued
any unreasonable noise as defined in § 188-3B hereof. In particular, without
limitation of the foregoing provision of this section, the following
enumerated acts are declared to be in violation of this section:
whether an "unreasonable noise" exists in a given situation include but
are not limited to the following:
(1) The volume of the noise.
(2) The intensity of the noise.
(3) Whether the nature of the noise is usual or unusual.
(4) Whether the origin of the noise is usual or unusual.
(5) The volume and intensity of the background noise, if any.
(6) The proximity of the noise to residential sleeping facilities.
The nature and the zoning district of the areas within which the
noise emanates.
(7)
(8) The time of the day or night the noise occurs.
(9) The time duration of the noise.
(10)Whether the sound source is temporary.
(11)Whether the noise is continuous or impulsive.
A. Animals. No person shall keep, permit or maintain any animal under his
control which frequently or for continued duration makes sounds which
create an unreasonable noise across a residential real property
boundary. This provision shall not apply to veterinarian facilities.
B. Commercial, business and industrial operation. No person shall operate
or permit to be operated on a sound source site a commercial business
or industrial operation that produces an unreasonable sound level.
C. Construction.
(1) No person shall operate or permit to be operated any tools,
machinery or equipment used in construction, drilling or
demolition work:
(a) Between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. the following
day or any time on legal holidays, such that the sound
therefrom creates an unreasonable noise across a residential
real property boundary. [Amended 2-6-2012 by L.L. No.
2-2012; 3-21-2013 by L.L. No. 1-2013]
§ 188-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 188-4
1:163
(b) At any other time such that the sound level at or across a real
property boundary exceeds an L10 of 60 for the daily period of
operation.
(2) The provisions of this subsection shall not apply to emergency
work.
D. Domestic power tools. No person shall operate or permit the operation
of any mechanically powered saw, sander, drill, grinder, lawn or garden
tool, snowblower or similar device used outdoors in residential areas
between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. of the following day, so
as to cause an unreasonable noise across a residential real property
boundary.
E. Explosives, firearms and similar devices. No person shall use or fire
explosives, firearms or similar devices which create impulsive sounds
so as to cause an unreasonable noise across a real property boundary.
F. Horns and signaling devices. No person shall cause or permit to be
caused the sounding of any horn or other auditory signaling device on
or in any motor vehicle except to serve as a danger warning.
G. Motor vehicle repairs and testing. No person shall repair, rebuild,
modify or test any motor vehicle in such a manner as to cause an
unreasonable noise across a residential real property boundary or
within a noise sensitive zone.
H. Mufflers. No person shall discharge into the open air the exhaust of any
steam engine, stationary internal-combustion engine, air-compressor
equipment, motor vehicle or other power device which is not equipped
with an adequate muffler in constant operation and properly
maintained to prevent any unreasonable noise or noise disturbance,
and no such muffler or exhaust system shall be modified or used with a
cutoff, bypass or similar device which causes said engines, vehicles or
other power devices to create an unreasonable noise.
I. Noise sensitive zones. No person shall cause or permit the creation of
any sound by means of any device or otherwise on any sidewalk, street
or public place adjacent to any hospital, nursing home, school, court,
house of worship or public library while such facility is in use at any
time, so that such sound disrupts the normal activities conducted at
such facilities or disturbs or annoys persons making use of such
facilities.
J. Sound reproduction devices.
(1) No person shall operate or cause to be operated a sound
reproduction device that produces an unreasonable noise or noise
disturbance across a real property boundary between the hours of
11:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. the following day or within a noise
sensitive zone.
§ 188-4 RAMAPO CODE § 188-4
1:164
§ 188-5. Exceptions.
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to:
§ 188-6. Variances.
(2) No person shall operate or use or cause to be operated or used any
sound reproduction device in any public place in such a manner
that the sound emanating therefrom creates an unreasonable noise
across a real property boundary.
(3) This section shall not apply to any person participating in a school
band or in a parade or sounds emanating from sporting,
entertainment or other public events where such devices are used.
K. Trucks. No person shall load any garbage or trash on a compactor
truck, or any other truck, whereby the loading, unloading or handling of
boxes, crates, equipment or other objects is conducted within a
residential district nor within 300 feet of any hotel or motel between the
hours of 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. the following day. [Amended
11-28-1984 by L.L. No. 15-1984]
A. The emission of sound for the purpose of alerting persons to the
existence of an emergency.
B. The emission of sound in the performance of emergency work.
A. The Town Board of the Town of Ramapo shall have the authority,
consistent with this section, to grant variances to this chapter.
B. Any person seeking a variance pursuant to this section shall file an
application with the Town Board. The application shall consist of a
letter signed by the applicant and containing a legal form of
verification. Such letter shall contain information which demonstrates
that bringing the source of sound or activity for which the variance is
sought into compliance with this chapter would constitute an
unreasonable hardship on the applicant, on the community or on other
persons. In addition, the following information shall be provided:
(1) The plan, specifications and other information pertinent to such
sources.
(2) The characteristics of the sound emitted by the source, including
but not limited to the sound levels, the presence of impulsive
sounds and the hours during which such sound is generated.
(3) The noise abatement and control methods used to restrict the
emission of sound.
C. The Town Board, upon receipt of such application and upon payment of
any fee which shall be required by resolution of the Town Board, shall
set the matter down for a public hearing to be held within 30 days from
the date the application is submitted. The Town Board shall cause
§ 188-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 188-6
1:165
§ 188-7. Enforcement.
The enforcement of these rules and regulations will be by properly
identified Police Department personnel, other duly authorized personnel or
by any other special personnel as may be from time to time authorized by
the Town Board.
§ 188-8. Penalties for offenses.
Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this chapter shall
be guilty of a Class 2 violation, as defined in Chapter 1, § 1-15 et seq., of
the Revised Code of the Town of Ramapo and shall be fined according to
the provisions thereunder. A separate offense shall be deemed committed
on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues.
Chapter 195
PARKS AND RECREATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alcoholic beverages — See Ch. 89.
Animals — See Ch. 93.
Littering — See Ch. 178.
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 199.
Streams and watercourses — See Ch. 240.
Trees — See Ch. 258.
publication of such public hearing to be given in the official newspaper
of the Town. The applicant shall give notice of the application by
certified mail to all property owners surrounding the sound source site
within a radius of 200 feet from the borders of said site.
D. In determining whether to grant or deny the application, the Town
Board shall balance the hardship to the applicant, the community and
other persons of not granting the variance against the adverse impact
on the health, safety and welfare of persons affected, the adverse
impact on the property affected and other adverse impacts of granting
the special variance.
E. The Town Board shall cause the taking of sound level readings by an
agency to be designated by the Town Board in the event that there shall
be any dispute as to the sound levels prevailing or to prevail at the
sound source site.
F. The Town Board shall have the power to impose restrictions, conditions
and the recording of covenants upon any sound source site, including
time limits on permitted activity, in the event that it shall grant any
variance hereunder.
§ 188-6 RAMAPO CODE § 188-8
1:166
ARTICLE I
Administration
§ 195-1. Title.
This chapter shall be cited and may be referred to hereinafter as the
"Department of Parks and Recreation Law of the Town of Ramapo."
§ 195-2. Legislative intent.
The Town Board of the Town of Ramapo concurs with the recommendations
of the Government Operations Committee Report, dated August 1967, in
relation to the formation of a Department of Parks and Recreation. The
Committee's findings stated: "Various municipal government experts
consider the single department head a better form of administering Town
recreation and parks programs in order to administer and make decisions
with dispatch, better coordinate with all other Town agencies and be
directly responsible to the elected Town executive and, therefore, to all of
the community." The Committee recommended that a Department of Parks
and Recreation should be created with a single department head assisted
by a board to advise him on overall long-term planning.
§ 195-3. Department of Parks and Recreation created.
The Department of Parks and Recreation be and hereby is created as a
separate department of Town government of the Town of Ramapo, Rockland
County, New York.
§ 195-4. Appointment of Director.
A. The executive head of the Department shall be called the "Director of
Parks and Recreation," who shall be appointed by the Town Board of the
Town of Ramapo for a term of office which shall run from the date of his
appointment until the first day of January 1971, and thereafter for
terms of six years or until his successor has qualified. The Director,
during his term, shall be removed for cause only after a proceeding
brought upon charges. The office of the Director shall be in the
unclassified civil service. The qualification for the office of the Director
shall be a minimum of Bachelor of Science degree in recreation and/or
park administration programs and five years' experience, or a master's
degree in recreation and/or park administration plus three years of
experience.
B. All personnel employed in the Department shall be employed in
accordance with civil service laws and rules.
C. The salary of the Director shall be fixed by the Town Board in the annual
budget of the Town.
§ 195-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-5
1:167
§ 195-5. Duties of Director.
The Director of Parks and Recreation shall be responsible to the Supervisor
as the chief executive officer of the Town pursuant to the Suburban Town
Law and shall have the following duties. He shall:
§ 195-6. Maintenance of parks and recreation areas.
All parks and recreation areas owned or leased by the Town of Ramapo shall
be maintained by the Department of Parks and Recreation.
A. Exercise those powers and duties necessary for the general supervision
of the Department of Parks and Recreation.
B. Plan, organize, direct and review administrative procedures necessary
to the operation of the Department of Parks and Recreation.
C. Supervise and review the work of the departmental subordinates and
report periodically to the Supervisor concerning the operation,
financial condition and future needs of his Department and further
recommend to the Supervisor requests for employment of such play
leaders, playground directors, supervisors, clerical or secretarial help
or such other officers and/or employees as he deems necessary for the
proper operation of the Department of Parks and Recreation.
D. Coordinate with the appropriate Town agencies or departments for the
planning, establishment and improvement of new and existing park and
recreation sites.
E. Coordinate with the Purchasing Agent of the Town of Ramapo with
regard to specifications for playground and recreational equipment,
supplies, furnishings and all other items necessary for the operation of
the Department of Parks and Recreation.
F. Organize and conduct a Town-wide recreational program for all age
groups, as approved by the Town Board.
G. Prepare rules and regulations, including fees and charges, governing
the conduct of persons and use of all Town park and recreational areas
and facilities, which rules and regulations shall not become effective
until approved by the Town Board.
H. Perform such other duties as may be assigned by the Supervisor, the
Town Board or other local ordinances or local laws.
I. Subject to appropriations made for the Department by the Town Board
and to all applicable provisions of law relating thereto, the Director
shall have power and authority to appoint and remove all employees of
the Department subject to the approval of the Town Board.
§ 195-5 RAMAPO CODE § 195-7
1:168
§ 195-7. Department of Parks and Recreation Advisory Board.
[Amended 6-14-1995 by L.L. No. 7-1995; 3-10-1999 by L.L. No.
4-1999]
The Town Board of the Town of Ramapo shall appoint a twelve-member
Department of Parks and Recreation Advisory Board. Such members shall
be residents of the Town of Ramapo. The members of such Advisory Board
first appointed shall be appointed for such terms that the term of at least
four Board members shall expire annually thereafter, and their successors
shall thereafter be appointed to serve a term of three years. The Town
Board shall designate annually from the membership of the Advisory Board
the Chairman thereof. The Town Board may provide for reimbursement
for such expenses which may be reasonable, necessary and proper. The
Department of Parks and Recreation Advisory Board shall adopt such rules
and regulations as are necessary to arrange for the time of its meetings and
conduct of its business. Failure of any member to comply with the rules and
regulations may result in removal from his/her position by the Town Board.
The Director of Parks and Recreation shall be an ex officio member of the
Board and shall be responsible to see that full and complete minutes of
the meetings are kept and distributed to the members thereof. In addition,
the Board shall have three additional nonvoting members as follows: one
senior citizen representative and two student representatives, each one
representing a school district. The Town Board shall fill all vacancies caused
by expiration, resignation, removal or otherwise.
§ 195-8. Duties of Board.
It shall be the duty of the Parks and Recreation Advisory Board to
recommend to the Director of Parks and Recreation for submission to the
Town Board with respect to the following:
§ 195-9. Lost and found objects.
Lost articles or money which is found in Town parks and recreation areas
shall be turned over to the park personnel or the Town police. A record will
be kept of the receipt and disposition of such articles. If the lawful owner
of any article or money does not claim the same, said property shall be
A. All matters relating to planning, policy formation, programming,
legislation and use of park and recreation facilities and areas.
B. Acquisition of lands for park and recreation purposes, including
coordination with other Town boards, agencies and officials.
C. Such recommendations as, in the opinion of the Board, will improve the
effectiveness of the parks and recreation programs or facilities,
including annual budgetary recommendations.
D. Such other duties as may be assigned by the Director of Parks and
Recreation, Supervisor and/or Town Board.
§ 195-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-9
1:169
disposed of in accordance with the Abandoned Property Law of the State of
New York.
§ 195-9 RAMAPO CODE § 195-9
1:170
ARTICLE II
Rules and Regulations
§ 195-10. Establishment of rules and regulations.
A. Establishment.
(1) The rules and regulations established in Article II of this chapter
shall apply to all facilities and public land and open space owned,
operated or managed by the Department of Parks and Recreation of
the Town of Ramapo. This includes scenic and conservation
easements, drainageways, stream beds and banks protected from
development and open to the public and all other space impressed
with a public use or purpose, except easements in the DEACOM
program. The term "park" when used herein refers to all the
aforesaid properties owned, operated or administered by the
Department of Parks and Recreation.
(2) These rules and regulations are supplemental to and not in place of
this chapter or state laws governing open spaces and places of
assembly.
(3) The policy objectives of the rules and regulations are:
(a) As to active use areas and facilities, to encourage their use to
the optimum degree on a first-come, first-served basis. Where
necessary to ensure availability to the greatest possible
number of people, limits on the amount of time any one person
or group may use the facility may be established by the
Department through the posting on the premises of the rules
applicable to the facility involved.
(b) As to passive use areas and facilities, to encourage their use
for the purposes intended and to discourage or prohibit
incompatible activities.
(c) To utilize open space and scenic areas so as to preserve
aesthetic beauty and protect and preserve natural flora and
fauna.
(d) To govern the conduct of the persons using facilities with
regard to each other and the facility itself.
B. Enforcement. The enforcement of these rules and regulations will be by
the Police Department of the Town of Ramapo, by any other peace
officers having jurisdiction and by such special personnel as may from
time to time be authorized by the Town Board of the Town of Ramapo.
C. Amendments to rules and regulations. The provisions of Article II of this
chapter may be established or amended by resolution of the Town
Board.
§ 195-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-10
1:171
§ 195-11. Use of facilities.
Equipment and facilities designed for obvious and common usage shall be
put to such commonly intended use and none other. Benches are for sitting
and resting, tables are for eating or game playing, tennis courts for tennis,
golf courses for golf, etc. Nonintended uses are prohibited if they may
occasion damage or excessive wear or inhibit others from using the facility
as intended. Violation of this rule constitutes a Class 1 violation as set forth
in Chapter 1, Article II.
§ 195-12. Permits required.
D. Violations. Violations of the rules and regulations hereinafter set forth
shall be as determined in said rule or regulation and as set forth and
defined in Chapter 1, Article II, of this Revised Code.
A. General provisions.
(1) Permits issued by the Department of Parks and Recreation shall be
utilized where orderly use or the collection of a user fee, or both,
shall require.
(2) Groups requesting issuance of a permit may be required to provide
proof of sufficient liability insurance coverage and, at the request
of the Town Attorney, may also be required to indemnify the Town
of Ramapo against any claims, damages and liabilities arising out of
their use of Town facilities. [Amended 2-6-2012 by L.L. No.
2-2012]
(3) Fees will be charged in accordance with a schedule of fees adopted
by the Town Board from time to time.
(4) Permits for group or team usages will be issued to a responsible
official or representative of the team or group. The permittee will
be held responsible for the conduct of the group. Users must leave
facilities in as good a condition of repair and cleanliness as found.
(5) Permits are nontransferable and good for the date and hour
specified only. Refunds will not be made for unused permits on or
after the date specified for use if loss of a period of use by others
will occur.
(6) If deposits are required, they will be returned only after inspection
of the facility by Parks and Recreation Department personnel.
(7) Regardless of previous patterns of usage, official Department of
Parks and Recreation or Town of Ramapo functions will have
priority of use. [Amended 2-6-2012 by L.L. No. 2-2012]
(8) The foregoing rules and regulations apply to all activities where a
permit is required.
§ 195-10 RAMAPO CODE § 195-12
1:172
B. Camping. No person shall tent or camp or erect or maintain a tent,
shelter or camp in any park except by permit and not otherwise than in
accordance with the terms of the permit.
C. Fires. No person shall kindle, build, maintain or in any way use a fire
except in fireplaces provided or in self-supporting barbecue grills or
stoves in places designated as picnic areas, or by special permit. Any
fire shall be continually under the care and direction of a competent
person over 21 years of age, from the time it is kindled until it is
extinguished, but no fire shall be built within 10 feet of any tree or
building or beneath the branches of any tree or in any underbrush.
D. Use of lakes and waters. No person shall swim or bathe in any area
except where designated, nor boat, kayak, canoe or punt, except by
permit, nor ice skate, except in a designated area that has been posted
and approved for the same.
E. Powered models. Gasoline, alcohol or other fuel-powered model
aircraft, autos, boats, rockets or other small-scale vehicles are
prohibited from all parks except by permit or in areas and at times
specifically designated for the same.
F. Large group events. No permit shall be granted for a field day, carnival,
concert, address, rally, dramatic presentation or the like at which more
than 25 persons are in attendance (hereafter called "large group
events") unless written application for such large group event has been
filed with the office of the Director of Parks and Recreation at least two
weeks prior to the date on which such event is to occur.
Notwithstanding this time limitation, the Director of Parks and
Recreation may, at his discretion, grant permission, at the applicant's
request, to submit such written application less than two weeks prior to
a large group event. Whenever submitted, said written application shall
state the duration of the large group event for which a permit is sought
and the approximate number of persons expected to be in attendance.
Permits for large group events will be granted on the following
conditions: [Added 11-12-1986 by L.L. No. 8-1986; amended
2-6-2012 by L.L. No. 2-2012]
(1) Permits for large group events will be granted as conditions of park
usage and availability of park facilities warrant.
(2) Every large group event permit will designate the time and park
area at which the planned event is to be held and will state the
approximate number of participants in the event, together with
other conditions (if any) upon which the permit is granted.
Considerations relating to the size of the expected group and the
chances of unduly disturbing other park occupants will determine
whether sound amplification equipment may be used in connection
with the event and the maximum volume levels at which any such
equipment may be operated.
§ 195-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-12
1:173
§ 195-13. Hours.
The parks and park facilities shall be available for use, transit and
convenience of the public from dawn to dusk unless otherwise extended by
posting. Remaining in the park or any facility after dusk, or after the posted
hours, shall constitute a Class 3 violation as set forth in Chapter 1, Article
II.
§ 195-14. Motor vehicles.
(3) Each applicant for a large group event permit agrees that the
applicant and all persons involved in the presentation of the event
will observe the terms and conditions of the permit, when issued,
and will comply with requests of park officials concerning traffic,
arrangements, alcoholic beverages, noise, crowd control measures
and the use of park facilities.
G. Violations of Subsections B through F of this section shall constitute a
Class 3 violation as set forth in Chapter 1, Article II. [Amended
11-12-1986 by L.L. No. 8-1986]
A. Licensed vehicles, including light trucks and motor vehicles operated
by licensed drivers, may enter the parks only upon the hard-surfaced
vehicular roads leading to parking areas and may not leave the road
surface.
B. Parking shall be in designated parking areas only.
C. The speed limit on all park roads is 10 miles per hour. [Amended
2-6-2012 by L.L. No. 2-2012]
D. No driving with a licensed or unlicensed vehicle, including but not
limited to automobiles, motorcycles, minibikes and snowmobiles, shall
be permitted within the confines of any park except as a part of a
Department-sponsored activity.
E. No person shall operate or bring into any park or have in his possession
or control while within the park any power-driven off-the-road or allterrain
vehicle, whether on wheels, tracks, skis, sleds, air supported or
a combination of any of the foregoing, except as part of an approved
program or on an officially designated course and while going directly
to or from such program or course.
F. In addition to other applicable law, all motor vehicle operators shall
obey lawfully given traffic directions and signals by any authorized
Parks and Recreation Department personnel while within the confines
of any park.
G. Parking from dusk to dawn unless otherwise posted is prohibited.
H. Any unattended vehicle parked in a manner obstructing passage or
play, parked for an extended period in an unauthorized location or
§ 195-12 RAMAPO CODE § 195-14
1:174
§ 195-15. Picnicking.
Picnicking without fire may be done in any area not otherwise prohibited
where it will not interfere with other recreational activities. Violation of this
rule constitutes a Class 1 violation as set forth in Chapter 1, Article II.
§ 195-16. Hunting and fishing.
§ 195-17. Golf.
Golfing, golf practice and the hitting or driving of golf balls are prohibited in
all parks other than the Town golf course. Violation of this rule constitutes
a Class 1 violation as set forth in Chapter 1, Article II.
§ 195-18. Organized games.
No team games or any kind of organized athletics is permitted except in
areas provided for the same. Violation of this rule constitutes a Class 1
violation as set forth in Chapter 1, Article II.
§ 195-19. Pets and horses.
parked overnight may be removed and impounded in the discretion of
the responsible park official or the Town police and, if impounded or in
the process of being impounded, shall not be released until towing and
storage charges have been paid by the owner or operator.
I. Violations of Subsections A through H of this section shall constitute a
Class 3 violation as set forth in Chapter 1, Article II.
A. Sport fishing must conform to New York State law, and park lakes may
be closed to fishing when necessary in the opinion of the Director for
periods of up to 30 days and for longer periods by resolution of the
Town Board. Such restrictions must be posted at the affected waters.
B. No commercial fishing is allowed.
C. No trapping is allowed on land or water nor hunting of any kind.
D. The use of firearms, air rifles, air pistols, BB guns and slingshots is
prohibited from all parks. Bows and arrows may be used on designated
archery ranges only. No broad-head arrows may be brought into the
parks under any circumstances.
E. Violations of Subsections A through D of this section shall constitute a
Class 3 violation as set forth in Chapter 1, Article II.
A. Horses and other animals may not be ridden in the parks except on
designated bridle paths, nor shall they be allowed to browse or graze in
any park.
§ 195-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-19
1:175
§ 195-20. Rubbish, refuse and pollution. [Amended 1-9-1985 by L.L.
No. 1-1985]
§ 195-21. Good order generally.
§ 195-22. General regulations.
B. Dogs, cats and other household pets shall not be brought into the parks
unless on a leash of no more than six feet in length and under the
supervision and direct control of the owner. No such animals may be
allowed to run freely in the park, unless expressly permitted by, and
while under the direct supervision of, a designated Department of Parks
and Recreation staff member authorized to grant such permission.
[Amended 2-6-2012 by L.L. No. 2-2012]
C. No person shall allow any animal in his custody to discharge fecal
matter in any park, and, if the same does occur, he shall remove the
same immediately.
D. Violation of Subsections A through C of this section shall constitute a
Class 3 violation as set forth in Chapter 1, Article II.
A. No person shall do any of the following within a park: discharge
household refuse in litter receptacles; leave glass, cans or broken
crockery or any material with sharp projections in any place where it
creates a danger to others; discharge litter, garbage, glass, cans, oil,
dye, chemicals or other objects or substances into park lakes or waters;
or do any other act which would endanger or disturb the animal life
therein except by fishing where fishing is authorized.
B. Violation of Subsection A shall constitute a Class 3 violation as set forth
in Chapter 1, Article II.
A. All persons shall so comport themselves as to enjoy the facilities
without detracting or restricting the enjoyment by others also legally
entitled to be there. Rowdy and boisterous behavior is prohibited.
B. No person shall fail, neglect or refuse to comply with or obey the lawful
direction or command of any member of the Ramapo Police
Department, personnel of the Parks and Recreation Department or
other duly authorized personnel or fail, neglect or refuse to comply with
or obey any instruction, direction, regulation, warning or prohibition in
any park or other recreational facility.
C. No parents, guardians or custodians or any minor shall permit or allow
him or her, as the case may be, to do any act which would constitute a
violation of these rules and regulations.
D. Violations of Subsections A through C shall constitute a Class 3
violation as set forth in Chapter 1, Article II.
§ 195-19 RAMAPO CODE § 195-22
1:176
§ 195-23. Use of swimming pool.
A. Preservation of parks, property and wildlife. No person shall injure,
deface, disturb, befoul or in any manner destroy or cause to be
destroyed any part of any park or any facility building, sign, structure,
equipment, utility or other property found therein. No person shall dig
for, remove, injure or destroy any tree, flower, shrub, plant or growing
thing or any rock, mineral, artifact or other material within the
boundaries of any park. No person shall kill, trap, hunt, pursue or in any
manner disturb or cause to be disturbed any wild bird, snake or animal
within the boundaries of any park.
B. Alcoholic beverages. See Chapter 89, Alcoholic Beverages, § 89-1.
[Amended 7-13-1983 by L.L. No. 10-1983; 2-6-2012 by L.L. No.
2-2012]
C. Signs. No signs or advertising shall be posted within park limits other
than those erected by the Parks and Recreation Department or erected
with the written permission of the Town Board. Bulletin boards are
exclusively for official park business, unless otherwise designated.
Items not related to the park or recreational programs shall not be
placed on the bulletin board. [Amended 2-6-2012 by L.L. No.
2-2012]
D. Peddling, sales, photographs, etc. No person shall in any park or in any
street contiguous to or running through a park exhibit, sell or offer for
sale, hire, lease or let out any object or merchandise, tickets for
entertainment or other affairs of any description, nor take moving
pictures or photographs for advertising, commercial or publicity
purposes within the limits of any park, or perform any personal service
for hire in any park, except under a permit in accordance with the terms
of such permit. Possession of objects or merchandise in quantities,
packages or containers customarily associated with peddling shall be
deemed to be prima facie evidence of exhibiting or offering for sale.
E. Violations. Violations of Subsections A through D of shall constitute a
Class 3 violation as set forth in Chapter 1, Article II.
A. Children under the age of 10 must be accompanied by an adult or
responsible child over the age of 10 to use the pool. [Amended
2-6-2012 by L.L. No. 2-2012]
B. All swimmers shall take a soap and water shower just before entering
the pool area.
C. Persons having skin lesions, inflamed eyes, mouth, nose or ear
discharges or having any type of bandage shall not be permitted to use
either pool.
D. Only persons dressed in bathing attire or comparable shall be
permitted in the pool. [Amended 2-6-2012 by L.L. No. 2-2012]
§ 195-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-23
1:177
§ 195-24. Use of tennis courts.
E. The Town of Ramapo is not liable for lost or stolen items.
F. Food and beverages are restricted to the concession and grassy areas.
[Amended 2-6-2012 by L.L. No. 2-2012]
G. Smoking is not permitted within the confines of the perimeter fences
surrounding all pools. [Amended 2-6-2012 by L.L. No. 2-2012]
H. Personal chairs and blankets are restricted to lawn areas and deck
areas at least 20 feet from the pool edge. [Amended 2-6-2012 by L.L.
No. 2-2012]
I. Personal belongings must be removed from the pool area at the end of
each swimming day.
J. Chaise lounges and chairs provided by the Town of Ramapo are
provided by the Town of Ramapo primarily for the convenience of the
adults, who will receive priority for their usage. [Amended 2-6-2012
by L.L. No. 2-2012]
K. Ball playing, running, pushing, throwing others into the pool, use of
profanity or behavior causing annoyance is prohibited and will result in
suspensions.
L. Only one person at a time will be permitted on each diving board.
Divers must swim to designated areas. All diving from any location is at
the diver's own risk.
M. Use of swimming or diving gadgets, such as diving masks, snorkel
tubes, flippers, inflated supports, balls, etc., is not permitted.
N. The wading pool is designed for children seven years of age and under.
Parents or guardians will be responsible at all times for the supervision
of their children using this facility.
O. No animals are permitted in swimming or wading areas at any time.
This restriction notwithstanding, service animals, which provide
assistance to the disabled, shall be permitted within the confines of the
perimeter fences surrounding the swimming pools. [Amended
2-6-2012 by L.L. No. 2-2012]
P. Alcoholic beverages shall not be brought nor consumed in the pool area
or in any section of the surrounding park area.
Q. Violation of any portion of this section constitutes a Class 1 violation as
set forth in Chapter 1, Article II.
A. The tennis courts may not be used except by holders of valid tennis
court ID cards, their guests, and by non-ID card holders who purchase
tennis coupons from the Department of Parks and Recreation. Tennis
§ 195-23 RAMAPO CODE § 195-24
1:178
§ 195-25. Use of golf course.
coupons may be purchased only at the time of play. [Amended
2-6-2012 by L.L. No. 2-2012]
B. Each player must present his or her valid ID card upon request.
[Amended 2-6-2012 by L.L. No. 2-2012]
C. All play will be limited to a one-hour time period, and such period shall
be extended only if there are no reservations or other players waiting.
D. Only soft-soled tennis shoes or non-marking sneakers will be permitted
on the courts. Shirts should be worn at all times. [Amended 2-6-2012
by L.L. No. 2-2012]
E. Food, beverages and smoking are prohibited on the courts at all times.
F. Proper tennis etiquette (conduct) will be observed at all times, and the
courts are to be used for tennis only. [Amended 2-6-2012 by L.L. No.
2-2012]
G. Attendants on duty shall control play.
H. ID cards shall be obtained from the Department of Parks and
Recreation on such forms and shall contain such information as the
Director shall determine. The fees for said permits shall be established
by the Town Board by resolution and shall remain in force and effect
until amended by the Town Board.
I. Any violation of any portion of this section shall constitute a Class 1
violation as set forth in Chapter 1, Article II.
A. Ticket required. No person shall be entitled to play at Spook Rock Golf
Course or be on or about the course without having first registered and
been issued a cash register receipt to do so. Such receipt shall show
that the person using the course has paid the appropriate fees for such
use as delineated hereafter. A player must reregister and pay an
additional fee to play more than 18 holes of golf. A caddy shall be
permitted to accompany a person who has registered if said caddy has
reported to the cashier for permission. Not more than four caddies will
be permitted to accompany a foursome, provided that each caddy must
carry a golf bag. Said permission shall not be unreasonably withheld.
B. Use of ticket limited. Tickets, when issued, shall entitle the holder to
use the facilities of the course and to be on or about the course only on
the day when issued and is valid for no more than 18 holes of golf.
C. Resident ID cards. All residents of the Town of Ramapo shall be entitled
to purchase a resident ID card, to be issued to a person only upon proof
that said person is a resident of the Town of Ramapo, which shall be
valid for the year in which it is issued. Resident ID cards shall be
renewed annually at the fee set by the Town Board.
§ 195-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-25
1:179
D. Misuse of identification card. Any misuses of the ID card, including but
not limited to loaning, selling or renting it to another, shall subject the
owner thereof to revocation of the card, without privilege to renew, and
suspension of playing privileges. Any unauthorized user thereof shall be
subject to revocation or suspension of golfing privileges at the course.
E. Revocation.
(1) Any violation by a golfer of any of the terms or conditions of the
rules and regulations of this section shall be a Class 1 violation and
subject to the penalties set forth in § 1-17 of the Revised Code and
shall constitute grounds for revocation or suspension by the
Director of the Department of Parks and Recreation, in addition to
the penalties specifically set forth in the subsections of this section.
In the event of the revocation or suspension of any permit or ID
card issued hereunder, all moneys paid for or on account thereof
shall be forfeited to and be retained by the Town.
(2) Any golfer accused of a violation of these rules and regulations
shall be served written notice by certified mail of their alleged
violation. The Director of the Department of Parks and Recreation
shall set a date, time and place for a hearing not more than 14 days
nor less than 10 days from the date of mailing of the notice. The
decision shall be rendered in writing no more than two days after
the conclusion of the hearing. The decision of the Director of Parks
and Recreation may be appealed by said individual by serving a
written notice of intent to appeal the decision of the Director of
Parks and Recreation within 30 days thereafter, who shall forthwith
notify the Appeal Board. The hearing by the Appeal Board shall
take place within seven days from service of the notice of appeal on
the Director of Parks and Recreation. The Appeal Board must make
its decision within two days after conclusion of the hearing.
(3) The Appeal Board shall consist of 20 ID card holders. A quorum
shall consist of three members of the Appeal Board. All decisions
shall be by majority vote of those present and voting. In the event of
a tie vote, the decision of the Director of Parks and Recreation shall
be deemed affirmed.
(4) The members of the Board shall be picked by lot from all the ID
card holders. Forty names shall be chosen, and the first 20 ID card
holders who accept appointment to this Board shall serve on said
Appeal Board.
F. Ticket conditions. The provisions of all rules and regulations adopted
and promulgated shall become the terms and conditions of each ticket
issued hereunder.
(1) Each player must have at least five golf clubs and his own golf bag.
(2) Each player must start from the location to which he or she is
directed by the starter. [Amended 2-6-2012 by L.L. No. 2-2012]
§ 195-25 RAMAPO CODE § 195-25
1:180
(3) The starter will send players off in groups of at least four whenever
practicable.
(4) Any match holding up play must permit the group behind to play
through without waiting for such a request.
(5) Practicing is not permitted on the greens or any other portions of
the golf course except in designated areas.
(6) It is the responsibility of all players to repair ball marks on the
greens, to replace divots on tees and fairways, to smooth over
footprints or club marks in the sand traps and to otherwise
maintain the course in good playing condition.14
(7) Users of non-mechanized, hand golf carts, power golf carts and
riding carts must proceed in the direction indicated by signs. No
cart is permitted on the aprons of the tees or greens and areas
designated as ground under repair. Users must stay outside of the
white lines and roped off areas. [Amended 2-6-2012 by L.L. No.
2-2012]
(8) No food or beverage is permitted beyond the first or 10th tees.
(9) All players are required to wear shirts and acceptable golf shoes at
all times.
(10)No match may search for a lost ball for more than a total of five
minutes on each hole.
(11)No player may remove a ball other than his own from any pond or
lake.
(12)No player shall search for golf balls other than his own upon any of
the land or in any of the waters of the golf course. However, other
members of the same group may assist in the search for a ball in
play.
(13) Any match, after having been advised by a ranger, designated
employee of the Parks and Recreation Department or other duly
authorized personnel, all of whom shall be identified, that said
match is not keeping up with play and said match refuses to speed
up play shall be directed to leave the golf course and shall be
subject to all the penalties enumerated herein.
(14)No person shall sell or offer for sale any object or merchandise or
any other thing, except pursuant to a permit issued by the
Department of Parks and Recreation. Violation of this subsection
shall constitute a Class 3 violation as set forth in Chapter 1, Article
II.
14.Editor's Note: Original § 256-515F(7), which immediately followed this subsection and
contained the same wording as the third sentence in Subsection A, was repealed 2-6-2012
by L.L. No. 2-2012.
§ 195-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-25
1:181
(15)No person or vehicle shall be on or about the golf course unless the
person is a ticket-holding player or an officer or employee of the
Town or unless permission has been granted by the Department of
Parks and Recreation for another specific use of the course.
Violation of this subsection shall constitute a Class 3 violation as
set forth in Chapter 1, Article II.
(16)No person in the employ of the Department of Parks and
Recreation shall drive or operate any vehicle other than authorized
golf carts upon the grounds of the golf course. The term
"authorized golf carts" means those that are provided by and at the
golf course solely for use thereon but shall permit the use of hand
carts or battery-operated hand carts. Violation of this subsection
shall constitute a Class 3 violation as set forth in Chapter 1, Article
II. [Amended 2-6-2012 by L.L. No. 2-2012]
G. Protection of property.
(1) Injury to property, drives and equipment. No person shall injure,
deface, displace, remove, fill in, raise, destroy or carry away any
sod, stone, gravel, sand, clay or earth; or make any excavation of
any kind, name or nature; or injure, deface, displace, remove or
destroy any structure, building or any other property or equipment,
real or personal, owned by or under the jurisdiction of said Town or
appertaining to the creation, government, use or maintenance of
said golf course; or injure or in any way interfere with the operation
of any machine or instrument used in said course; or injure, deface,
displace, remove or destroy any sign, inscription, post or
monument erected or marked for any purpose. Any damage
resulting from a legitimate golf swing is excluded from these
provisions.
(2) Trees, shrubs and grass. No person shall destroy, cut, break,
deface, mutilate, injure, sever from the ground or remove any
plant, flower, shrub, tree or other growing thing. Any damage
resulting from a legitimate golf swing is excluded.
(3) Animals and fish. No person shall trap, hunt or fish upon any of the
lands or waters of the golf course.
(4) Pollution of waters. No person shall throw, cast or discharge into
any of the waters of the course any substance, matter or thing,
liquid or solid, which may result in the pollution of said waters.
(5) Refuse and rubbish matter. No person shall throw, cast or
discharge onto the grounds of the golf course any papers, paper
cups, coffee containers or other refuse matter.
(6) Violation of Subsection G(1) through (5) of this section shall
constitute a Class 3 violation as set forth in Chapter 1, Article II.
H. Conduct.
§ 195-25 RAMAPO CODE § 195-25
1:182
(1) Disorderly conduct. No person shall utter loud and offensive or
profane or indecent language; do any obscene or indecent act;
throw stones or other missiles; annoy, obstruct, molest or interfere
with any person; interfere with, encumber, obstruct or render
dangerous any drive, path, walk or public place; loiter or create a
disturbance while under the influence of intoxicating liquor; do any
act tending or amounting to a breach of the peace; enter or leave
except at established entranceways or exits; introduce, carry or fire
any firecrackers, torpedoes or fireworks; engage in, instigate, aid
or encourage an argument or fight; assault any person; cast, throw
or deposit on any walk, crossing, path, floor or surface any portion
of any fruit, vegetable, foodstuff, paper, pasteboard, litter or other
substances; cast, throw or deposit on the ice or in the streams,
brooks, ponds and waters any sticks or stones or pollute the
streams, brooks, ponds or waters; enter upon any portion of the
course in disregard of signs or posted notices forbidding the same;
or fail to obey or interfere with any properly identified course
employee in the proper performance of his duties. Violation of this
subsection shall constitute a Class 3 violation as set forth in
Chapter 1, Article II.
(2) All persons shall so comport themselves as to enjoy the facilities
without detracting or restricting the enjoyment by others also
legally entitled to be there. Rowdy and boisterous behavior may be
cause for expulsion from the facilities.
(3) No person shall fail, neglect or refuse to comply with or obey the
lawful direction of properly identified, designated employees of the
Department of Parks and Recreation or other duly authorized
personnel or fail, neglect or refuse to comply with or obey an
instruction, direction, rule or regulation, warning or prohibition
written, printed or displayed on the golf course.
(4) No parents, guardians or custodians of any minor shall permit or
allow him or her, as the case may be, to do any act which would
constitute a violation of these rules and regulations.
(5) Violation of Subsection H(2) through (4) of this section shall
constitute a Class 3 violation as set forth in Chapter 1, Article II.
I. Enforcement.
(1) The enforcement of these rules and regulations will be by properly
identified Department of Parks and Recreation personnel, other
duly authorized personnel and by any other special personnel as
may be from time to time authorized by the Director of Parks and
Recreation or the Town Board.
(2) Any player may report another player for a violation of the rules
and regulations by submitting a report in writing to the Director of
Parks and Recreation. In such event, a hearing will be held within
seven days by the Appeal Board.
§ 195-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-25
1:183
Chapter 199
PEDDLING AND SOLICITING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Noise — See Ch. 188. Parks and recreation — See Ch. 195.
§ 199-1. Title; applicability.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Peddler and Solicitor
Law" and shall apply to the unincorporated area of the Town of Ramapo.
§ 199-2. Legislative intent.
The attention of the Town Board of the Town of Ramapo has been directed
to abuses and unscrupulous and disruptive acts by persons engaging in
door-to-door soliciting and selling of goods, merchandise and wares; and the
imposition of unwarranted obligations and commitments upon the residents
of the Town by such itinerant persons engaging in abuse, violent conduct
and threats; and that many of the foregoing have resulted in complaints
to the police authorities of the Town of Ramapo because of the unruly
conduct or behavior, or exaggerated, unethical and spurious claims and
representations with respect to such goods, wares and merchandise; and
that such unsalutary conduct has violated the peace, good order and safety
and general welfare of the citizens of the Town, and it is, therefore, the
intent of the Town Board, by the enactment of this chapter, to minimize
and prevent the foregoing abuses and violations of the rights of the citizens
of the Town of Ramapo and to protect them and the general welfare as
hereafter more fully provided.
§ 199-3. License required. [Amended 4-24-1991 by L.L. No. 7-1991]
§ 199-4. Word usage and definitions.
A. No person shall engage in the business of selling or attempting to sell
or solicit orders for the sale of any property or any services on any
public street or public place.
B. The hawking, peddling and soliciting orders for the sale of any personal
property or any services within the Town of Ramapo without having
obtained a license therefor from the Clerk of the Town is prohibited.
Additional authorization may be required in areas under private
ownership.
A. The following terms, phrases and words and their derivations shall have
the meaning given herein, and, as required, the present tense shall
include the future, and words in the plural shall include the singular,
§ 195-25 RAMAPO CODE § 199-4
1:184
§ 199-5. Exceptions. [Amended 6-13-1984 by L.L. No. 6-1984;
4-24-1991 by L.L. No. 7-1991]
and vice versa. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely
directory.
B. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated: [Amended 4-24-1991 by L.L. No. 7-1991]
CHARITABLE — Includes the words patriotic, philanthropic, social
service, welfare, benevolent, educational, civic or fraternal, either
actual or purported.
CHIEF OF POLICE — The Chief of Police of the Town of Ramapo or a
representative authorized by the Chief of Police to perform the acts of
the Chief of Police in accordance with this chapter.
CONTRIBUTIONS — Includes the words alms, food, clothing, money,
subscription, property or donation under the guise of a loan of money
or property.
ESTABLISHED PLACE OF BUSINESS — A building or structure which
is operated as a regularly established place of business and from which
a person transacts business and deals in goods, wares or merchandise
or performs services or solicits orders for the same on a continuing and
ongoing basis.
HAWKING OR PEDDLING — Engaging in either:
PERSON — Any individual, firm, copartnership, corporation, company,
association or joint-stock association, church, religious sect, religious
denomination, society, organization or league and includes any trustee,
receiver, assignee, agent or other similar representative thereof.
RELIGIOUS AND RELIGION — As used herein shall not mean and
include the word "charitable" as herein defined, but shall be given their
commonly accepted definitions.
SOLICIT AND SOLICITATION — The request, directly or indirectly, of
money, credit, property, financial assistance or other thing of value on
the plea or representation that such money, credit, property, financial
assistance or other thing of value will be used for a charitable or
religious purpose as those purposes are defined in this chapter.
The business of selling or attempting to sell or soliciting orders for
the sale of any property or any services, by going from house to
house, place of business or any combination thereof; or
(1)
Soliciting contributions for any person, organization, entity or any
other purpose, by going from house to house, place of business or
any combination thereof.
(2)
A. This chapter shall not apply to:
(1) Any sale conducted pursuant to statute or by order of any court.
§ 199-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 199-5
1:185
§ 199-6. Application for license.
Every applicant for a license hereunder shall submit a verified written
application to the Town Clerk supplying the following information:
(2) An honorably discharged member of the armed forces of the United
States who has procured a license from the Rockland County Clerk,
as provided by the General Business Law of the State of New York.
[Amended 2-6-2012 by L.L. No. 2-2012]
(3) A wholesaler of articles to dealers or merchants engaged in selling
such articles.
(4) Merchants having an established place of business within the Town
and the employees of such merchants, and any person vending at
the express invitation of the customer or serving the latter on a
regular and established basis.
(5) A truck gardener or farmer who, himself or through his employees,
sells products of his own farm or garden.
(6) Dealers in milk, baked goods and heating oil, provided that they
have otherwise complied with any licensing and health and safety
requirements of any other competent governmental body or
agency.
(7) Persons peddling, soliciting or vending or collecting for the benefit
of any bona fide fraternal, educational, religious or charitable
organization; provided, however, that such organization shall have
otherwise been certified or otherwise been duly qualified as
required by law or by any competent governmental body or agency.
(8) Any person selling goods, wares, commodities or services regularly
to those who are his established customers, patrons or purchasers.
B. This chapter shall not apply to the sale of daily newspapers nor be
interpreted as intending to, nor shall it be construed to, unlawfully
interfere with the conduct of interstate commerce or impair the rights
of free speech, press or publication and shall be construed as
implementing and not as limiting the purposes and provisions of the
New York State Home Solicitation Sales Act.15
C. All persons and organizations soliciting funds solely for charitable or
other purposes who or which are exempted from the license
requirements under this chapter shall maintain and keep records
identifying all persons soliciting funds within the Town, and such
records shall contain at least the name and the address of the person
soliciting, the areas solicited and the date or dates of solicitation. Said
records shall be made available for inspection by the Chief of Police
upon request.
15.Editor's Note: See Personal Property Law § 425 et seq.
§ 199-5 RAMAPO CODE § 199-6
1:186
A. Name, permanent home address and local address, if any, of applicant.
B. A physical description of the applicant, setting forth:
(1) Date of birth.
(2) Height.
(3) Weight.
(4) Color of hair and eyes.
C. A detailed statement of the particular business, trade or occupation for
which the license is requested and a description of the goods, wares,
merchandise or commodities offered for sale.
D. The name and address of the person, firm or corporation, if any, he
represents; the names and addresses of all partners, if a partnership;
the names and addresses of the principal officers, if a corporation; and
the name and address of a person upon whom a legal process and
notice may be served.
E. Prior arrests and the disposition thereof, including the date and nature
of such arrest, and location of the court where such record or
disposition is on file.
F. The number and kind of motor vehicles to be used in carrying on the
business, and the registration, license and insurance data for each such
vehicle and operators thereof.
G. Three photographs, two by two inches in size, taken within 60 days
immediately prior to the date of filing of the application, showing
clearly the face and shoulders of the applicant. [Amended 6-13-1984
by L.L. No. 6-198416]
H. References as to the applicant's good character, such as at least two
residents of Rockland County, or municipalities in Rockland or
adjoining counties in which the applicant has conducted his business or
operations.
I. If peddling or soliciting is to be conducted as a team, group or other
organized party under single leadership or direction, control or
sponsorship, the above-required personal information shall also be
supplied as to such leader or person in charge and with respect to each
other person, employee or agent so involved.
J. If such applicant represents or is the agent for a principal, there shall
be appended to the application a letter or other evidence of
authorization or agency from the principal describing the nature and
scope of such applicant's authority and any restrictions, limitations and
16.Editor's Note: This local law also repealed former Subsection G, which required that the
length of time for which a license is required be stated on the application, and
redesignated former Subsections H through M as Subsections G through L.
§ 199-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 199-6
1:187
§ 199-7. Fees. [Amended 6-13-1984 by L.L. No. 6-1984; 2-6-2012 by
L.L. No. 2-2012; 5-28-2014 by L.L. No. 5-2014]
A fee as set forth in the Standard Schedule of Fees of the Town of Ramapo
shall be paid by each individual to be licensed hereunder, and said fee,
payable to the Town Clerk, shall be applied to the cost of processing the
license applications and otherwise enforcing and effectuating the objectives
of this chapter without, however, imposing an undue burden on the
interstate business activities of any applicant and provided further that any
applicant may apply to the Town Clerk for an adjustment of such fee where
the same appears discriminatory, unreasonable or unduly burdensome in
the circumstances, as shown by affidavit and appropriate supporting
evidence. Thereupon, and with due deliberate speed, the Town Clerk shall
determine whether the fee fixed hereunder is discriminatory, unreasonable
or unduly burdens the applicant's interstate business activities and shall fix
as the license fee an amount that is fair and reasonable in the circumstances
and file his report thereon in the Clerk's records. Any applicant aggrieved
by a determination of such Town official shall be advised of his right to
appeal such decision to the Supervisor, or his designated agent, whose
determination shall be final.
§ 199-8. Investigation; issuance or denial of license. [Amended
6-13-1984 by L.L. No. 6-1984; 4-24-1991 by L.L. No. 7-1991]
conditions imposed on such applicant by the principal agency or
organization he represents. In addition, copies of each order form,
contract or other form or document to be utilized by the applicant in
such sale or solicitation shall be attached to the application.
K. Where the applicant is offering for sale goods, merchandise or
commodities required to be sold by weight, measure or count, as
provided under Article 16 of the Agricultural and Markets Law of the
State of New York, such application shall be accompanied by a
certificate from the Sealer of Weights and Measures, having jurisdiction
thereof, certifying that all weighing and measuring devices to be used
by the applicant have been examined and approved.
L. Any additional information required by any competent Town office or
agency in the interest of the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of
the Town, including denials of licenses or their revocation by
municipalities within six months of the present application.
A. Investigation.
(1) When the application is properly filled out and signed by the
applicant, the original and duplicate thereof shall be filed with the
Clerk, and the Clerk shall refer the original to the Chief of Police,
who shall make or cause to be made within 10 working days such
investigation of the applicant's business responsibility and
character as he deems necessary for the protection of the public
good.
§ 199-6 RAMAPO CODE § 199-8
1:188
(2) If, as a result of such an investigation, the applicant's character or
business responsibility is found to be unsatisfactory, the Chief of
Police shall endorse on such application his disapproval and his
reasons therefor and shall return said application to the Clerk. Any
determination by the Chief of Police that an application is
unsatisfactory shall be based on one or more of the following
findings with respect to the applicant:
(a) Conviction of a crime involving moral turpitude.
(b) Prior violation of a peddling or soliciting law.
(c) Previous fraudulent acts or conduct.
(d) Record of breaches of solicited contracts.
(e) Concrete evidence of bad character.
(3) In the absence of any such finding, the Chief of Police shall find the
application satisfactory, shall endorse his approval on the
application and shall return the application to the Clerk.
B. Denial or issuance of license.
(1) If an application is found unsatisfactory by the Chief of Police and
he has endorsed his disapproval upon the application, the Clerk
shall notify the applicant, by certified mail, that the application is
disapproved and shall deny the applicant a license.
(2) Upon receipt of the fee, application and report of the Police Chief's
investigation, and upon compliance with all the requirements of
this chapter, the Town Clerk shall issue a license to the applicant
specifying the particular business authorized. This license shall be
nontransferable. It shall be in continuous possession of the licensee
while engaged in the business licensed. The license shall be
produced upon the demand of any police or law enforcement officer
and shall be exhibited to each prospective buyer or person solicited
before making any offer or solicitation. All licenses shall be for the
following period of time: [Amended 5-28-2014 by L.L. No.
5-2014]
(a) First-time applicant: 60 days following the date of issuance.
(b) Renewal of initial license: 360 days following date of issuance.
(3) Where an organization has several agents peddling, soliciting or
distributing merchandise or printed material, each agent shall be
registered separately, and each shall pay the appropriate fee. Upon
the expiration of a license, a new license will be issued upon
compliance with all the provisions of this chapter and the payment
of fees and the posting of the bond, except that the investigation
and waiting period therefor may be waived if approved by the Clerk
and Chief of Police.
§ 199-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 199-9
1:189
§ 199-9. Bonding requirements. [Added 4-24-1991 by L.L. No.
7-1991]
§ 199-10. Restrictions. [Amended 6-13-1984 by L.L. No. 6-1984;
4-24-1991 by L.L. No. 7-1991]
A licensed peddler or solicitor shall not:
A. Prior to the issuance of any license, the applicant shall file with the
Town Clerk a bond running to the Town in the amount of $1,500, with
good and sufficient surety, in such form as shall be approved by the
Town Attorney or his designated representative. Said bond shall remain
in force for the term of the license and shall be conditioned to indemnify
and pay the Town for any penalties or costs incurred in the enforcement
of any of the provisions of this chapter and to indemnify or reimburse
any purchaser of personal property from the holder of the license in a
sum equal to at least the amount of any payment such purchaser may
have been induced to make through the misrepresentation as to the
kind, quality or value of the personal property, whether the
misrepresentations were made by the licensee or said licensee's agents,
servants or employees either at the time of making the sale or through
any advertisements printed or circulated with reference to such
personal property or parts thereof.
B. The aforesaid bond shall be declared forfeited upon proof of:
(1) Falsification in the application for a license.
(2) Violation of any of the provisions of this chapter by the applicant or
his agents, servants or employees.
C. The Town Board may, by resolution, exempt persons from the bond and
fee requirements, provided that the applicant satisfies the Board that
the nature of his activity does not jeopardize the position of the Town or
the protection given herein to the residents.
A. Resort to deceptive acts or practices, physical abuse, threats,
intimidation or harassment in the course of conducting his business or
offer for sale any provision, food or merchandise that is unwholesome,
unfit, deleterious or harmful to the user of consumer thereof.
B. Peddle at or solicit a private residence which has displayed a sign
bearing the words "no peddling or soliciting" or words of like intent, nor
shall any licensee remain on the premises after the owner or occupant
thereof shall have requested his departure therefrom.
C. Keep the vehicles and receptacles used by him in an unclean and
unsanitary condition, nor the foodstuffs and edibles offered for sale
uncovered and unprotected from dirt, dust, insects, contamination or
spoilage, or as otherwise required by any competent municipal health
authority.
§ 199-9 RAMAPO CODE § 199-10
1:190
§ 199-11. Taking of orders.
All orders taken by licensed solicitors who demand, accept or receive
payment or deposit of money in advance of final delivery shall be in writing,
in duplicate, stating the terms thereof and the amount paid in advance,
and one copy shall be given to the purchaser at the time the deposit of
money is paid to the solicitor, and which shall contain the notice or right of
cancellation as below set forth.
§ 199-12. Cancellation of orders. [Amended 6-13-1984 by L.L. No.
6-1984]
As more fully provided and set forth in the New York State Home
Solicitation Sales Act,17 which is incorporated herein by reference as to
rights, remedies and procedures in any sale, order for purchase or
agreement to buy which was induced by or the result of harassment,
intimidation, abusive conduct, misrepresentation of material facts or highpressure
tactics by the solicitor, any person or consumer shall have the
right of cancellation as therein set forth upon giving written notice to the
solicitor, by mail properly addressed and postage prepaid, and notice, the
D. Vend his goods, wares and merchandise in any location within 250 feet
of any other peddler, solicitor and/or private business vending goods,
wares and merchandise of a similar nature.
E. Sell any confectionery or ice cream within 250 feet of any school
between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. on school days.
F. Permit any vehicle used by him to stop or remain on any crosswalk.
G. Use any noisy device to attract public attention to his wares or shout or
cry out his wares, except that peddlers of ice cream and ice cream
products for immediate consumption are exempted from the foregoing
prohibition of the use of a bell.
H. Assign or transfer his license to any other person, and any transfer to or
use of such license by any other person shall be a violation and shall
automatically thereupon terminate such license.
I. Fail to carry his license upon his person or to exhibit the same upon
demand to any police, Town officer or citizen being solicited or involved
in a transaction with him.
J. Frequent any street, sidewalk or public place so as to cause a private or
public nuisance.
K. Sell or solicit except between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m.
L. Fail to leave all premises promptly upon request of any occupant of
such premises. [Amended 2-6-2012 by L.L. No. 2-2012]
17.Editor's Note: See Personal Property Law § 425 et seq.
§ 199-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 199-12
1:191
language or tenor of which makes clear the purchaser's intention to return
such goods, wares or merchandise, will be sufficient. In such event, the
seller's failure to tender to the buyer all payment made by the buyer, with
an acknowledgment of his cancellation of the order, shall be deemed a
violation of this chapter and shall subject the licensee to any penalties
hereunder, in addition to any penalties provided under the New York State
Home Solicitation Sales Act.
§ 199-13. Revocation or suspension of license. [Amended 6-13-1984
by L.L. No. 6-1984; 4-24-1991 by L.L. No. 7-1991]
A. Licenses issued under the provisions of this chapter may be revoked by
the Town Clerk after written notice and a hearing for any violation of
this chapter.
B. Notice of hearing for revocation of a license shall be given in writing,
setting forth specifically the grounds of the complaint and the time and
place of hearing. Such notice shall be mailed to the licensee at least 10
days prior to the date set for the hearing, except as below set forth.
Licenses can be revoked for any of the following causes:
(1) Fraud, misrepresentation or a materially incorrect statement
contained in the application for a license.
(2) Fraud, misrepresentation or a materially incorrect statement made
in the course of carrying on the business of solicitor, peddler,
distributor or transient merchant.
(3) Any violation of this chapter.
(4) Conviction of any crime, misdemeanor or violation.
(5) Conducting the business of peddler, solicitor, distributor or
transient merchant in an unlawful manner or in such manner as to
constitute a breach of the peace or to constitute a menace to the
health, safety or general welfare of the public.
C. In addition to the foregoing, the Town Clerk may forthwith temporarily
suspend any license issued pursuant to this chapter upon receiving
information giving reasonable cause to believe that any licensee
hereunder has either violated this chapter by an act involving moral
turpitude, physical abuse, threats, intimidation or harassment or has
been convicted of any violation of this chapter or of any crime or offense
endangering the peace, safety, health or general welfare of the
inhabitants of this Town. Within 10 days after such suspension, the
Town Clerk shall conduct a hearing and issue his or her determination
as to whether the license shall be revoked or reinstated. If such hearing
or determination is not made within said ten-day period, the license
shall be restored automatically.
§ 199-12 RAMAPO CODE § 199-14
1:192
§ 199-14. Appeals. [Amended 6-13-1984 by L.L. No. 6-1984]
Any licensee aggrieved by any action or determination of the Town Clerk
hereunder may appeal to the Supervisor of the Town of Ramapo or any
agent or agency he may designate, within 14 days after notice of the action
or determination complained of has been mailed to his last known address,
by filing a written statement setting forth fully the grounds for appeal. The
Supervisor or his or her agent shall set a time and place for a hearing on
such appeal, and notice of such hearing shall be mailed to the applicant's
last known address at least five days prior to the date set for the hearing.
The decision and order of the Supervisor or his or her agent on such appeal
shall be final and conclusive.
§ 199-15. Maintenance of records.
The Town Clerk shall keep a record of all applications and of all licenses
granted hereunder, giving the number and date of each license, the name
and residence of the person licensed, the license fee paid and also the date
of revocation of licenses revoked, if any.
§ 199-16. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 6-13-1984 by L.L. No.
6-1984; 2-6-2012 by L.L. No. 2-2012]
Any person violating the provisions of this chapter shall be liable to a fine of
not more than $250 for each violation and/or not more than 15 days in jail,
and each day of such violation shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 199-17. Enforcement. [Amended 4-24-1991 by L.L. No. 7-1991]
The Police Department of the Town of Ramapo and/or the enforcement
official as designated in Chapter 376, Zoning, § 376-140 of the Code of
the Town of Ramapo shall have the power, right and authority to issue an
appearance ticket, as the same is defined in Article 150 of the Criminal
Procedure Law of the State of New York, for the violation of any section of
this chapter.
Chapter 204
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Landscapers — See Ch. 173.
Littering — See Ch. 178.
Solid waste — See Ch. 235.
Trees — See Ch. 258.
§ 199-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 199-17
1:193

ARTICLE I
Parking Areas
[Adopted 1-14-1987 by L.L. No. 3-1987]
§ 204-1. Title.
This article shall be known and may be cited hereinafter as the "Property
Maintenance Law of the Town of Ramapo: Parking Areas."
§ 204-2. Legislative intent.
It is the aim of the Town Board of the Town of Ramapo to promote the public
health, welfare and safety of the citizens by providing for the cleanliness,
maintenance and preservation of parking, accessory and other open areas
provided for or required in connection with any subject premises. To do so,
the Town Board does hereby enact this article regulating the management
and maintenance of parking areas, accessory areas or other open space
used in connection therewith.
§ 204-3. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ACCESSORY AREA — Buffer zones, setbacks, side and rear yards or other
areas, surfaced or natural, or open space used in connection with subject
premises.
ASHES — The residue from the burning of wood, coal, coke or other
combustible materials.
GARBAGE — Putrescible animal and vegetable wastes resulting from the
preparation, handling, cooking and consumption of food.
GARBAGE CONTAINER — A covered container which is rodent, vermin,
insect and water proof.
HOLDER — Owner, tenant, trustee, receiver, executor or other person who
controls, in whole or in part, any subject premises.
LIGHTING PERIOD — Sunset of any day to the sunrise of the following day.
PARKING AREA — Space provided by the holder for the parking of vehicles,
together with the means of ingress and egress thereto and the roads and
driveways of any subject premises.
REFUSE — All solid wastes (except body wastes), including garbage,
rubbish, ashes, street cleanings, dead animals, abandoned automobiles and
solid market and industrial wastes.
RUBBISH — Nonputrescible solid wastes (excluding ashes) consisting of
both combustible and noncombustible wastes, such as paper, cardboard, tin
cans, yard clippings, leaves, tree trimmings, wood, glass, bedding, crockery
and similar materials.
§ 204-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 204-3
1:195
SUBJECT PREMISES — Any premises which contain, in whole or in part,
any parking area servicing any industrial, commercial (retail, wholesale
or services to the public), professional, educational, entertainment or
recreational area or in conjunction with apartment or multiple residences
or other areas regularly used for purposes or functions to which the general
public is invited, directly or indirectly, the ingress and egress thereto,
roads and driveways therein, buffer zones, setbacks or other open space in
connection therewith with respect to all of said areas used in connection
with such premises or any other open areas provided for in connection with
the issuance of a certificate of occupancy, variance or special permit as
required pursuant to the Zoning Code of the Town of Ramapo or any law
applicable to such premises or use thereof.
TRASH CONTAINER — A container with appropriate cover to receive handcarried
discarded paper and trash.
§ 204-4. Scope.
Any holder of a subject premises shall comply with the following:
A. The subject premises shall be kept free and clear of ashes, dirt, debris,
rubbish, garbage, refuse and other obstructions and the same shall be
kept properly repaired and maintained.
B. All roads, sidewalks, driveways, parking areas and other areas used in
connection with the subject premises, as well as the means of ingress
and egress to the subject premises, shall be kept in proper repair and
free from dirt, refuse, snow and ice.
C. All water drains and water drainage systems shall be kept clean and in
proper working order.
D. All prescribed lights shall be kept in proper working order and lighted
during the lighting period when the subject premises or any portion
thereof is being used by the holder of the subject premises or any
portion thereof is open for business.
E. All fences, screening, curbing, grass, shrubbery, retaining walls, slopes
and other space used in connection therewith shall be kept maintained
and/or repaired.
F. Any parking lines for parking spaces shall be kept properly painted and
marked. Parking spaces for handicapped persons shall be completely
covered with an iridescent, light blue paint, upon which there shall be
superimposed the handicapped logo, as is provided by law for such
parking spaces.
G. All exterior areas shall be kept free and clear of the storage of goods,
wares and merchandise. Loading and unloading are to be done in
designated zones only.
H. All refuse shall be stored in the designated place or places in proper
garbage receptacles.
§ 204-3 RAMAPO CODE § 204-4
1:196
§ 204-5. Enforcement.
§ 204-6. Effect on other legislation.
This article is not in limitation of any other law, rule, regulation, order
or certificate which may affect any premises subject to this article or
any penalty, fine or liability thereunder but is in addition thereto. Any
inconsistent local law, regulation, order or certificate or part thereof in
conflict with this article is hereby repealed insofar as it may affect the
enforcement of this article.
§ 204-7. Penalties for offenses.
I. There shall be at convenient places proper trash receptacles, which
shall be sufficiently serviced to prevent overflow.
A. The Police Department of the Town of Ramapo and/or the enforcement
official as designated in Chapter 376, Zoning, § 376-140 of the Code of
the Town of Ramapo shall have the power, right and authority to issue
an appearance ticket, as the same is defined in Article 150 of the
Criminal Procedure Law of the State of New York, for the violation of
any section of this article.
B. In addition to any other penalty under the law, the enforcement official
as designated in § 376-140, upon the direction of the Town Board, is
hereby authorized and empowered to erect, replace, repair or maintain
fences, trees, plantings, shrubbery or other screening on land within
the jurisdiction of the Town of Ramapo where such screening facilities
are required by the Zoning Board of Appeals, the Planning Board or
such other department or agency of the Town of Ramapo having
jurisdiction of the premises, or Chapter 376, Zoning, of this Code or the
Town Subdivision Regulations or such other law or ordinance affecting
said premises and there is a failure to comply with such direction, and,
if after giving 30 days' notice by registered mail addressed to the owner
of record of such land at the address shown on the last preceding
assessment roll, such fences, trees, plantings, shrubbery or other
screening are not so erected, replaced, repaired or maintained by or on
behalf of such owner, all costs and expenses incurred by the Town in
connection with any action so taken shall be assessed against the land
upon which such screening facilities are located. A copy of this article
shall be attached to any notice sent under this subsection.
A. Any violation by a person, firm or corporation of any provision of this
article shall be deemed a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine not to
exceed $1,000 or imprisonment for a period not to exceed one year, or
both. [Amended 2-6-2012 by L.L. No. 2-2012]
B. Each day that a violation of this article is committed or continues to
exist shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 204-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 204-7
1:197
Chapter 207
PROPERTY OWNERSHIP REGISTRATION
§ 207-1. Title.
This chapter shall be cited and may be referred to hereinafter as the
"Property Ownership Registration Law."
§ 207-2. Legislative intent.
It is the intention of the Town Board of the Town of Ramapo, by the adoption
of this chapter, to promote the public health, safety and welfare of its people
by enforcing its zoning laws and regulations of properties owned by persons
residing outside the jurisdiction of the Town of Ramapo.
§ 207-3. Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms shall have the
following meanings:
ACTION OR PROCEEDING — Any action or proceeding which may be
instituted in the Town Court of the Town of Ramapo in connection with the
alleged violation of any ordinance or local law of the Town of Ramapo or of
the laws of the State of New York.
OWNER — Any individual or individuals, partnership, association or
corporation who or which is the fee owner of property or who or which is
the lessee of land, which lease has a duration of more than five years. (Such
five-year period shall include any and all extensions contained in the lease
agreement.)
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, partnership, association or other
organized group of persons, municipality or other legal entity.
PROCESS — A summons or any notice, mandate or other paper or process
issued under any provision of the Code of the Town of Ramapo or the laws
of the State of New York.
PROPERTY — Real property located within the Town of Ramapo, whether
unimproved or improved by a structure consisting of other than a singlefamily
residence.
§ 207-4. Registration requirements.
A. Each owner of property within the Town of Ramapo, as herein defined,
who shall reside or have its principal place of business outside the
confines of the Town of Ramapo shall be required to file with the
Building, Planning and Zoning Department of the Town of Ramapo, on a
form to be prescribed by the Town of Ramapo, the name, address and
telephone number of an individual authorized to act on behalf of the
owner in matters concerning the management and operation of the
§ 204-7 RAMAPO CODE § 207-4
1:198
§ 207-5. Enforcement. [Added 7-11-1984 by L.L. No. 10-198418]
The enforcement official as designated in Chapter 376, Zoning, § 376-140 of
the Code of the Town of Ramapo shall have the power, right and authority
to issue process for violations of this chapter.
§ 207-6. Failure to comply. [Added 7-11-1984 by L.L. No. 10-1984]
Should any person fail to comply with the provisions of this chapter, then
said person will be subject to the penalties hereinafter set forth. Process
setting forth notice of the failure and the liability resulting thereby will be
served in any one of the following manners:
property of the owner, in relation to the Town of Ramapo, including but
not limited to the acceptance of service of notices and process.
B. The individual designated in Subsection A above shall reside in
Rockland County. This individual shall, by such designation, be
authorized to bind the owner to any settlement, fine, judgment or other
disposition, other than incarceration, which may result from any civil or
criminal action or proceeding instituted by the Town of Ramapo against
said owner.
C. It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision of this
chapter, whether he has any knowledge of or intends any violation of
said chapter.
D. The designation hereinabove described shall be required to be filed
annually and no later than January 31 of any given calendar year.
E. Any change in ownership of any property, as defined herein, shall
necessitate the filing with the Building, Planning and Zoning
Department of a new designation, if the same is required under this
chapter, within 30 days after such change.
A. By personal service upon the owner of said land, as the same is shown
on the last complete assessment roll of the Town.
B. By mailing to such owner, as shown on the assessment roll, by certified
or registered mail, return receipt requested, a copy of said notice and
order and by securing or affixing a copy of said notice and order upon
the structure.
C. By delivery of a copy thereof to any adult person in charge of or residing
in said structure and by securing or affixing a copy of said notice and
order upon the same.
18.Editor's Note: This local law also repealed in its entirety L.L. No. 5-1984, adopted
4-25-1984, which local law amended this chapter by amending and adding certain
sections.
§ 207-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 207-7
1:199
§ 207-7. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 7-11-1984 by L.L. No.
10-1984]
Any person violating any section or provision of this chapter shall, upon
conviction, be punished by a fine of not exceeding $500 for the first offense,
$1,000 for the second offense and $2,000 for the third and subsequent
offenses.
§ 207-8. Nonpayment of penalties. [Added 7-11-1984 by L.L. No.
10-1984; amended 2-6-2012 by L.L. No. 2-2012]
Should the aforesaid penalties not be paid within 30 days of being assessed,
and after notice of said failure is served as provided in § 207-6 hereinabove,
then the property covered by this chapter will be assessed for the unpaid
penalties, and the penalties so assessed shall be collected in the same
manner and time as Town taxes.
Chapter 215
SCENIC ROAD DISTRICT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Zoning — See Ch. 376.
§ 215-1. Short title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Scenic Road District
Law for the Town of Ramapo."
§ 215-2. Intent and legislative findings.
The Town Board of the Town of Ramapo wishes to preserve its historic
resources, stone walls, other natural features, and scenic views from its
roadways and other public areas by channeling new development away
from those areas and onto lands which are not as scenic and historically
significant. The view experienced from these areas contributes significantly
to the overall character of the Town, an attribute the community seeks to
preserve and enhance while accommodating growth and change. Where
development occurs in sensitive scenic areas, the Town wishes to assure
that such development is consistent with the objective of maintaining the
existing scenic character of such areas to the greatest extent practicable.
Specifically, the Town finds:
A. That the natural, open character of the Ramapo Scenic Road District is
a critical feature of the unique heritage of the Town of Ramapo whose
preservation enriches and benefits both residents and visitors;
§ 207-7 RAMAPO CODE § 215-2
1:200
§ 215-3. Establishment of district.
§ 215-4. Plan review and approval.
B. That the Ramapo Scenic Road District is characterized by historic
homes and buildings, mature trees, thick virgin woodlands or fields
which contribute to the overall scenic, historic and quality character of
the Town;
C. That it is desirable to protect panoramic views as well as sensitive
natural habitats on the Ramapo Scenic Road District; and
D. That preservation of these features while providing for appropriate
development can only be achieved by encouraging flexibility in the
design of land use and development projects.
A. In furtherance of the above legislative findings, a Scenic Road District
is hereby established which shall include all property in unincorporated
areas of the Town of Ramapo within 1,000 feet from the center line of
the following public roads: [Amended 6-29-2005 by L.L. No. 4-2005]
(1) Route 202.
(2) Sterling Mine Road.
(3) Route 17, north of the intersection with the New York State
Thruway.
(4) The entire length of the Palisades Parkway.
(5) South Mountain Road.
(6) Spook Rock Road.
(7) Johnsontown Road
(8) Camp Hill Road.
(9) Route 306 north of Grandview.
(10) Seven Lakes Drive.
B. The Scenic Road District is shown on the Town's Scenic Road District
Map.19
A. No construction or material alteration of any principal or accessory use
within the Scenic Road District is permitted unless said use shall have
obtained approval as set forth below.
(1) If it is determined that the use is subject to site development plan
approval, such use shall receive plan approval from the Planning
Board together with the site development plan approval in
19.Editor's Note: Said map is on file in the office of Building, Planning and Zoning.
§ 215-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 215-4
1:201
conformity with the regulations set forth below in Subsection A(3)
and (4).
(2) All other uses shall be subject to review and approval by the
Building Inspector. The Building Inspector shall issue a building
permit upon a determination of compliance with the regulation set
forth below in Subsection A(3) and (4), and other applicable zoning
and building code requirements.
(3) Review standards. In order to grant approval, the Building
Inspector or Planning Board, whichever is applicable, must find
that the important scenic and natural features of the site will be
substantially preserved and, except for structures subject to
Architectural Review pursuant to Article X of the Town's Zoning
Law, that such structure or alteration is architecturally compatible
with surrounding structures. To the extent practicable, all
structures to be built on land within the Ramapo Scenic Road
District shall be sited and clustered on the tract in such a way as to
avoid or minimize the obstructing of scenic views in this district.
[Amended 2-11-2015 by L.L. No. 1-2015]
(4) Additional standards of review. The additional regulations set forth
below supplement, but do not replace, the use and bulk regulations
otherwise applicable to the underlying zoning districts.
(a) The minimum front setback requirement, as set forth for the
applicable underlying zoning district, may be doubled for all
structures and parking areas located within the Ramapo
Scenic Road District. The side and rear yard setbacks may also
be doubled by the Planning Board if there are historic or scenic
resources which are to be protected.
(b) The Building Inspector or Planning Board, whichever is
applicable, may require that the front yard shall be managed
by the property owner in a way that preserves significant
existing vegetation, plant specimens, landforms and water
features; nurtures tree planting and other natural landscaping
efforts; creates dense landscaping buffers; preserves stone
walls, existing fields and similar features; and/or ensures both
the protection of visual buffers and the prominence of key
scenic vistas, including views of historic properties and
landscapes.
(c) Any necessary intrusions within the open space area shall be
reduced to the extent practicable by such measures as
common driveways and shared utility services for building
sites that may gain access from the roadways in the Ramapo
Scenic Road District.
(d) Cluster subdivisions in accordance with the Town Law of the
State of New York shall be the preferred residential land
§ 215-4 RAMAPO CODE § 215-4
1:202
development technique for lands within, adjacent to or
affecting the overall character of a Ramapo Scenic Road
District, provided that:
[1] All structures and/or parking areas are effectively
screened on a year-round basis by existing landform and/
or vegetation or by substantial new planting and berming
as viewed from the public right-of-way, provided that such
treatment does not diminish the prominence of key scenic
vistas including views of historic properties and
landscapes.
[2] A conservation easement, satisfactory to the approving
authority, is granted by the landowner to the Town, a land
trust or similarly qualified entity to ensure that the
screening will be properly maintained and managed or a
similarly binding mechanism as acceptable to the Town
Attorney shall be provided.
(e) Existing vegetation shall be preserved to the maximum extent
possible. Every attempt shall be made to limit cutting so as to
maintain native vegetation as a screen for structures as seen
from road, parks and other public views within the Ramapo
Scenic Road District.
(f) No cutting of trees exceeding eight inches in diameter
(measured at a height of four feet off the ground) shall be
permitted except in accordance with an approved building
permit, site plan, subdivision or timber harvesting plan. In
RR-160, RR-80, RR-50, R-40, R-40A, R-35, R-25, R-15, R-15A
and R-15C Zoning Districts, cutting all trees in a single
contiguous area exceeding 20,000 square feet shall be
prohibited, however, this restriction shall not apply: 1) to
roadways, drainage structures and utility easements in an
approved subdivision; or 2) in subdivisions which have been
subject to review by means of an environmental impact
statement pursuant to the New York State Environmental
Quality Review Act. Where the tree cutting restriction is
applicable, the Planning Board may grant a waiver from this
restriction upon a finding that there are unique characteristics
to the property or other factors creating an undue hardship,
provided the Planning Board makes a specific finding that the
objectives of the Scenic Road District Law are nonetheless
substantially satisfied. In all other zoning districts, cutting all
trees in a single contiguous area exceeding 20,000 square feet
may be permitted in accordance with an approved site plan.
[Amended 5-13-2013 by L.L. No. 2-2013]
(g) Throughout the Ramapo Scenic Road District
telecommunication towers shall be discouraged. In all cases
the Town shall encourage shared use of towers rather than
§ 215-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 215-4
1:203
§ 215-5. Enforcement.
The enforcement official as designated in § 376-140 of Chapter 376, Zoning,
of the Code of the Town of Ramapo, as may be amended, shall have the
power, right and authority to issue an appearance ticket, as the same is
defined in Article 150 of the Criminal Procedure Law of the State of New
York, for the violation of any section of this chapter. In addition, the Town
of Ramapo may institute an appropriate action or proceeding in any court
of competent jurisdiction pursuant to § 268 of the Town Law of the State of
New York.
§ 215-6. Penalties for offenses.
Any person violating any section or provision of this chapter shall be guilty
of a Class 3 violation as defined in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article
II, Penalties, of the Code of the Town of Ramapo, and shall be punished
according to the provisions thereunder.
§ 215-7. Review of decision.
Whenever the Building Inspector shall approve or disapprove a building
permit pursuant to this chapter, such decision shall be reviewable by appeal
to the Board of Appeals from the Building Inspector's decision. The appeal
shall be taken not more than 30 days after the filing of the decision of the
Building Inspector in the office of the Building Inspector.
Chapter 218
SEWERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Department of Public Works — See Ch. 54. Stormwater management and sediment and
erosion control — See Ch. 237.
new construction, and reduced tower height to limit the need
for external lighting.
(h) All signs shall be regulated pursuant to Chapter 376, Zoning,
of the Code of the Town of Ramapo.
§ 215-4 RAMAPO CODE § 215-7
1:204
ARTICLE I
Sewage Disposal
[Adopted 3-8-1965 by L.L. No. 1-1965 as Ch. 35 of the 1965 Code;
amended in its entirety 2-6-2012 by L.L. No. 2-2012]
§ 218-1. Approval required.
No septic tank, leaching pit, chemical toilet, privy, pipe or other means
for the disposal or discharge of sewage or sink wastes shall be installed
anywhere in the Town of Ramapo except as approved by the Rockland
County Department of Health. Any applicant who receives an approval from
the Rockland County Department of Health must file a copy of said approval
with the Building Inspector.
§ 218-2. Exposure of sewage.
No person, firm or corporation, either as owner, lessee or tenant of any
property, dwelling, building or place, shall construct or maintain any privy,
cesspool, sewage disposal system, pipe or drain so as to expose or discharge
the contents or other liquid or matter therefrom to the atmosphere or on the
surface of the ground or so as to endanger any source of drinking water, nor
shall any such person, firm or corporation discharge into any watercourse,
storm sewer, drain or body of water any sewage or sewage effluent from
a cesspool, sewage disposal system, pipe or drain or any excreta from a
privy vault or other receptacle for the storage of excreta unless approval in
writing for such discharge shall have been issued therefor by the Rockland
County Department of Health and such discharge shall be made in
accordance with the requirements thereof.
§ 218-3. Penalties for offenses.
Any violation of this regulation either by the occupancy of a structure
without a duly authorized certificate of approval or by the installation or
use of a septic tank, leaching pit, chemical toilet, privy or discharge pipe
without compliance with the terms and provisions aforesaid, or any violation
of the terms and provisions of this regulation, is hereby declared to be a
misdemeanor and shall render the owner of the land whereon the same was
installed, or tenant or the person so installing the same, or any other person
guilty of a violation thereof, liable to a fine not to exceed the sum of $1,000
or to imprisonment for a period of not more than one year, or both. Each
week that such violation exists shall constitute a separate offense. The Town
may enforce obedience to this article by injunction, and pursuit of any one
remedy shall not bar the invoking of any other remedy or penalty, all of
which shall be cumulative.
§ 218-4. Territory covered.
This regulation shall apply to all the territory within the Town of Ramapo,
outside the corporate limits of the Villages of Sloatsburg, Hillburn, Suffern,
Pomona, New Square and Spring Valley.
§ 218-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 218-4
1:205

ARTICLE II
Sewer Rents
[Adopted 12-8-1969 by L.L. No. 5-1969]
§ 218-5. Title.
This article shall be cited and may be referred to hereinafter as the "Sewer
Rent Law."
§ 218-6. Legislative intent. [Amended 2-6-2012 by L.L. No. 2-2012]
It is the intention of the Town Board of the Town of Ramapo by the adoption
of this article to establish and impose sewer rents in accordance with the
provisions of the Municipal Home Rule Law and other applicable laws of the
State of New York.
§ 218-7. Applicability. [Amended 2-6-2012 by L.L. No. 2-2012]
This article shall apply to all the territory within the Town of Ramapo,
outside the corporate limits of the Villages of Sloatsburg, Hillburn, Suffern,
Pomona, New Square and Spring Valley, and shall provide for the method
and manner of payment of rents for the operation and maintenance of
sewers servicing such territory.
§ 218-8. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
SEWER RENTS — A scale of annual charges established and imposed by the
Town Board for the use of the sewer system.
SEWER SYSTEM — All sewer pipes and other appurtenances constructed,
operated and maintained by the Town of Ramapo and used for the
collection, treatment and disposal of sewage, industrial waste and other
wastes, including sewers, intercepting sewers, outfall sewers, pumping,
treatment and disposal works and their appurtenances.
UNITS OF USE — The quantity of usage of the sewer system assigned to
different classifications of real property in the Town of Ramapo.
USER — A parcel of real property fronting on a sewered street or on a
sewer easement to which a sewer connection has or can be made serving
the property.
§ 218-9. Schedule of units of use. [Amended 6-13-1973 by L.L. No.
3-1973; 2-6-2012 by L.L. No. 2-2012]
The basis of the charge for sewer rents to be paid by the users shall be
determined from the following schedule of units of use:
§ 218-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 218-9
1:207
Classification of Property Units of Use
One-family dwelling 1 unit
Each separate apartment in a two-family, three-family or
multiple dwelling
1 unit
Garbage disposal units, each disposal 1 unit
Launderettes in apartment houses, for each two washing
machines
1 unit
Mobile home 1 unit
Combination one-family home with a professional or
business office, owner-occupied
1 1/2 units
Rooming house, each four rooms or part 1 unit
Hotel or motel (no meals), each four rooms or part 1 unit
Hotels, American plan with meals, each two rooms 1 unit
Offices, with five occupants or fewer 1 unit
Stores, with five occupants or fewer 1 unit
Commercial establishments, with five occupants or fewer
(occupants are defined as owners, managers or
employees)
1 unit
For each additional five occupants or part 1 unit
Industrial plants, for each five occupants or part plus an
additional charge for effluent, based on quantity and
quality to be determined and units to be assigned
1 unit
Launderettes, for each two washing machines 1 unit
Laundries, based on capacity and units to be assigned
Car laundries, based on capacity and units to be
assigned
Bar and grill 3 units
Luncheonette (open less than 14 hours per day) 3 units
Luncheonette (open more than 14 hours per day) 6 units
Restaurant, small, 20 seats or fewer 3 units
Restaurant, medium, 21 to 75 seats 4 units
Restaurant, large, over 75 seats 5 units
Restaurant with bar, add three units
Schools: public, private, parochial
Elementary, for each 60 pupils 1 unit
Junior high school, for each 54 pupils 1 unit
Senior high school, for each 42 pupils 1 unit
Colleges
For each 54 day students 1 unit
§ 218-9 RAMAPO CODE § 218-9
1:208
Classification of Property Units of Use
For each 75 evening students 1 unit
For each eight resident students (where dormitories are
available)
1 unit
Churches, synagogues, temples (including Sunday
school)
Small congregation, under 100 families 1 unit
Medium congregation, 101 to 250 families 2 units
Large congregation, over 250 families 3 units
For part-time weekday schools add one unit
Drive-in theaters, for each 40 car spaces or part 1 unit
Theaters, for each 60 seats or parts 1 unit
Bowling alleys, for each two lanes 1 unit
Hospitals, for each four beds 3 units
Convalescent homes, for each two beds 1 unit
Service station without car wash 1 unit
Service station with car wash 2 units
Beauty shops, fewer than three employees and/or
owners
1 unit
Three through five employees and/or owners 2 units
Six or more employees and/or owners 3 units
§ 218-10. Annual sewer rent.
There is hereby established and imposed an annual sewer rent on all users
to be determined by multiplying the unit charge by the number of units
assigned to each user based upon the schedule of units of use in § 218-9
of this article. The unit charge shall be established annually by the Town
Board.
§ 218-11. Payment.
A. All these charges shall be paid at the same time as other Town charges.
Any property not reflected on the sewer charge roll of the Town of
Ramapo on May 1 of each year shall prepay as part of the connection
charge an amount which shall represent payment of sewer charges to
the end of the fiscal year next occurring after the sewer charge is
shown on the Town of Ramapo sewer rent roll. Said rate will be based
on the current sewer rent in existence at that time.
B. All provisions of all local laws and ordinances of the Town of Ramapo
inconsistent herewith are hereby repealed, except that any charge
owing to the Town of Ramapo for sewer rents or otherwise for sewer
service on the effective date of this article shall not be impaired thereby
§ 218-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 218-11
1:209
and such charge shall be collected as if this article had not been
adopted.
§ 218-11 RAMAPO CODE § 218-11
1:210
ARTICLE III
Sewer Use and Maintenance
[Adopted 1-22-1975 by L.L. No. 2-1975]
§ 218-12. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BUILDING SEWER — The extension from the building down to the public
sewer or other place of disposal.
INDUSTRIAL WASTES — The liquid wastes from industrial manufacturing
processes, trade or business as distinct from sanitary sewage.
PERSON — Any individual, firm, company, association, surety, corporation
or group.
PUBLIC SEWER — A sewer on which all owners of abutting property have
equal rights and which is controlled by public authority.
SANITARY SEWER — A sewer which carries sewage and to which storm-,
surface and ground waters are not intentionally admitted.
SEWAGE — A combination of the water-carried wastes from residences,
business buildings, institutions and industrial establishments, together with
such ground-, surface and storm waters as may be present.[Amended
2-6-2012 by L.L. No. 2-2012]
SEWAGE TREATMENT PLANT — Any arrangement of devices and
structures used for treating sewage.
SEWER — A pipe or conduit for carrying sewage.
SEWERAGE WORKS — All facilities for collecting, pumping, treating and
disposing of sewage.
STORM DRAIN (SOMETIMES TERMED "STORM SEWER") — A sewer
which carries storm- and surface waters and drainage but excludes sewage
and industrial wastes.
§ 218-13. Use of public sewers.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge to any natural outlet
within the Town of Ramapo, or in any area under the jurisdiction of said
Town of Ramapo, any sewage or other polluted waters, except where
suitable treatment has been provided.
B. Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful to construct or
maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool or other facility
intended or used for the disposal of sewage.
C. The owner of all houses, buildings or properties used for human
occupancy, employment, recreation or other purposes situated within
the Town of Ramapo, abutting on any street, alley or right-of-way on
which there is now, or may be in the future, a public sanitary sewer
§ 218-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 218-13
1:211
located within 100 feet of the property is hereby required, at his
expense, to install suitable toilet facilities therein and to connect such
facilities directly with the proper public sewer within the required
state, county and Town regulations, after 30 days of official notice to do
so. [Amended 2-6-2012 by L.L. No. 2-2012]
D. No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any stormwater,
surface water, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage,
uncontaminated cooling water or unpolluted industrial process waters
to any sanitary sewer.
E. Stormwater and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to
such sewers as are specifically designated as storm sewers or to a
natural outlet approved by the Director of Public Works or his
assistants. Industrial cooling water or unpolluted process water may be
discharged, on approval of the Director of Public Works or his
assistants, to a storm sewer or natural outlet.
F. No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged to any public
sewers any of the following described waters or wastes:
(1) Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil or other flammable or
explosive liquid, solid or gas.
(2) Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids
or gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with
other wastes, to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment
process, create a public nuisance or create any hazard in the
receiving waters of the sewage treatment plant.
(3) Any water or wastes having a pH lower than 5.5 or higher than 9.5
or having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage
or hazard to structures, equipment and personnel of the sewerage
works. [Amended 6-11-1975 by L.L. No. 6-1975]
(4) Solids or viscous substances in quantities or of a size capable of
causing obstruction to the flow in sewers or other interference with
the proper operation of the sewerage works, such as, but not
limited to, ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass,
rags, feathers, tar, plastic, wood, etc., either whole or ground by a
garbage grinder.
G. No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged the following
described substances, materials, waters or wastes if it appears likely, in
the opinion of the Director of Public Works, that such wastes can harm
the sewers, sewage treatment process or equipment; have an adverse
effect on the receiving stream or otherwise endanger life, limb or public
property; or constitute a nuisance. In forming his opinion as to
acceptability of these wastes, the Director of Public Works will give
consideration to such factors as the quantities of subject wastes in
relation to flows and velocities in the sewers, materials of construction
of the sewers, nature of the sewage treatment process, capacity of the
§ 218-13 RAMAPO CODE § 218-13
1:212
sewage treatment plant, degree of treatability of wastes in the sewage
treatment plant and other pertinent factors. The substances prohibited
are: [Amended 6-11-1975 by L.L. No. 6-1975]
(1) Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such concentration as may
exceed limits established by federal, state or Town regulations.
(2) Any garbage, which shall include but not be limited to the wastes
from the preparation, crushing, handling, cooking or disposal of
food, that has not been properly shredded after it has passed
through an approved garbage grinder approved by the Director of
the Department of Public Works. [Amended 2-6-2012 by L.L. No.
2-2012]
(3) Waters or wastes containing substances which are not amenable to
treatment or reduction by the sewage treatment processes
employed.
(4) Materials which exert or cause:
(a) Unusual concentrations of inert suspended solids, such as but
not limited to fuller's earth, lime slimes and lime residues or of
dissolved solids, such as but not limited to sodium chloride and
sodium sulfate.
(b) Excessive discoloration due to inks or dyes or other substances
or processes or combination thereof.
(c) Any waters or wastes containing iron, chromium, copper, zinc
and similar objectionable or toxic substances or wastes
exerting an excessive chlorine requirement, to such degree
that any such material received in the composite sewage at the
sewage treatment works exceeds the limits established by the
Director of Public Works for such materials.
(d) Unusual BOD, chemical oxygen demand or chlorine
requirements in such quantities as to constitute a significant
load on the sewage treatment works.
(e) Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than 150° F.
(65° C.).
(f) Any water or waste containing fats, wax, grease or oil, whether
emulsified or not, in excess of 100 milligrams per liter or
containing substances which may solidify or become viscous at
temperatures between 32° and 110° F. (0° and 65° C.).
H. If any waters or wastes are discharged or are proposed to be
discharged to the public sewers, which water or wastes, in the
judgment of the Director of Public Works, may have a deleterious effect
upon the sewerage works, processes, equipment or receiving waters or
which otherwise create a hazard to life or constitute a public nuisance,
the Director of Public Works may:
§ 218-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 218-13
1:213
(1) Reject the wastes.
(2) Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to
the public sewers.
(3) Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge.
(4) Require payment to cover the added cost of handling and treating
the wastes not covered by existing taxes or sewer charges.
I. Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion
of the Director of Public Works, they are necessary for the proper
handling of liquid wastes containing grease in excessive amounts or any
flammable wastes, sand or other harmful ingredients, except that such
interceptors shall not be required for private living quarters or dwelling
units. All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the
Director of Public Works or his assistants and shall be located as to be
readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection.
J. If the Director of the Department of Public Works permits the
pretreatment or equalization of waste flows, the design and installation
of the plants and equipment shall be subject to the review and approval
of the Director and subject to the requirements of all applicable codes,
ordinances and laws. [Added 6-11-1975 by L.L. No. 6-1975]
K. Where preliminary treatment or flow equalization facilities are provided
for any waters or wastes, they shall be maintained continuously in
satisfactory and effective operation by the owner, at his expense.
[Added 6-11-1975 by L.L. No. 6-1975]
L. When required by the Director of Public Works or his assistants, the
owner of any property serviced by a building sewer carrying industrial
wastes shall install a suitable control manhole, together with such
necessary meters and other appurtenances in the building sewer, to
facilitate observation, sampling and measurement of the wastes. Such
manhole, when required, shall be accessibly and safely located and
shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by the Director
of Public Works or his assistant. The manhole shall be installed by the
owner at his expense and shall be maintained by him so as to be safe
and accessible at all times.
M. No blowoff or drip or steam exhaust from any boiler or pipe system
connected thereto shall be directly connected with the house drain or
the house sewer. Such connections may be permitted with the written
approval of the Director of Public Works if provision is made for the
discharge of steam or hot water into a suitable storage tank or steam
condenser provided with proper mechanism for gradually releasing the
hot water into the house sewer. [Added 2-6-2012 by L.L. No. 2-2012]
N. Cellar drains in or below the cellar floor to remove groundwater, drains
from areaways, courts and the like, roof leaders or the discharge pipe
from any pump or other similar mechanical device arranged to care for
§ 218-13 RAMAPO CODE § 218-13
1:214
§ 218-14. Private sewage disposal.
such ground- or surface water or clear unpolluted water for cooling
purposes for refrigeration equipment shall not be connected directly or
indirectly with the house sewer. When inspections indicate that water
from such sources is being discharged into the house sewer, either
directly or indirectly through leaks in the house sewer or in any other
manner, such discharge shall constitute a violation of this article and
shall be cause for recovery and revocation of any permit previously
granted to connect with the sewer under the terms of this article,
unless the necessary corrections are made within 30 days from the date
of written notice given to the owner of the premises or his agent. Such
notice shall be deemed sufficient if sent to the owner by mail, addressed
to him at the address shown on the latest completed assessment rolls
of the Town, or if mailed to the agent of said owner. [Added 2-6-2012
by L.L. No. 2-2012]
O. No industrial or trade wastes containing more organic matter or having
a strength greater than domestic sanitary sewage; chemicals, acids or
corrosive agents; animal, vegetable or mineral oils; grease or
petroleum products, including, among others, gasoline, naphtha or any
volatile or explosive material; or any foreign material, liquid or solid,
either in concentrated form or diluted with water, which trade wastes
or other materials may detrimentally affect the sewer or the operation
of the sewage treatment plant, shall be discharged directly or indirectly
into the house drain, the house sewer or the sewer. [Added 2-6-2012
by L.L. No. 2-2012]
P. Wherever the Director of Public Works finds that the materials specified
in the previous subsection are about to or are finding their way into the
sewer system, whether damage has been caused or not, he shall require
the owner of the premises in question to submit application for a special
permit for transmittal with his comments to the Board for whatever
action said Board deems wise. Said application shall be supplemented
by a written report giving complete and specific information as to any
treatment facilities to be installed on the premises and the provisions to
be made to prevent entrance of any materials not capable of removal by
treatment processes. This report shall show the time to be allowed for
such installation and the penalties to be imposed in case of failure to
comply therewith. Said application shall be accompanied by a fee in
advance to cover the costs of the necessary inspection; if treatment
facilities are proposed, said fee is to be based on the annual period or
fractional portion thereof. [Added 2-6-2012 by L.L. No. 2-2012]
A. Where a public sanitary sewer is not available under the provisions of
§ 218-13C, the building sewer shall be connected to a private sewage
disposal system complying with the provisions of this section and all
other applicable state, county and Town laws.
B. Before commencement of construction of a private sewage disposal
system, the owner shall first obtain a written permit signed by the
§ 218-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 218-14
1:215
§ 218-15. Building sewers and connections.
Department of Health, Rockland County. A permit and inspection fee of
$40 shall be paid to the Town of Ramapo at the time the application is
filed with the County Health Department. [Amended 2-6-2012 by L.L.
No. 2-2012]
C. The installation of a private sewage disposal system shall be completed
to the satisfaction of the Rockland County Health Department. Said
Department shall be allowed to inspect the work at any stage of
construction, and, in any event, the applicant for the permit shall notify
the Department of Health when the work is ready for final inspection
and before any underground portions are covered. Application for
inspection shall be made in writing to the Department of Health, and
such inspection shall be made as soon as practical thereafter.
D. The type, capacities, location and layout of a private sewage disposal
system shall comply with all recommendations of the Department of
Health of the State of New York.
E. At such time as a public sewer becomes available to a property served
by a private sewage disposal system, a direct connection shall be made
by the owner of said property to the public sewer within 30 days, and
any septic tanks, cesspools and similar private sewage disposal
facilities shall be abandoned and filled by the property owner with
suitable material such as gravel or dirt at no expense to the Town of
Ramapo. [Amended 2-6-2012 by L.L. No. 2-2012]
F. The owner shall operate and maintain the private sewage disposal
facilities in a sanitary manner at all times at no expense to the Town of
Ramapo.
G. One permit shall be issued to cover the excavation and construction of
the house sewer and/or to disconnect the existing house drain or sewer
pipe from the cesspool or septic tank and then to connect it to the newly
laid house sewer discharging into the street sewer, the fee for which
shall be determined by the Town of Ramapo.
A. No unauthorized person shall make any connection with or opening into
any public sewer or appurtenances thereof without first obtaining a
written permit from the Director of Public Works or his assistants. A set
of plans and profiles for the proposed sewer installation shall be
submitted to the Department of Public Works for approval when main
lines are being proposed or where otherwise indicated. [Amended
2-6-2012 by L.L. No. 2-2012]
B. There shall be one class of building sewer permit, for residential and
commercial service. The owner or his agent shall make application on a
special form furnished by the Town of Ramapo. The permit application
shall be supplemented by any plans, specifications or other information
considered pertinent in the judgment of the Director of Public Works or
§ 218-14 RAMAPO CODE § 218-15
1:216
§ 218-16. Powers and authority of inspectors.
his assistants. All permit and inspection fees shall be paid to the Town
of Ramapo at the time the application is filed. [Amended 2-6-2012 by
L.L. No. 2-2012]
C. All costs and expenses incident to the installation and connection of the
building sewer shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify
the Town of Ramapo from any loss or damage that may directly or
indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the building sewer and
shall furnish such financial indemnification as the Town of Ramapo may
require.
D. A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every
building or as otherwise approved by the Director of Public Works or his
assistants. In the case of duplex buildings (one structure separated by a
party wall), a separate and independent sewer line shall be required for
each dwelling unit side by side and at such a location as not to encroach
or be within 10 feet of a property line.
E. No person shall make connection of roof downspouts, exterior
foundation drains, areaway drains or other sources of surface runoff or
groundwater to a building sewer or building drain which in turn is
connected directly or indirectly to a public sanitary sewer.
F. The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall
conform to the requirements of the New York State Uniform Fire
Prevention and Building Code and the Town of Ramapo. [Amended
2-6-2012 by L.L. No. 2-2012]
G. The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the Director of
Public Works or his assistants a minimum of 24 hours in advance of
when the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the
public sewer. The connection shall be made under the supervision of the
Director of Public Works or his assistants. [Amended 2-6-2012 by L.L.
No. 2-2012]
H. No change of line and grade of proposed sanitary sewer, as shown on
approved plans and profiles, shall be made without approval of the
Director of Public Works. [Added 2-6-2012 by L.L. No. 2-2012]
I. No property owner shall cause or permit a sewer line owned and
operated by the Town of Ramapo and located in an easement on private
property to be adversely impacted. The installation of any structure,
permanent or temporary, such as sheds, pools, decks, fencing and/or
other landscape grading and planting within a sanitary sewer easement
without receiving written permission from the Director of Public Works
is prohibited. [Added 2-6-2012 by L.L. No. 2-2012]
A. The Director of Public Works of the Town of Ramapo or his assistant,
bearing proper credentials and identification, shall be permitted to
enter all properties and/or dwellings for the purposes of inspection,
§ 218-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 218-16
1:217
§ 218-17. Penalties for offenses.
§ 218-18. Effect on related regulations.
This article shall be read together with all local laws and ordinances of the
Town of Ramapo relating to sewer system licensing and use, sewer rents,
sewage disposal regulations and zoning regulations hereof.
observation, measurement, sampling and testing. The Director of Public
Works or his representative shall have authority to inquire into any
processes, including metallurgical, chemical, oil refining, ceramic,
paper or other industries, having a direct bearing on the kind and
source of discharge to the sewers or waterways or facilities for waste
treatment. [Amended 2-6-2012 by L.L. No. 2-2012]
B. The Director of Public Works or his assistants and other duly authorized
employees of the Town of Ramapo, bearing proper credentials and
identification, shall be permitted to enter all private properties through
which the Town of Ramapo holds a duly negotiated easement for the
purposes of, but not limited to, inspection, observation, measurement,
sampling, repair and maintenance of any portion of the sewerage works
lying within said easement. All entry and subsequent work, if any, on
said easement, shall be done in full accordance with the items of the
duly negotiated easement pertaining to the private property involved.
A. Any person found to be violating any provision of this article shall be
served by the Town of Ramapo with written notice stating the nature of
the violation and providing a reasonable time limit for the satisfactory
correction thereof. The offender shall, within the period of time stated
in such notice, permanently cease all violations.
B. Any person who shall continue any violation beyond the time limit
provided in Subsection A shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, on
conviction thereof, shall be fined in an amount not exceeding $1,000 or
imprisoned for a period of not more than one year, or both, for each
violation. Each day in which any such violation shall continue shall be
deemed a separate offense. [Amended 2-6-2012 by L.L. No. 2-2012]
C. Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall become
liable to the Town of Ramapo for any expense, loss or damage the Town
of Ramapo suffers by reason of such violation.
§ 218-16 RAMAPO CODE § 218-18
1:218
ARTICLE IV
Sewer Licensing and Use
[Adopted 3-28-1979 by L.L. No. 2-1979 as Ch. 318 of the 1979 Code]
§ 218-19. Title.
This article shall be known as the "Sewer System Licensing and Use Law of
the Town of Ramapo."
§ 218-20. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BOARD — The Town Board of the Town of Ramapo, County of Rockland,
New York.
DISTRICT — All sewer districts of the Town presently existing or hereinafter
constituted, except for those of the Villages of Sloatsburg, Hillburn, Suffern,
Pomona, New Square and Spring Valley.[Amended 2-6-2012 by L.L. No.
2-2012]
HOUSE SEWER — Includes all pipes and appurtenances necessary to
connect a building with the system, and it shall begin at the inside face
of the foundation wall, or at an equivalent place, and it shall end at the
connection to the system. Two or more rules and regulations may apply to
different parts of the house sewer. The Board shall levy appropriate taxes
or sewer rentals for sewer service upon the property owner within said
district and shall collect such taxes or sewer rentals as authorized. The
Town Board shall govern all sewer districts in accordance with applicable
law and specifications and regulations for sewers issued by the New York
State Department of Health and the Rockland County Department of
Health.20[Amended 2-6-2012 by L.L. No. 2-2012]
SEWER CONTRACTOR — Any person, firm or corporation acting as agent
for the owner and performing the work necessary to lay, relay or repair
sewer pipe or connections, or any appurtenant part thereto.[Added
2-6-2012 by L.L. No. 2-2012]
SYSTEM — All sewers, sewer lines and appurtenances to the sewer
improvement in said district.
TOWN — The Town of Ramapo, County of Rockland, New York.
§ 218-21. Permit required for street openings. [Amended 2-6-2012
by L.L. No. 2-2012]
It shall be the responsibility of the owner for whom a house connection is
being furnished to procure any necessary permits for street openings and
to replace the street surface as provided by the New York State Highway
20.Editor's Note: The definition of "Superintendent," which immediately followed this
definition, was repealed and all references in this article to the "Superintendent" were
amended to "Director of Public Works" 2-6-2012 by L.L. No. 2-2012.
§ 218-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 218-21
1:219
Law and any regulations issued thereunder by the Town of Ramapo
Superintendent of Highways or any other department or agency having
jurisdiction. Any person, firm or corporation acting as agent for the owner
and desiring to lay, relay or repair sewer pipe or connections, or any
appurtenant part thereto, in or below the surface of any private or public
highway, road, street or avenue within the district to connect to any part
of the system shall, prior to the commencement of any work, apply for and
obtain the permit required in the manner provided in the New York State
Highway Law and may on behalf of the owner obtain the street opening
permit as provided above. Such person, firm or corporation, except when
he or it is proceeding under contract with the Town and/or district, shall be
licensed in the manner provided by § 218-26 of this article.
§ 218-22. Permit required for sewer connections.
§ 218-23. Fee for sewer connection permit. [Amended 1-25-1995 by
L.L. No. 2-1995; 8-13-2003 by L.L. No. 3-2003; 2-6-2012 by L.L. No.
2-2012]
One permit shall be issued to cover the excavation and construction of the
house sewer and/or to disconnect the existing house drain or sewer pipe
from the cesspool or septic tank and then to connect it to the newly laid
house sewer discharging into the street sewer, the fee for which shall be
$150. If no permit is issued within 30 days, the fees shall be returned to the
A. An owner or his agent, before commencing any work or excavation for a
house sewer or connection to the sewer, or before making any
alterations or additions to existing house sewers or connections which
may be or are proposed to be connected to the system, shall file with
the Director of Public Works a written application for a permit, signed
by him or his agent on the form provided by the Director of Public
Works. Said application shall be accompanied by a complete description
of the proposed work, together with a plan or sketch thereof showing in
detail the location of the proposed connection, the contract price and
such other pertinent facts as the Director of Public Works may request.
No work shall be done and no connection shall be made until the
application has been approved and permission given by the Director of
Public Works. No connection to the system shall be made except under
inspection of the Director of Public Works and not before public notice
is given by the Board that the system is in readiness for use.
B. All charges, fees or rates for said permit shall be due and payable in
advance to the Town and when so paid shall be credited to the operation
and maintenance fund of the district. Any such permit will be issued
upon the express condition that the Board may, at the recommendation
of the Director of Public Works, at any time revoke and annul same if it
is deemed for the best interests of the district and Town. Such person,
firm or corporation, except when he or it is proceeding under contract
with the Town and/or district, shall be licensed in the manner provided
by § 218-26 of this article.
§ 218-21 RAMAPO CODE § 218-23
1:220
applicant, together with one copy of the filed application with the reasons
for rejection noted thereon and signed by the Director of Public Works.
The permit fee shall not be refunded once a sewer permit is issued. In
the event the property owner chooses to change sewer contractors after a
sewer permit is issued, a new permit must be obtained.
§ 218-24. Fee for review of building permit application. [Added
2-6-2012 by L.L. No. 2-2012]
The Department of Public Works shall review all building permit
applications for installation of plumbing facilities in basements or below
the first floor, for which a sewer review fee, as set forth in the Standard
Schedule of Fees, shall be paid.
§ 218-25. Construction at expense of owner. [Amended 2-6-2012 by
L.L. No. 2-2012]
All house sewer construction shall be done by the owner or contractor at the
owner's cost and expense between the lateral connection left by the Town
at the property line and the building. The Director of Public Works shall
approve, subject to § 218-22, the opening into the existing sewer for the
house connection. Where the existing sewer main is not located in a public
street, the person desiring to connect with such sewer main shall relocate
said main in the nearest public street in accordance with specification of the
Director of Public Works.
§ 218-26. License requirements.
A. License required. Every person, firm or corporation, before the
commencement of any work to construct a house sewer or connection
to the sewer system, shall make application in writing to the Director of
Public Works for a license.
B. Application for license. Prior to the issuance of any license by the
Director of Public Works, an applicant shall furnish to the Director of
Public Works satisfactory proof as follows:
(1) That said applicant is qualified to do such work in a good,
workmanlike manner.
(2) That said application is accompanied by bond with sureties
acceptable to the Board, in the sum of not less than $10,000,
guaranteeing:
(a) That the applicant shall duly and faithfully perform said work
in all respects.
(b) That the applicant shall comply in all respects with all rules
and regulations established by the Town.
(c) That the applicant will indemnify the Town for all loss or
damage that may result from his work for a period of not less
§ 218-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 218-26
1:221
than one year from date of completion and approval by the
Director of Public Works.
(d) That the applicant, as a condition of approval of the license, is
deemed to guarantee to each and every owner for whom work
shall be performed, for a period of not less than one year after
date of completion and approval by the Director of Public
Works of the work to be performed, the proper construction
and installation of the work performed.
(e) That the applicant will receive a permit from the Town before
commencing any work or excavation.
(f) That in the event the applicant has been deemed to have
violated this article or any rule or regulation, upon notice
thereof said applicant will forthwith, at his own expense, cure
said violation, and in the event of his failure to do so within a
reasonable time thereafter, said violation may be cured by the
Town, and any expense incidental thereto will be paid by the
applicant.
(3) The fee for such license shall be $50 payable to the Town upon
submission of the application. [Amended 12-22-1982 by L.L. No.
10-1982]
C. Insurance required. The applicant shall furnish certificates of public
liability insurance in the sum of $50,000 and $100,000 and property
damage insurance in the sum of $5,000, which shall indemnify and save
harmless the district and Town, its officers, agents and employees, from
all suits and actions for the recovery of damages, money or otherwise,
for and on account of any injury or damages resulting in death or
otherwise received or sustained by any person, persons or property as a
direct or indirect result of any work, labor or materials used by the
applicant and/or as a result of negligence, carelessness or recklessness
of the applicant in the performance of said work and/or as a result of
any act of omission or commission of said applicant. Said applicant shall
have workmen's compensation insurance as required by law, and the
application shall be accompanied by certificates thereof or by
satisfactory proof of the exemption. All of said policies of insurance
shall bear an endorsement in favor of the Town of Ramapo.
D. Cancellation and renewal of licenses. Upon receiving said certificate
from the Board, the applicant shall furnish to the Director of Public
Works a certificate of issuance signed by the Town Clerk. Said license
may be canceled and annulled by the Board for cause after a public
hearing thereon, but such license shall be automatically canceled and
annulled upon the expiration of either the bond or the insurance
required for such license. The owner of such canceled license shall not
thereafter be licensed for a period of two years after the date of the
cancellation of said license. Said license shall expire on the 31st day of
§ 218-26 RAMAPO CODE § 218-26
1:222
§ 218-27. Inspection of work; certificate of use.
§ 218-28. Connection with sewers required.
All buildings or premises within the district shall be connected with said
system as provided by any applicable County of Rockland regulation, local
law or ordinance. Whether or not said connection is made, all sewer rentals
or assessments shall commence as required by law.
§ 218-29. Existing waste disposal systems to be disconnected.
[Amended 2-6-2012 by L.L. No. 2-2012]
If and when a sewer connection is completed and approved, for any
property upon which buildings are located, existing waste disposal facilities,
including privy vaults, cesspools, septic tanks or similar facilities, shall
December in each year succeeding the date of its initial issuance.
[Amended 2-6-2012 by L.L. No. 2-2012]
E. Work performed by owner.
(1) Nothing herein contained shall prevent any owner from
constructing the connection and/or furnishing the material from
the house drain to the property line and any owner doing such work
on his private property need not, unless required by any other law,
obtain a license nor furnish any bond, public liability insurance nor
any workmen's compensation insurance but shall otherwise comply
with this article.
(2) The owner shall comply with this article concerning any work
necessary and materials for the connection and shall obtain all
necessary street opening permits.
A. No trench shall be backfilled nor shall any portion of the pipe or fitting
be covered until inspected and approved by the Director of Public
Works. Application for inspection shall be made in writing to the
Director of Public Works within 24 hours of when the building sewer is
ready for inspection, and such inspection shall be made as soon as
practical thereafter. Verbal requests may be made for inspection;
however, only written requests shall constitute documented proof of the
request. [Amended 2-6-2012 by L.L. No. 2-2012]
B. Upon approval of the work performed, the Director of Public Works
shall issue a certificate of use for said sewer connection, the issuance of
which shall remain subject to the requirements of § 218-22. The
certificate of use may be revoked by the Director of Public Works for
any violation of this article. The owner shall be entitled to appeal said
revocation to the Board, which shall hear the same at a public hearing
duly advertised at which the Director of Public Works shall be present.
The Board may restore the certificate or approve the action of the
Director of Public Works.
§ 218-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 218-29
1:223
immediately be disconnected and filled with a suitable material or
completely crushed so that no underground void remains; they shall be
abandoned by the property owner within 30 days after final inspection and
approval of the street sewer by the Director of Public Works. The Town
of Ramapo shall not provide any inspections of the abandoned tank. The
property owner shall be solely responsible for filling the abandoned tank or
facility.
§ 218-30. General regulations. [Amended 2-6-2012 by L.L. No.
2-2012]
A. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to cause, allow
or permit the discharge of sewage wastes from any building or
buildings or premises within the sewer district into or upon any
highway, private or public way, stream, watercourse, ditch, either
surface or subsurface, groundwater drain or stormwater drain.
B. Every building shall have a separate and independent connection with
the district sewer directly in front of the land upon which it is situated
except as otherwise permitted. When a building is situated in the rear
of another building, provided that both are on the same tax lot parcel
and in the same ownership, both buildings may be connected into a
single house sewer. No buildings in separate ownership shall be
permitted to share the same house sewer.
C. Size of house sewer. For single, two-family and three-family residences
the street lateral portion of the house sewer shall be six inches in
diameter. For single and two-family homes the building lateral portion
of the house sewer shall be four inches in diameter. The building lateral
shall be six inches in diameter for three-family homes. Proposed house
sewer sizes for commercial buildings are subject to the approval of the
Director of Public Works.
D. In each house drain constructed subsequent to the adoption of this
article, at a point just inside of the cellar wall, a four-inch standard
cleanout fitting with screw ferrules shall be provided. The lowest part of
the screw ferrule shall be placed at a point not less than 12 inches
above the cellar floor or the highest portion thereof if at different
elevations.
E. Construction materials for house sewers.
(1) Approved materials for sanitary sewer pipe are cast-iron, ductile
iron, and polyvinyl chloride pipe; other pipe materials shall require
the approval of the Director of Public Works.
(2) Class of pipe shall conform to manufacturer's recommendations for
width of trench, depth of cover and class of bedding.
(3) Cast-iron sewer pipe shall conform to federal specifications for CIP
WW-P421A. Cast-iron soil pipe shall conform to Standard
Specification for CI Soil Pipe ASTM Designation A74-75 Extra
§ 218-29 RAMAPO CODE § 218-30
1:224
Heavy. Neoprene gaskets shall conform to ASTM Designation
C564-70.
(4) Ductile iron pipe shall be centrifugally cast in metal molds in
accordance with ANSI/AWWA C151/A21.51. Gaskets shall be
furnished in accordance with ANSI/AWWA C111/A21.11. Asphaltic
outside coating and inside lining and coating are in accordance
with ANSI/AWWA C151/A21.10.
(5) Polyvinyl chloride pipe shall conform to ASTM Specification D
3034-78 SDR 35, using elastomeric gasket joints.
(6) Trenching.
(a) The trench width at the point at the top of the pipe shall not
exceed two feet plus the diameter of the pipe.
(b) All pipe, regardless of type or size, shall be laid on a bed of
from four inches to six inches of three-quarter-inch crushed
stone. All loose earth shall be removed from excavation, then
stone shall be placed in excavation and brought to grade, then
pipe shall be bedded in the stone.
(c) All connections on main, between consecutive manholes, shall
be accurately measured and recorded, certified as to accuracy
by the subdivider or subdivider's engineer as required by Local
Law No. 1, County of Rockland, Article VIII, Section I, and
submitted to the Director of Public Works. Depth of connection
at curb below finished grade shall also be recorded.
(d) All sanitary sewer pipe shall have a minimum cover of 2.5 feet
in all paved and proposed paved areas. Lesser cover may be
approved by the Director of Public Works on a case-by-case
basis, which may include encasement of the sewer in concrete.
(e) Sanitary sewer lines and water service lines must have a
minimum separation of 10 feet.
(7) Backfilling.
(a) Semi-granular material shall be used for backfilling. Material
shall be free of large stone, hard dry lumps, wood and trees
and, in cold weather, free of frozen lumps.
(b) All pipe shall be backfilled by hand in six-inch layers to a point
1 1/2 feet above the top of the pipe. Each layer shall be
tamped. The backfill shall be tamped around the lower half of
pipe. The remainder of backfilling may be done in a manner
acceptable to the Director of Public Works.
(c) Sewer trenches, in existing or proposed roads, shall be
backfilled and tamped in layers of one foot each. Pavement
shall be restored subject to the terms of the applicable road
§ 218-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 218-30
1:225
opening permit and approval of the Director of Public Works.
The contractor shall maintain restored pavement until such
time that the Superintendent of Highways shall give approval
of the job.
(8) House connections.
(a) House connection pipe shall be laid to minimum grade of 1/4
inch to one foot, unless otherwise approved by the Director of
Public Works. House connection under public or proposed
public roads shall not exceed 50 linear feet without specific
permission of the Director of Public Works.
(b) Pipes and joints for house connections shall conform to the
sewer pipe specifications shown above.
(c) All house connections at the main shall be of the Y type,
installed at the same time as the main and at a point on the
main indicated on the plan by the builder or builder's engineer.
In the event that no Y was installed for a given lot, an approved
saddle shall be installed by the builder.
(d) Joints between PVC and CIP shall be adapters by manufacturer
of pipe, or flexible rubber couplings as manufactured by
Fernco, Inc., or approved equal. Proposed joints between other
dissimilar materials shall be subject to the manufacturer's
recommendations and approval of the Director of Public
Works.
(e) The ends of all house connections shall be terminated with a
permanent, waterproof, approved cap or plug until such time
as the house soil line and house connection line are joined.
(f) Cleanouts shall be constructed just outside the building
foundation wall and at the right-of-way line where the street
lateral transitions to the house lateral. Cleanouts shall be
installed at intervals not exceeding 90 feet measuring from the
main and at ninety-degree change of direction where long
radius bends are not used. Cleanouts shall be brought up to
approximately one foot below ground level. Cleanouts in a
paved area may be brought up almost to ground level,
protected by a masonry box and steel plate. The location of the
cleanout caps shall be triangulated off of fixed objects and
submitted to the Sewer Inspector.
(g) No backfilling of house connection shall be allowed without
express permission of the Department of Public Works after
pipe installation has been inspected and approved.
(h) Permit to connect to public sewers shall be taken out before
any work commences. All applications shall be filled out
completely and signed by both owner and contractor.
§ 218-30 RAMAPO CODE § 218-30
1:226
Contractors must be licensed in accordance with provisions of
this article.
(i) House connection inspection requests shall be called in or
submitted with sewer permit number, tax lot number and name
and address of owner. These items shall also be available to the
inspector at the job site.
(j) A grease and oil interceptor tank shall be installed in house
connection lines or restaurants, luncheonettes, nursing homes,
hospitals, gas stations and garages with floor drains,
automobile laundries, and other types of commercial
establishments as may be required at the discretion of the
Department of Public Works, Rockland County Sewer District
No. 1.
(k) Any subdivision with "dry" sewers shall, at the time of sanitary
sewer construction, install house connection lines to within
five feet of CI soil pipe coming out of the foundation. All house
connection ends shall be triangulated from two house corners
or labeled, permanent objects, in relation to CI soil pipe and
submitted to the Department of Public Works by the subdivider
or subdivider's engineer and certified as to accuracy by a
licensed professional engineer according to Local Law No. 1,
County of Rockland, Article VIII, Section 1.
(9) Manholes.
(a) Manholes shall be installed in street sewer at a maximum
distance of 300 feet apart unless otherwise approved by the
Department of Public Works.
(b) Manholes shall be of an approved precast concrete type, with
resilient gaskets at section joints and with resilient seals at
pipe to manhole joints or approved equal. Any deviation from
this method must be approved by the Department of Public
Works. Refer to Construction Drawing Nos. 2 and 3, copies of
which may be obtained from the Department of Public Works.
(c) Manholes shall be cast with proper deflections and elevations
on inlets and outlets and be on the job site before any pipe
installation begins.
(d) Manholes shall be constructed on a firm base. Unstable
material shall be removed from excavation and stone or
concrete used to establish a stable base, as determined by the
Department of Public Works.
(e) Drop manholes shall be constructed when there is a change of
grade at the manhole of 24 inches or more. Details are shown
on Construction Drawing No. 3, copies of which may be
obtained from the Department of Public Works.
§ 218-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 218-30
1:227
(f) Depths of inverts in manholes shall be 3/4 diameter of sewer
pipe. Portland cement mortar shall be used for the building of
inverts.
(g) Manhole castings shall be brought up to finished grade with
the use of riser sections. A maximum of 10 inches of laid-up
masonry may be used between manhole and casting. Casting
shall be Campbell No. 1203 or approved equal. Cover shall be
Campbell No. 1203-107 or approved equal. Manholes in
easements shall have locking-type covers. Refer to
Construction Drawing No. 4, copies of which may be obtained
from the Department of Public Works.
(h) Watertight EPDM rubber seals as supplied by Infi-shield, Inc.,
or an approved equal shall be installed between manhole
section joints. The Department of Public Works shall determine
the applicable section joints.
(10) The Department of Public Works shall be notified 24 hours before
start of job, and cut sheets shall be submitted to the office before
any work starts.
(11) All new proposed roads shall be cut to subgrade before sanitary
sewer is installed.
(12) An inspection report certified by a licensed New York State
professional engineer stating the results of a low-pressure air test,
an infiltration and/or an exfiltration test shall be submitted to the
Department of Public Works, Town of Ramapo. All mains, manholes
and house connections (main to right-of-way) shall be tested at the
expense of the subdivider or contractor. Type of test to be run shall
be directed by the Department of Public Works. The allowable rate
of infiltration and/or exfiltration shall not exceed 100 gallons per
inch diameter of pipe per mile per day. All visible leaks shall be
sealed.
(13) All manholes shall be successfully vacuum tested prior to being
accepted by the Town of Ramapo. Specific testing procedures shall
be obtained from the Department of Public Works.
(14) Deflection tests for sewer mains shall be conducted with a fivepercent
madrel supplied by the Town of Ramapo. Arrangements to
borrow the mandrel from the Town shall be made at least 48 hours
in advance of the testing date. In the event any damage occurs to
the mandrel during testing, the contractor shall be responsible for
any and all repairs or replacement.
(15) Before final inspection, all sewer mains and manholes shall be
cleaned and power flushed and be free of all silt, stone, debris, and
other foreign materials.
§ 218-30 RAMAPO CODE § 218-30
1:228
§ 218-31. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 2-6-2012 by L.L. No.
2-2012]
A violation of any ordinance, rule or regulation hereunder is hereby
declared to be a misdemeanor, and the offender shall be liable to
prosecution for each violation and shall be subject to a fine of not to exceed
$1,000 for each offense or imprisonment of not more than one year, or both,
and shall also be liable to a civil penalty of $1,000 for each violation. In
addition thereto, an action or proceeding may also be maintained in the
name of the Town in a court of competent jurisdiction to compel compliance
with or to restrain by injunction the violation of any such ordinance, rule
or regulation, notwithstanding that the ordinance, rule or regulation may
provide a penalty or punishment for such violation. All moneys recovered
hereunder by the Town shall be credited to the operation and maintenance
(16) In the event only part of a subdivision is paved, the manholes and
castings in the remaining portion shall be protected from shifting
and displacement by construction vehicles or other means by the
installation of a four-inch to six-inch thick ten-foot diameter binder
course encompassing the manhole casting.
(17) In the event that, to sewer a given lot, group of lots or a
subdivision, a highway or road crossing is necessary to an existing
gravity sewer main and tunneling is required by the state, county
or Town Highway Department, a carrier pipe shall be installed in a
casing pipe of material and quality as specified on Construction
Drawing No. 5, a copy of which may be obtained from the
Department of Public Works.
F. Where, due to special or unusual conditions, a house sewer connection
cannot be constructed within the provisions of this article, or where
such chapter does not exactly apply, the Director of Public Works shall,
upon the receipt of an application for a house sewer connection under
such conditions, submit a report and recommendation explaining all
details of the case to the Board for its decision. Notice thereof shall be
given to the applicant, who shall have the right to appear before said
Board, and consideration shall be given to the requests of the applicant.
G. Nothing in this article shall prevent an owner or his agent from
appealing to the Board, on written notice to the Director of Public
Works, from any requirement or decision which in the opinion of the
owner or agent is unfair to him or imposes upon him an unusual
hardship.
H. The Director of Public Works or his duly authorized representatives
shall, in the discharge of his duties and in the enforcement of these
regulations and for the purposes of inspection and reinspection, have
the right to enter upon the properties and the buildings located in the
district at a reasonable time for the purpose of determining whether
sewer or drain construction on such premises is in accordance with the
requirements of this article.
§ 218-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 218-31
1:229
fund of the district. The Board may at any time in its discretion stop
and prevent the discharge into the system of any substance deemed by
it liable to injure the system or any pertinent part thereof or to interfere
with the normal operation of the system or any pertinent part thereof, and
said Board may at any time, without notice and without liability, obligation
or recourse, sever the house sewer connection or drain from the system
through which such detrimental substances are discharged. Upon proof of
the abatement of the detrimental discharge or correction of the cause of
such discharge, the Board may cause the disconnected house sewer or drain
to be reconnected to the system upon the receipt of a fee of $40 for such
reconnection.
§ 218-32. When effective; applicability.
This article shall take effect immediately after compliance with law
concerning the publication, posting and public hearing as provided by law
and shall be operative only within the unincorporated area of the Town of
Ramapo.
§ 218-31 RAMAPO CODE § 218-32
1:230
ARTICLE V
Illicit Discharges, Activities and Connections to Storm Sewer
System
[Adopted 3-8-2006 by L.L. No. 3-2006]
§ 218-33. Purpose and objectives.
The purpose of this article is to provide for the health, safety, and general
welfare of the citizens of the unincorporated area of the Town of Ramapo
through the regulation of non-stormwater discharges to the municipal
separate storm sewer system (MS4) to the maximum extent practicable
as required by federal and New York State law. This article establishes
methods for controlling the introduction of pollutants into the MS4 in order
to comply with requirements of the SPDES general permit for municipal
separate storm sewer systems. The objectives of this article are to:
§ 218-34. Definitions.
Whenever used in this article, unless a different meaning is stated in a
definition applicable to only a portion of this article, the following terms will
have meaning set forth below:
BMPS (BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES) — Schedules of activities,
prohibitions of practices, general good housekeeping practices, pollution
prevention and educational practices, maintenance procedures, and other
management practices to prevent or reduce the discharge of pollutants
directly or indirectly to stormwater, receiving waters, or stormwater
conveyance systems. BMPs also include treatment practices, operating
procedures, and practices to control site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or
water disposal, or drainage from raw materials storage.
CLEAN WATER ACT — The Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C.
§ 1251 et seq.), and any subsequent amendments thereto.
A. Meet the requirements of the SPDES general permit for stormwater
discharges from MS4s, Permit No. GP-02-02 or as amended or revised;
B. Regulate the contribution of pollutants to the MS4 since such systems
are not designed to accept, process or discharge non-stormwater
wastes;
C. Prohibit illicit connections, activities and discharges to the MS4;
D. Establish legal authority to carry out all inspection, surveillance and
monitoring procedures necessary to ensure compliance with this
article; and
E. Promote public awareness of the hazards involved in the improper
storage and/or discharge of trash, yard waste, lawn chemicals, pet
waste, wastewater, grease, oil, petroleum products, cleaning products,
paint products, hazardous waste, sediment, snow and ice control
materials, and other pollutants into the MS4.
§ 218-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 218-34
1:231
CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY — Activities requiring authorization under the
SPDES permit for stormwater discharges from construction activity,
GP-02-01, as amended or revised, and any land disturbance requiring a
municipal, New York State, or federal permit. These activities include
construction projects resulting in land disturbance. Such activities include
but are not limited to clearing and grubbing, grading, excavating, and
demolition.
DISCHARGER — Any person who owns or is in control of real or personal
property that discharges, directly or indirectly, any material into the MS4.
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS — Any material, including any substance, waste,
or combination thereof, which because of its quantity, concentration, or
physical, chemical, or infectious characteristics may cause, or significantly
contribute to, a substantial present or potential hazard to human health,
safety, property, or the environment when improperly treated, stored,
transported, disposed of, or otherwise managed.
ILLICIT CONNECTION — Any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface
or subsurface, which allows an illegal discharge to enter the MS4, including
but not limited to:
ILLICIT DISCHARGE — Any direct or indirect non-stormwater discharge to
the MS4, except as exempted in § 218-36 of this article.
INDIVIDUAL SEWAGE TREATMENT SYSTEM — A facility including septics,
cesspools and similar facilities serving one or more parcels of land or
residential households, or a private, commercial or institutional facility, that
treats sewage or other liquid wastes for discharge into the groundwaters of
New York State, except where a permit for such a facility is required under
the applicable provisions of Article 17 of the Environmental Conservation
Law.
INDUSTRIAL ACTIVITY — Activities requiring the SPDES permit for
discharges from industrial activities except construction, GP-98-03, as
amended or revised.
MS4 — Municipal separate stormwater sewer system.
MUNICIPALITY — The Town of Ramapo.
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORMWATER SEWER SYSTEM — A conveyance
or system of conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, municipal
Conveyances which allow any non-stormwater discharge, including
treated or untreated sewage, process wastewater, and wash water, to
enter the MS4 and any connections to the storm drain system from
indoor drains and sinks, regardless of whether said drain or connection
had been previously allowed, permitted, or approved by an authorized
enforcement agency; or
A.
Any drain or conveyance connected from a commercial or industrial
land use to the MS4 which has not been documented in plans, maps, or
equivalent records and approved by an authorized enforcement agency.
B.
§ 218-34 RAMAPO CODE § 218-34
1:232
streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels, or storm
drains):
NON-STORMWATER DISCHARGE — Any discharge to the MS4 that is not
composed entirely of stormwater. This includes any pollutants, as well as,
but not limited to, trash, yard waste, or pet waste.
NYS DEC — The New York State Department of Environmental
Conservation.
PERSON — Any individual, association, organization, partnership, firm,
corporation or other entity owning the property or having control of the
property.
POLLUTANT — Dredged spoil, filter backwash, solid waste, incinerator
residue, treated or untreated sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions,
chemical wastes, biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked
or discarded equipment, rock, sand, soil, and industrial, municipal or
agricultural waste and ballast discharged into water or any substance which
may cause or might reasonably be expected to cause pollution of the waters
of the state in contravention of the standards.
PROPERTY — Any building, lot, parcel of land, or portion of land, whether
improved or unimproved, including adjacent sidewalks and parking strips
and all chattel.
SMO (STORMWATER MANAGEMENT OFFICER) — An employee, the
Municipal Engineer or other public official(s) designated by the Town of
Ramapo to enforce this article. The SMO may also be designated by the
municipality to accept and review stormwater pollution prevention plans,
forward the plans to the applicable municipal board and inspect stormwater
management practices and designate certain responsibilities pursuant to
this article to other employees or agents of the municipality.
SPDES GENERAL PERMIT FOR CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITIES GP-02-01
— A permit under the New York State Pollutant Discharge Elimination
System (SPDES) issued to developers of construction activities to regulate
disturbance of one or more acres of land.
SPDES GENERAL PERMIT FOR STORMWATER DISCHARGES FROM
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORMWATER SEWER SYSTEMS GP-02-02 — A
permit under the New York State Pollutant Discharge Elimination System
(SPDES) issued to operators of small municipal separate stormwater sewer
systems (MS4s) to authorize them to discharge to waters of the United
States in accordance with the conditions and requirements set forth within
the Permit GP-02-02.
A. Owned or operated by the Town of Ramapo;
B. Designed or used for collecting or conveying stormwater;
C. Which is not a combined sewer; and
Which is not part of a publicly owned treatment works (POTW) as
defined at 40 CFR 122.2
D.
§ 218-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 218-34
1:233
SPDES (STATE POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM)
STORMWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT — A permit issued by the NYS DEC
that authorizes the discharge of pollutants to waters of the state.
SPECIAL CONDITIONS —
STORMWATER — Rainwater, snowmelt, drainage and uncontaminated
groundwater.
303(d) LIST — A list of all surface waters in the state for which beneficial
uses of the water (drinking, recreation, aquatic habitat, and industrial
use) are impaired by pollutants, prepared periodically by the New York
State Department of Environmental Conservation as required by Section
303(d) of the Clean Water Act; 303(d) listed waters are estuaries, lakes and
streams that fall short of state surface water quality standards and are not
expected to improve within the next two years.
DISCHARGE COMPLIANCE WITH WATER QUALITY STANDARDS —
The condition that applies where a municipality has been notified by
NYS DEC that the discharge of stormwater authorized under its MS4
permit may have caused or has the reasonable potential to cause or
contribute to the violation of an applicable water quality standard.
Under this condition the municipality must take all necessary actions
to ensure future discharges do not cause or contribute to a violation of
water quality standards.
A.
LISTED WATERS — TERS — The condition in the municipality's MS4
permit that applies where the MS4 discharges to a 303(d) listed water.
Under this condition the stormwater management program must
ensure no increase of the listed pollutant of concern to the 303(d) listed
water.
B.
TMDL (TOTAL MAXIMUM DAILY LOAD) STRATEGY —
The condition in the municipality's MS4 permit where a TMDL,
including requirements for control of stormwater discharges, has
been approved by the EPA for a water body or watershed into
which the MS4 discharges. If the discharge from the MS4 did
not meet the TMDL stormwater allocations prior to September
10, 2003, the municipality was required to modify its stormwater
management program to ensure that reduction of the pollutant of
concern specified in the TMDL is achieved.
(1)
The condition in the municipality's MS4 permit that applies if a
TMDL is approved in the future by the EPA for any water body or
watershed into which an MS4 discharges. Under this condition the
municipality must review the applicable TMDL to see if it includes
requirements for control of stormwater discharges. If an MS4 is not
meeting the TMDL stormwater allocations, the municipality must,
within six months of the TMDL's approval, modify its stormwater
management program to ensure that reduction of the pollutant of
concern specified in the TMDL is achieved.
(2)
C.
§ 218-34 RAMAPO CODE § 218-34
1:234
TMDL — Total Maximum Daily Load.
TOTAL MAXIMUM DAILY LOAD — The maximum amount of a pollutant to
be allowed to be released into a water body so as not to impair uses of the
water, allocated among the sources of that pollutant.
WASTEWATER — Water that is not stormwater, is contaminated with
pollutants and is or will be discarded.
§ 218-35. Administration.
The stormwater management officer(s) [SMO(s)] shall administer,
implement, and enforce the provisions of this article.
§ 218-36. Illegal discharges; exemptions; illicit connections.
A. Prohibition of illegal discharges. No person shall discharge or cause to
be discharged into the MS4 any materials other than stormwater except
as provided in Subsection A(1). The commencement, conduct or
continuance of any illegal discharge to the MS4 is prohibited except as
described as follows:
(1) The following discharges are exempt from discharge prohibitions
established by this article, unless the NYS DEC or the municipality
has determined them to be contributors of pollutants which could
negatively impact water quality: waterline flushing or other potable
water sources; landscape irrigation or lawn watering; existing
diverted stream flows; rising groundwater; groundwater
infiltration to storm drains; pumped groundwater, foundation or
footing drains; crawl space or basement sump pumps; airconditioning
condensate; irrigation water; springs; water from
individual residential car washing; natural riparian habitat or
wetland flows; dechlorinated/debrominated swimming pool, spa
and pond discharges; residential street, driveway, home or deck
wash water; water from fire-fighting activities; and any other water
source not containing pollutants. Such exempt discharges shall be
allowed only if uncontaminated.
(2) Discharges approved in writing by the SMO to protect life or
property from imminent harm or damage, provided that such
approval shall not be construed to constitute compliance with other
applicable laws and requirements, and further provided that such
discharges may be permitted for a specified time period and under
such conditions as the SMO may deem appropriate to protect such
life and property while reasonably maintaining the purpose and
intent of this article.
(3) Dye testing in compliance with applicable state and local laws is an
allowable discharge but requires a written notification to the SMO
prior to the time of the test.
§ 218-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 218-36
1:235
§ 218-37. Failing individual sewage treatment systems.
No persons shall operate a failing individual sewage treatment system
in areas tributary to the municipality's MS4. A failing individual sewage
treatment system is a system which has one or more of the following
conditions:
§ 218-38. Activities contaminating stormwater.
(4) Any discharge permitted under a SPDES permit, waiver, or waste
discharge order issued to the discharger and administered under
the authority of the NYS DEC, provided that the discharger is in full
compliance with all requirements of the permit, waiver, or order
and other applicable laws and regulations, and provided that
written approval has been granted for any discharge to the MS4.
The discharger shall be required to file a copy of said written
approval with the MS4 prior to the discharge.
B. Prohibition of illicit connections.
(1) The construction, use, maintenance or continued existence of any
illicit connections to the MS4 is prohibited.
(2) This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illicit
connections made in the past, regardless of whether the connection
was permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at
the time of connection.
A. The backup of sewage into a structure.
B. Discharges of treated or untreated sewage onto the ground surface.
C. A connection or connections to a separate stormwater sewer system.
D. Liquid level in the septic tank above the outlet invert.
E. Structural failure of any component of the individual sewage treatment
system that could lead to any of the other failure conditions as noted in
this section.
F. Contamination of off-site groundwater that can reasonably be
attributed to the individual sewage treatment system.
A. Activities that are subject to the requirements of this section are those
types of activities that:
(1) Cause or contribute to a violation of this article.
(2) Cause or contribute to the municipality being subject to the special
conditions as defined in § 218-34 (Definitions) of this article.
B. Such activities include failing individual sewage treatment systems as
defined in § 218-37, improper management of pet waste or any other
§ 218-36 RAMAPO CODE § 218-38
1:236
§ 218-39. Use of best management practices.
activity that causes or contributes to violations of the municipality's
MS4 SPDES permit authorization.
C. Upon notification to a person that he or she is engaged in activities that
cause or contribute to violations of the municipality's MS4 SPDES
permit authorization, that person shall take all reasonable actions to
correct such activities such that he or she no longer causes or
contributes to violations of the municipality's MS4 SPDES permit
authorization.
A. Best management practices. Where the SMO has identified illicit
discharges as defined in § 218-34 or activities contaminating
stormwater as defined in § 218-38, the municipality may require
implementation of best management practices (BMPs) to control those
illicit discharges and activities.
(1) The owner or operator of a commercial or industrial establishment
shall provide, at its own expense, reasonable protection from
accidental discharge of prohibited materials or other wastes into
the MS4 through the use of structural and nonstructural BMPs and
shall keep and maintain records and logs of the inspection and
maintenance of the BMPs and make available for inspection by the
MS4 for a period of three years.
(2) Any person responsible for a property which is, or may be, the
source of an illicit discharge or an activity contaminating
stormwater as defined in § 218-38 may be required to implement,
at said person's expense, additional structural and nonstructural
BMPs to reduce or eliminate the source of the pollutant(s) to the
MS4, including the recordkeeping requirements described in
Subsection A(1).
(3) Compliance with all terms and conditions of a valid SPDES permit
authorizing the discharge of stormwater associated with industrial
activity, to the extent practicable, shall be deemed compliance with
the provisions of this section.
B. Individual sewage treatment systems; response to special conditions
requiring no increase of pollutants or requiring a reduction of
pollutants. Where individual sewage treatment systems are
contributing to the municipality's being subject to the special
conditions as defined in § 218-34 of this article, the owner or operator
of such individual sewage treatment systems shall be required to:
(1) Maintain and operate individual sewage treatment systems as
follows:
(a) Inspect the septic tank annually to determine scum and sludge
accumulation. Septic tanks must be pumped out whenever the
bottom of the scum layer is within three inches of the bottom of
§ 218-38 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 218-39
1:237
§ 218-40. Suspension of access to MS4; illicit discharges in
emergency situations.
the outlet baffle or sanitary tee or the top of the sludge is
within 10 inches of the bottom of the outlet baffle or sanitary
tee. Most tanks should be pumped out every two to three years.
However, pumping may be more or less frequent depending
on use. Inspection of the tank for cracks, leaks and blockages
should be done by the septage hauler at the time of pumping
of the tank contents.
(b) Avoid the use of septic tank additives.
(c) Avoid the disposal of excessive quantities of detergents,
kitchen wastes (including oil and grease), laundry wastes, and
household chemicals.
(d) Prohibit the disposal of cigarette butts, disposable diapers,
sanitary napkins, trash and other such items.
(2) Repair or replace individual sewage treatment systems as follows:
(a) In accordance with 10 NYCRR Appendix 75A and Article IV of
the Rockland County Sanitary Code.
(b) A professional engineer licensed to practice in New York State
shall prepare design plans for any type of absorption field that
involves:
[1] Relocating or extending an absorption area to a location
not previously approved for such.
[2] Installation of a new subsurface treatment system at the
same location.
[3] Use of an alternate system or innovative system design or
technology.
(c) A written certificate of compliance shall be submitted by the
design professional to the municipality at the completion of
construction of the repair or replacement system. A written
certificate of approval shall be issued by the Rockland County
Health Department after inspection of the construction of the
repair or replacement system.
A. If it is necessary for the SMO to take action, the SMO may, without prior
notice, suspend MS4 discharge access to a person when such
suspension is necessary to stop an actual or threatened discharge
which presents or may present imminent and substantial danger to the
environment, to the health or welfare of persons, or to the MS4. The
SMO shall notify the person of such suspension within a reasonable
time thereafter in writing of the reasons for the suspension. If the
person fails to comply with a suspension order issued in an emergency,
§ 218-39 RAMAPO CODE § 218-40
1:238
§ 218-41. Industrial or construction activity discharges.
Any person subject to an industrial or construction activity SPDES
stormwater discharge permit shall comply with all provisions of such
permit. Proof of compliance with said permit shall be required by the
municipality in a form acceptable to the NYS DEC prior to the allowing of
discharges to the MS4.
§ 218-42. Access and monitoring of discharges.
the SMO may take such steps as deemed necessary to prevent or
minimize damage to the MS4 or to minimize danger to persons. All
costs and expenses incurred by the SMO to remedy the situation,
including proper disposal, shall be assessed to the owner of the
property. If the property owner fails to pay same, it may become a lien
against the property, subject to a hearing a minimum of 10 days prior
to the imposition of the tax lien.
B. Suspension due to the detection of illicit discharge. Any person
discharging to the municipality's MS4 in violation of this article may
have his MS4 access terminated if such termination would abate or
reduce an illicit discharge. The SMO will notify such person in writing
of the proposed termination of its MS4 access and the reasons therefor.
The person may petition the SMO for a reconsideration and hearing.
Access may be granted by the SMO if he/she finds that the illicit
discharge has ceased and the person has taken steps to prevent its
recurrence. Access may be denied if the SMO determines in writing
that the illicit discharge has not ceased or is likely to recur. A person
commits a violation if the person reinstates MS4 access to property
terminated pursuant to this section without the prior approval of the
SMO.
A. The SMO or his/her designee shall be permitted to enter and inspect all
properties subject to regulation under this article as often as may be
necessary to determine compliance with this article. If a person has
security measures in force that require proper identification and
clearance before entry into its premises, the person shall make the
necessary arrangements to allow access to the SMO.
B. All persons shall allow the SMO ready access to all parts of the property
for the purposes of inspection, sampling, examination and copying of
records as may be required to implement this article.
C. The municipality shall have the right to set up on any property subject
to this article such devices as are necessary in the opinion of the SMO
to conduct monitoring and/or sampling of the property's stormwater
discharge.
D. The municipality has the right to require the properties subject to this
article to install monitoring equipment as is reasonably necessary to
determine compliance with this article. The property's sampling and
§ 218-40 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 218-42
1:239
§ 218-43. Notification of spills.
Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as soon as any person
responsible for a property or operation, or responsible for emergency
response for a property or operation, has information of any known or
suspected release of materials which are resulting or may result in illegal
discharges or pollutants discharging into the MS4, said person shall take all
necessary steps to ensure the discovery, containment, and cleanup of such
release. In the event of such a release of hazardous materials said person
shall immediately notify emergency response agencies, the municipality,
and the responsible MS4 of the occurrence via emergency dispatch
services. In the event of a release of nonhazardous materials, said person
shall notify the municipality and responsible MS4 in person or by telephone
or facsimile no later than the next business day. Notifications in person or
by telephone shall be confirmed by written notice addressed and mailed to
the municipality within three business days of the telephone notice. If the
discharge of prohibited materials emanates from a commercial or industrial
establishment, the owner or operator of such establishment shall also retain
an on-site written record of the discharge and the actions taken to prevent
its recurrence. Such records shall be retained for at least three years.
§ 218-44. Notice of violation; penalties for offenses.
monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and
proper operating condition by the person at his own expense. All
devices used to measure stormwater flow and quality shall be
calibrated to ensure their accuracy.
E. Unreasonable delay in allowing the municipality access to a property
subject to this article is a violation of this article. A person who is the
operator of a property subject to this article commits an offense if the
person denies the municipality reasonable access to the property for
the purpose of conducting any activity authorized or required by this
article.
F. If the SMO has been refused access to any part of the property from
which stormwater is discharged and he/she is able to demonstrate
probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this article, or
that there is a need to inspect and/or sample as part of a routine
inspection and sampling program designed to verify compliance with
this article or any order issued hereunder, then the SMO may seek
issuance of a search warrant from any court of competent jurisdiction.
A. Notice of violation. When the municipality's SMO finds that a person
has violated a prohibition or failed to meet a requirement of this article,
the SMO may order compliance by written notice of violation by
certified mail and/or posting of the property to the responsible person.
(1) Such notice may require, without limitation:
(a) The elimination of illicit connections or discharges;
§ 218-42 RAMAPO CODE § 218-44
1:240
§ 218-45. Appeal of notice of violation.
Any person receiving a notice of violation may appeal the determination of
the SMO to the Town Board within 15 days of its issuance, which shall hear
the appeal within 30 days after the filing of the appeal and, within five days
of making its decision, file its decision in the office of the Municipal Clerk
and mail a copy of its decision by certified mail to said person.
§ 218-46. Corrective measures after appeal.
(b) That violating discharges, practices, or operations shall cease
and desist;
(c) The abatement or remediation of stormwater pollution or
contamination hazards and the restoration of any affected
property;
(d) The performance of monitoring, analyses, and reporting;
(e) Payment of a fine and reimbursement of any costs and/or
expenses incurred by the municipality relating to the violation;
and
(f) The implementation of source control or treatment BMPs.
(2) If abatement of a violation and/or restoration of affected property is
required, the notice shall set forth a deadline within which such
remediation or restoration must be completed. Said notice shall
further advise that, should the violator fail to remediate or restore
within the established deadline, the work will be done by a
designated governmental agency or a contractor and the expense
thereof shall be charged to the violator.
(3) The municipality shall also have the right to issue an appearance
ticket for said violation.
B. Penalties. In addition to or as an alternative to any penalty provided
herein or by law, any person who violates the provisions of this article
shall be guilty of a violation punishable by a fine not exceeding $1,000
or imprisonment for a period not to exceed 15 days, or both for
conviction of a first offense; for conviction of a second offense both of
which were committed within a period of five years, punishable by a
fine not less than $1,000 nor more than $2,500 or imprisonment for a
period not to exceed 15 days, or both; and upon conviction for a third or
subsequent offense, all of which were committed within a period of five
years, punishable by a fine not less than $2,500 nor more than $5,000
or imprisonment for a period not to exceed 15 days, or both. However,
for the purposes of conferring jurisdiction upon courts and judicial
officers generally, violations of this article shall be deemed offenses.
Each week's continued violation shall constitute a separate additional
offense.
§ 218-44 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 218-46
1:241
§ 218-47. Injunctive relief.
It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision or fail to comply
with any of the requirements of this article. If a person has violated or
continues to violate the provisions of this article, the SMO may petition for
a preliminary or permanent injunction restraining the person from activities
which would create further violations or compelling the person to perform
abatement or remediation of the violation.
§ 218-48. Alternative remedies.
A. If the violation has not been corrected pursuant to the requirements set
forth in the notice of violation or, in the event of an appeal, within five
business days of the decision of the municipal authority upholding the
decision of the SMO, then the SMO may request the person's
permission for access to the subject property to take any and all
measures reasonably necessary to abate the violation and/or restore
the property. The cost of implementing and maintaining such measures
shall be the sole responsibility of the person.
B. If refused access to the subject property, the SMO may seek a warrant
in a court of competent jurisdiction to be authorized to enter upon the
property to take any and all measures reasonably necessary to abate
the violation and/or restore the property. The cost of implementing and
maintaining such measures shall be the sole responsibility of the
person.
A. Where a person has violated a provision of this article, he/she may be
eligible for alternative remedies in lieu of a penalty, upon
recommendation of the Town Attorney and concurrence of the SMO,
where:
(1) The violation was unintentional.
(2) The discharger has no history of previous violations of this article.
(3) Environmental damage was minimal.
(4) The discharger acted quickly to remedy violation.
(5) The discharger cooperated in investigation and resolution.
B. Alternative remedies may consist of one or more of the following:
(1) Attendance at compliance workshops.
(2) Storm drain stenciling or storm drain marking.
(3) River, stream or creek cleanup activities.
§ 218-46 RAMAPO CODE § 218-49
1:242
§ 218-49. Declaration of nuisance.
In addition to the enforcement processes and penalties provided, any
condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of
this article is a threat to public health, safety, and welfare and is declared
and deemed a nuisance and may be summarily abated or restored at the
violator's expense, and/or a civil action to abate, enjoin, or otherwise
compel the cessation of such nuisance may be taken.
§ 218-50. Remedies not exclusive.
The remedies listed in this article are not exclusive of any other remedies
available under any applicable federal, state or local law and it is within
the discretion of the authorized enforcement agency to seek cumulative
remedies.
§ 218-49 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 218-50
1:243
Chapter 223
SIGNS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Zoning — See Ch. 376, Art. VIII.
§ 218-50 RAMAPO CODE § 218-50
1:244
ARTICLE I
Temporary Signs
[Adopted 5-8-1985 by L.L. No. 4-1985]
§ 223-1. Title.
This article shall be known and may be cited hereinafter as the "Temporary
Signs Law of the Town of Ramapo."
§ 223-2. Legislative intent; purpose. [Amended 6-14-1989 by L.L.
No. 11-1989]
It is the intention of the Town Board of the Town of Ramapo, by the adoption
of this article, to regulate the posting and display of political and other
temporary signs on property within the unincorporated area of the Town
of Ramapo in pursuance of and for the purpose of securing and protecting
the public health, comfort, convenience, safety and welfare and preserving
the peace, good order and physical appearance of the Town of Ramapo and
its inhabitants. The Town Board finds that the streets, highways and other
areas of the Town are becoming increasingly cluttered with political and
other types of signs which are interfering with the natural beauty and traffic
safety of the Town. The substantial possibility exists of a proliferation of
such signs in the Town over extended periods of time with the attendant
problems with pedestrian and vehicular traffic safety, litter, structural and
other hazards. It is the purpose of this article to protect the general public
from the hazards of flying paper or cloth, general debris and litter and the
destruction of, or injury to, property and property rights.
§ 223-3. Word usage; definitions.
A. "Shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
B. For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meanings given herein.
PERSON — An individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company or organization of any kind.
POLITICAL SIGN — A temporary sign or advertisement, the import of
which asks or suggests that the viewer vote for or against, or merely
announces, a particular candidate seeking any political or elective
office, as well as any sign or advertisement, the import of which asks
or suggests that the viewer vote for or against, or merely announces, a
particular ballot issue.
PUBLIC PROPERTY — All publicly owned property, including highways,
streets, sidewalks, rights-of-way, easements, public grounds, parks,
school property or any other public property, posts, hydrants, trees,
streetlamps, utility poles or traffic signs situated on public property and
anything affixed thereto and thereover.[Amended 6-14-1989 by L.L.
No. 11-1989]
§ 223-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 223-3
1:245
§ 223-4. Signs on public property. [Amended 6-14-1989 by L.L. No.
11-1989]
No person shall display or post any sign on, or over, any public property in
the unincorporated area of the Town of Ramapo.
§ 223-5. Signs on private property. [Amended 6-14-1989 by L.L. No.
11-1989]
§ 223-6. Security deposit; time limits; exemptions.
SIGN — Any bill, poster, placard, announcement, handbill, flyer,
painting, drawing, structure or other similar configuration or object in
any form whatsoever, or any part thereof, which contains printed or
written matter in words, symbols or pictures, or in any combination
thereof. The term "sign" does not include the flag, pennant or insignia
of any nation, group of nations or of any governmental agency or of
any educational, charitable, philanthropic, civic, professional, religious
or like campaign, drive, movement or event, nor does it include signs
posted or erected pursuant to and in the discharge of any governmental
function or required by any law, ordinance or governmental regulation.
TEMPORARY SIGN — A sign erected for a relatively short period
of time, which period shall be terminated by the work, event, sale
of the premises or product advertised or occurrence of the event to
which it refers, and in all respects the same as a sign which is not
temporary insofar as matters of location, construction and public safety
are concerned.
A. No signs shall be posted on any private property without the written
permission of the owner thereof and filing of a security deposit
pursuant to § 223-6. A list of persons granting the written permission
must be filed with the Town Clerk's office.
B. No signs shall be placed in a position that will obstruct or impair vision
and traffic or in any manner create a hazard or disturbance to the
health and safety of the general public.
A. Political signs. [Amended 6-14-1989 by L.L. No. 11-1989]
(1) Prior to the placement of any political signs by any person, such
person shall file with the Town Clerk a notice that said person
intends to post or display political signs, said notice containing the
following information:
(a) Name of applicant.
(b) Address of applicant.
(c) Telephone number where applicant can be reached.
(d) Purpose for sign.
§ 223-3 RAMAPO CODE § 223-6
1:246
(e) Duration of the event advertised by the sign.
(2) Accompanying the notice described above shall be the payment of a
sign permit fee as set forth in the Standard Schedule of Fees and a
security deposit as set forth in the Standard Schedule of Fees of the
Town of Ramapo as a guaranty that each and every such sign will
be removed promptly within two weeks immediately following the
nomination, primary, election or referendum to which it pertains. If
such removal is not made within the specified time, the Town shall
have such signs removed and the security deposit shall be forfeited
to the Town to defray the cost of removal of such signs. No political
sign may be posted or displayed within the Town more than 60 days
prior to the nomination, primary, election or referendum to which it
pertains. Provided the candidate for a primary election succeeds in
said primary election, then and in that event, the removal of such
candidate's signs shall be completed within two weeks immediately
following the general election wherein said person is a candidate.
[Amended 5-28-2014 by L.L. No. 4-2014]
B. Other temporary signs. [Amended 6-14-1989 by L.L. No. 11-1989]
(1) Prior to the placement of any temporary signs by any person, such
person shall file with the Town Clerk a notice that said person
intends to post or display signs, such notice containing the
following information:
(a) Name of applicant.
(b) Address of applicant.
(c) Telephone number where applicant can be reached.
(d) Purpose for sign.
(e) Duration of the event advertised by the sign.
(2) Accompanying the notice described above shall be the payment of a
sign permit fee as set forth in the Standard Schedule of Fees and a
security deposit as set forth in the Standard Schedule of Fees of the
Town of Ramapo as a guaranty that such signs will be removed
promptly within two weeks immediately following the cessation of
the event or activity mentioned in the permit. If such removal is not
made within the specified time, the Town shall have such signs
removed and the security deposit shall be forfeited to the Town to
defray the cost of removal of such signs. No temporary sign, other
than political signs, may be posted or displayed within the Town for
a period of more than 30 days. [Amended 5-28-2014 by L.L. No.
4-2014]
C. Exemptions.
(1) Signs for charitable purposes. All signs of a temporary nature
which are for charitable purposes, or where the applicant is a
§ 223-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 223-6
1:247
§ 223-7. Enforcement. [Amended 1-14-1987 by L.L. No. 2-1987]
The Police Department of the Town of Ramapo and/or the enforcement
official as designated in Chapter 376, Zoning, § 376-140 of the Code of
the Town of Ramapo shall have the power, right and authority to issue an
appearance ticket, as the same is defined in Article 150 of the Criminal
Procedure Law of the State of New York, for the violation of any section of
this article.
§ 223-8. Penalties for offenses.
charitable, nonprofit or philanthropic organization, shall be exempt
from the security deposit provisions of this article.
(2) Signs advertising merchandise for sale. All temporary signs
advertising merchandise for sale in or upon the premises where
such temporary signs are displayed shall be exempt from the
permit and security deposit provisions of this article.
A. Any person violating any section or provision of this article shall be
guilty of a Class 3 violation, as defined in Chapter 1, § 1-15 et seq., of
the Revised Code of the Town of Ramapo, and shall be punished
according to the provisions thereunder.
B. In the case of continuing violation of this article, each week that such
violation exists and each sign posted in violation of this article shall
constitute a separate and distinct Class 3 violation.
C. In addition to the above-provided penalties and punishment, the Town
Board may also maintain an action in the name of the Town in any court
of competent jurisdiction to compel compliance with or to restrain by
injunction the violation of this article.
§ 223-6 RAMAPO CODE § 223-8
1:248
Chapter 228
SNOWPLOWING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 243.
§ 228-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited hereinafter as the "Snowplow
Licensing Law of the Town of Ramapo."
§ 228-2. Legislative intent.
It is the intention of the Town Board of the Town of Ramapo by the adoption
of this chapter to regulate the plowing of snow by private snow removal
contractors within the unincorporated area of the Town of Ramapo in
pursuance of and for the purpose of securing and protecting the public
health, convenience, safety and welfare and preserving the peace, good
order and physical appearance of the Town of Ramapo and its inhabitants.
The Town Board finds that, in the plowing of snow by private snow removal
contractors, snow is deposited on public roads and highways, thereby
creating pedestrian and vehicular traffic safety and other hazards. It is the
purpose of this chapter to protect the general public from the hazards of
snow and the destruction of or injury to persons and property.
§ 228-3. Word usage; definitions.
§ 228-4. Permit required.
No person, firm or corporation shall plow snow or cause or allow same to be
plowed by the use of any vehicle within the Town of Ramapo unless a permit
therefor, as hereinafter prescribed, issued by the Town Clerk of the Town of
Ramapo, is in full force and effect and such permit is prominently displayed
by affixing to the vehicle as to be readily visible from the exterior thereof.
A. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
B. For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meanings given herein:
VEHICLE — Any vehicle, as defined in the Vehicle and Traffic Law of
the State of New York, licensed to operate on the highways of the State
of New York and used to plow snow, but the term shall not include a
vehicle used solely by a person, firm or corporation to plow snow within
the confines of his or its own property, whether owned or leased, nor
shall it include a vehicle used solely by a governmental entity to plow
snow on public roads, highways and thoroughfares.
§ 223-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 228-5
1:249
§ 228-5. Application for permit; fee; issuance, term and
transferability of permit.
§ 228-6. Interference with public thoroughfares prohibited.
No person shall plow, shovel, sweep or pile snow, ice or other materials in
or beyond the right-of-way of any street or public highway or cause such to
be done so as to interfere with the safety and convenience of public travel.
§ 228-7. Enforcement.
The Police Department of the Town of the Town of Ramapo and/or the
enforcement official as designated in Chapter 376, Zoning, § 376-140 of the
Code of the Town of Ramapo shall have the power, right and authority to
issue an appearance ticket, as the same is defined in Article 150 of the
Criminal Procedure Law of the State of New York, for the violation of any
section or provision of this chapter.
§ 228-8. Penalties for offenses.
A. Application for such permit shall be made to the Town Clerk of the Town
of Ramapo by the owner of the vehicle, in writing, upon forms to be
furnished by said Town Clerk, which forms shall contain the owner's
name and address, the vehicle identification number, the New York
State license number attached thereto and such additional information
as the Town Clerk shall require. The Town Clerk may require such
documents and information as may be reasonably necessary to verify
the facts stated in such application.
B. The applicant shall, at the time of the filing of his application, pay a
permit fee as provided in the Standard Schedule of Fees of the Town of
Ramapo for each vehicle. [Amended 2-6-2012 by L.L. No. 2-2012]
C. If such application or applications shall be approved by the Town Clerk,
a permit or permits shall be issued by the Town Clerk to the applicant.
D. Such permit shall commence November 15 and expire November 14 in
each year and shall be in such form as the Town Clerk shall prescribe.
E. Such permit shall not be transferable to another owner.
A. The Town Board may, following a hearing before such Town Board,
revoke the permit or permits granted to any person, firm or corporation
under the authority of this chapter or any law, ordinance, rule or
regulation relating to snowplowing.
B. In addition to any other penalties that may be invoked under this
chapter, any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions
of this chapter shall be guilty of a Class 3 violation as defined in Chapter
1, § 1-15 et seq., of the Revised Code of the Town of Ramapo and shall
be punished according to the provisions thereunder. In the case of
§ 228-5 RAMAPO CODE § 228-8
1:250
Chapter 235
SOLID WASTE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Littering — See Ch. 178. Property maintenance — See Ch. 204.
continuing violation of this chapter, each week that such violation exists
shall constitute a separate and distinct Class 3 violation.
C. In addition to the above-provided penalties and punishment, the Town
Board may also maintain an action in the name of the Town in any court
of competent jurisdiction to compel compliance with or to restrain by
injunction the violation of this chapter.
D. Any person who takes part in or assists in any violation of this chapter
shall also be subject to the penalties provided herein.
§ 228-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 228-8
1:251

ARTICLE I
Placement for Collection
[Adopted 7-13-1983 by L.L. No. 9-1983]
§ 235-1. Title.
This article shall be known and may be cited hereinafter as the "Trash
Pickup Law of the Town of Ramapo."
§ 235-2. Word usage; definitions.
A. For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words
and their derivations shall have the meanings given herein. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense shall
include the future, words in the plural number include the singular
number, and words in the singular number include the plural number.
The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
B. As used in this chapter, the following words shall have the meanings
indicated: [Amended 2-6-2012 by L.L. No. 2-2012]
CARDBOARD — Thick paperboard, brown in color, including but not
limited to corrugated materials.
DWELLING OR UNIT — Any one-, two- or three-family residential
building, excluding all condominiums, located in the unincorporated
areas of the Town of Ramapo.
GARBAGE — Normal, usual kitchen and household waste, primarily
from perishable or disposable items, such as leftover food matter, food
packaging and containers, such as milk cartons, disposable plastic
eating utensils, dishes, pots and pans, crockery, and small household
appliances, provided the same are placed in securely fastened
containers or bags which, when filled, have a maximum weight of 60
pounds and a maximum volume of 30 gallons.
PERSON — Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company or organization of any kind.
RECYCLABLES —
COMMINGLED CONTAINERS — Glass bottles (green, clear or
brown), tin and bimetallic containers (including aerosol cans), PET
plastic containers (No. 1), HDPE plastic containers (No. 2), PVC
plastic containers (No. 3), LDPE plastic containers (No. 4), PP
plastic containers (No. 5), PS plastic containers (No. 6), other
plastic containers (No. 7), aluminum foil (pie plates), milk cartons,
bleached white frozen/refrigerated food containers, drink boxes,
and other containers (designated by the Town of Ramapo).
(1)
COMMINGLED PAPER — White and colored ledger (office paper),
white envelopes, newspaper, corrugated containers, magazines,
computer printout paper, Kraft paper (brown grocery bags), junk
(2)
§ 235-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 235-2
1:253
§ 235-3. Placement of garbage, trash and recyclables. [Amended
2-6-2012 by L.L. No. 2-2012]
TOWN — The Town of Ramapo.
TRASH —
mail (including envelopes and coupons), telephone and paperback
books, chipboard/boxboard, fax/photocopy paper, catalogs,
notebook paper, construction paper, soft-covered workbooks, and
other paper.
LEAF or LEAVES — These terms shall have the meanings assigned
by common usage, as set forth in the latest edition of Webster's
New Collegiate Dictionary, and shall not include twigs, stems or
branches.
(3)
YARD WASTE — Grass clippings, trees and tree branches, provided
the same are cut into sections less than four feet in length with
each such section weighing not more than 60 pounds. Tree stumps
and excessive dirt are not included herein.
(4)
OTHER RECYCLABLES — Such other items as the Town of Ramapo
shall deem from time to time to be recyclables.
(5)
Any item of solid waste not encompassed within the definitions
herein of "garbage" and "recyclables" that is nontoxic and/or
nonputrescible and is placed in a clearly fastened container or bag
which is filled to a maximum weight of 60 pounds and a maximum
gallon capacity of 30 gallons. Said items include, but are not limited
to, discardable household items of a durable nature; tree branches;
ashes and other refuse resulting from the burning of wood and/
or coal for heating purposes; and small motor vehicle parts. Said
items shall not include materials left over from home improvements
and remodeling projects and/or refuse from demolished or newly
constructed buildings.
(1)
Discardable household items of a durable nature, such as furniture
and large household appliances such as refrigerators (so long as
their doors have been removed), washing machines, dryers,
dishwashers, and window air conditioners.
(2)
Tires, bearing a Town of Ramapo tire removal sticker, and motor
vehicle parts not exceeding 60 pounds and containerized as
necessary to facilitate rapid loading on collection vehicles,
exclusive of junk vehicles, vehicle bodies, engine blocks or
transmissions.
(3)
A. For collection pursuant to a schedule announced by the Department of
Public Works of the Town, all trash must be placed on the curbline
where accessible. Such trash shall be placed in containers whenever
possible. Such trash shall be set out no earlier than 3:00 p.m. on the day
prior to collection, and all containers shall be removed no later than
§ 235-2 RAMAPO CODE § 235-3
1:254
§ 235-4. Enforcement.
The Police Department of the Town of Ramapo and/or the enforcement
official as designated in Chapter 376, Zoning, § 376-140 of the Code of
8:00 p.m. on the collection day. When a regular collection day falls on
a legal holiday, containers shall not be set out until the next regularly
scheduled collection day unless special announcement of collection is
made by the Town.
B. Placement of garbage, trash and recyclables shall be in an orderly
fashion to facilitate collection, in accordance with the following
provisions:
(1) Garbage. Placement of garbage for collection shall be at any point
between the street curb and the five feet behind the front building
line. Garbage shall be placed into securely fastened containers or
bags not larger than 30 gallons in volume and filled to a maximum
weight of 60 pounds.
(2) Trash. Placement of trash for collection shall be at the street curb.
Trash shall be placed into securely fastened containers or bags not
larger than 30 gallons in volume and filled to a maximum weight of
60 pounds.
(3) Furniture and large household appliances. Placement of furniture
and large household appliances shall be at the street curb. Property
owners shall schedule placement of such items with the
Department of Public Works.
(4) Recyclables. Placement of recyclables for collection shall be at the
street curb. Commingled recyclables and paper must be placed in
separate recycling bins provided by the Town of Ramapo.
(5) Cardboard. Placement of cardboard for collection shall be at the
street curb. Before being placed inside the paper recycling bin,
cardboard boxes must be flattened and secured together, by
insertion into a larger, flattened box, tying or taping.
(6) Leaves. Placement of leaves for collection shall be at the street
curb. Leaves must be bagged in biodegradable brown paper bags.
(7) Yard waste. Placement of yard waste for collection shall be at the
street curb. Grass clippings must be placed in biodegradable brown
paper bags. Brush, branches and trees shall be cut into sections no
more than four feet in length and tied into bundles weighing no
more than 60 pounds.
(8) Tires. Placement of tires for collection shall be at the street curb. A
Town of Ramapo tire removal sticker shall be affixed to each tire
placed for collection. Stickers may be purchased at the office of the
Ramapo Town Clerk.
§ 235-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 235-4
1:255
the Town of Ramapo shall have the power, right and authority to issue an
appearance ticket for the violations of this chapter.
§ 235-5. Penalties for offenses.
A. Any person violating any section or provision of this chapter shall be
guilty of a Class 3 violation, as defined in Chapter 1, § 1-15 et seq., of
the Revised Code of the Town of Ramapo, and shall be punished
according to the provisions thereunder.
B. In the case of continuing violation of this chapter, each day that such
violation exists shall constitute a separate and distinct Class 3 violation.
§ 235-4 RAMAPO CODE § 235-5
1:256
ARTICLE II
Recycling
[Adopted 5-25-1988 by L.L. No. 7-1988]
§ 235-6. Title; applicability.
This article shall be cited and may be referred to hereinafter as the
"Mandatory Recycling Law of the Town of Ramapo" and shall apply to the
unincorporated area of the Town.
§ 235-7. Legislative intent and purpose. [Amended 8-24-1988 by
L.L. No. 8-1988; 11-27-1991 by L.L. No. 15-1991; 2-6-2012 by L.L.
No. 2-2012]
It is the goal of the Town to reduce the total amount of solid waste
generated in the unincorporated area of the Town. To accomplish this
goal, the Town desires to implement a recycling program mandating the
separation of recyclables from other refuse produced by residential and
nonresidential premises. This program is also designed to protect the health
and safety of the residents of the Town.
§ 235-8. Definitions.
A. For the purposes of this article, certain words and phrases shall be
construed herein as set forth in this section unless it is apparent from
the context that a different meaning is intended. When not inconsistent
with the context, the present tense shall include the future, and words
used in the plural shall include the singular and vice versa. Further, a
masculine pronoun shall include the feminine. The word "shall" is
always mandatory and not merely directory.
B. As used in this article, the following words shall have the meanings
indicated: [Amended 8-24-1988 by L.L. No. 8-1988; 11-27-1991 by
L.L. No. 15-1991]
PERSON — Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company or organization of any kind.
RECYCLABLES — [Amended 2-6-2012 by L.L. No. 2-2012]
COMMINGLED CONTAINERS — Glass bottles (green, clear or
brown), tin and bimetallic containers (including aerosol cans), PET
plastic containers (No. 1), HDPE plastic containers (No. 2), PVC
plastic containers (No. 3), LDPE plastic containers (No. 4), PP
plastic containers (No. 5), PS plastic containers (No. 6), other
plastic containers (No. 7), aluminum foil (pie plates), milk cartons,
bleached white frozen/refrigerated food containers, drink boxes,
and other containers (designated by the Town of Ramapo).
(1)
COMMINGLED PAPER — White and colored ledger (office paper),
white envelopes, newspaper, corrugated containers, magazines,
computer printout paper, Kraft paper (brown grocery bags), junk
(2)
§ 235-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 235-8
1:257
§ 235-9. Prohibited acts. [Amended 8-24-1988 by L.L. No. 8-1988;
11-27-1991 by L.L. No. 15-1991]
Recyclables shall not be placed in the same receptacle with other forms of
refuse for removal to the Town's solid waste baler.
§ 235-10. Recycling requirements. [Amended 8-24-1988 by L.L. No.
8-1988; 11-27-1991 by L.L. No. 15-1991; 2-6-2012 by L.L. No.
2-2012]
REFUSE — All putrescible and nonputrescible solid wastes (except
body wastes), including garbage, wastepaper, trash, construction and
demolition debris and ashes.
TOWN — The unincorporated area of the Town of Ramapo.
mail (including envelopes and coupons), telephone and paperback
books, chipboard/boxboard, fax/photocopy paper, catalogs,
notebook paper, construction paper, soft-covered workbooks, and
other paper.
LEAF or LEAVES — These terms shall have the meanings assigned
by common usage, as set forth in the latest edition of Webster's
New Collegiate Dictionary, and shall not include twigs, stems or
branches.
(3)
YARD WASTE — Grass clippings, trees and tree branches, provided
the same are cut into sections less than four feet in length with
each such section weighing not more than 60 pounds. Tree stumps
and excessive dirt are not included herein.
(4)
OTHER RECYCLABLES — Such other items as the Town of Ramapo
shall deem from time to time to be recyclables.
(5)
A. Commingled containers shall be placed in the recycling bin provided by
the Town.
B. Commingled papers shall be placed in the recycling bin provided by the
Town.
C. Leaves shall be placed in biodegradable Kraft paper bags having a
weight of no more than 60 pounds.
D. Cardboard boxes must be flattened and secured together, before being
placed inside the paper recycling bin, by insertion into a larger,
flattened box, tying or taping.
E. Grass clippings must be placed in biodegradable brown paper bags.
Brush, branches and trees shall be cut into sections no more than four
feet in length and tied into bundles weighing no more than 60 pounds.
F. A Town of Ramapo tire removal sticker shall be affixed to any tire left
for pickup.
§ 235-8 RAMAPO CODE § 235-10
1:258
§ 235-11. Rules and regulations.
§ 235-12. Enforcement.
The Police Department of the Town of Ramapo and/or the enforcement
official as designated in Chapter 376, Zoning, § 376-140 of the Code of
the Town of Ramapo shall have the power, right and authority to issue an
G. The Town Board may, from time to time, designate additional materials
as recyclables.
H. Ownership of recyclables set out for collection shall vest in the Town. It
shall be unlawful for a person to collect, remove or dispose of
recyclables which are the property of the Town without first having
obtained the permission of the Town.
I. Any person may donate or sell recyclables to any person, whether
operating for profit or not for profit. No one, however, under any
circumstances may pick up said recyclables from the curbside in the
Town.
J. The Town Board is hereby empowered to designate the days of the week
on which recyclables shall be collected.
K. No person having custody or control of residential, industrial or
business premises within the unincorporated area of the Town of
Ramapo shall permit or cause any recyclables within his control to
become a hazard or potential hazard to public travel, health or safety or
to become a nuisance of any sort.
L. For collection pursuant to a schedule adopted by the Town Board, all
recyclables must be placed on the curbline where accessible. Such
recyclables shall not be set out earlier than 3:00 p.m. on the day prior to
the collection, and all recycling bins shall be removed no later than 8:00
p.m. of the collection day. When a regular collection day falls on a legal
holiday, recyclables shall not be set out until the next regularly
scheduled collection day, unless special announcement of collection is
made by the Town.
M. No recycling bins or containers for the placement of refuse can be
placed in any structure within 10 feet of a public road except as
provided in Subsection L above.
A. The Town of Ramapo Director of Public Works is hereby empowered to
jointly promulgate rules and regulations as may be deemed necessary
to effectuate the intent and requirements of this article. Said rules and
regulations shall be approved by the Town Board at a public meeting.
[Amended 11-27-1991 by L.L. No. 15-1991; 2-6-2012 by L.L. No.
2-2012]
B. Said rules and regulations may be amended by the Town Board by
resolution at a public meeting of the Town Board.
§ 235-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 235-12
1:259
appearance ticket, as the same is defined in Article 150 of the Criminal
Procedure Law of the State of New York, for the violation of any section of
this article.
§ 235-13. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 8-24-1988 by L.L. No.
8-1988; 11-27-1991 by L.L. No. 15-1991]
Any person, firm or corporation who or which shall violate this article or
who or which shall knowingly assist therein shall be subject to the following
punishment:
A. Upon the first offense, the refuse shall not be collected and shall be
marked with a sticker indicating "Mandatory Recycling. Your refuse
was not collected today because recyclables were mixed in. Your refuse
will be collected on your next regular refuse day, once the recyclables
have been removed. Failure to comply will result in a summons. Town of
Ramapo Local Law No. 7-1988, as amended."
B. For a second offense within 30 days, by a fine of not less than $25 nor
more than $200. In addition, the refuse shall not be collected.
[Amended 2-6-2012 by L.L. No. 2-2012]
C. For a third offense within 90 days, by a fine of not less than $50 nor
more than $500. In addition, the refuse shall not be collected.
[Amended 2-6-2012 by L.L. No. 2-2012]
D. For a fourth offense within 180 days, by a fine of not less than $200 nor
more than $1,000. In addition, the refuse shall not be collected.
[Amended 2-6-2012 by L.L. No. 2-2012]
E. For failure to comply with § 235-10L and M of this article:
(1) Upon the first offense, a warning will be issued that the person is in
violation of this article; and
(2) For a subsequent offense, a fine of not less than $50 nor more than
$250.
§ 235-12 RAMAPO CODE § 235-13
1:260
ARTICLE III
Solid Waste Management
[Adopted 12-8-1993 by L.L. No. 9-1993]
§ 235-14. Title; applicability.
This article shall be cited and may be referred to hereinafter as the "Solid
Waste Management Law." This article shall relate to the unincorporated
areas of the Town of Ramapo.
§ 235-15. Legislative intent.
§ 235-16. Word usage and definitions.
A. The Town Board of the Town of Ramapo finds it necessary to the
preservation of the appearance of the Town, the prevention of health
hazards and the convenience and financial well-being of the citizenry to
regulate the solid waste management industry.
B. It is the intention of the Town Board to maintain prompt, efficient, clean
and courteous service by the refuse collection industry at reasonable
prices and to assure compliance with federal, state and county laws and
regulations.
A. For the purposes of this article the following terms, phrases and words
and their derivations shall have the meaning given herein. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include
the future, words in the plural number include the singular number, and
words in the singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
B. As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ASHES — The residue from the burning of wood, coal, coke or other
combustible materials.
COMMINGLED RECYCLABLES — Include glass bottles, aluminum and
tin cans and plastic containers.
CONSTRUCTION AND DEMOLITION DEBRIS — Any waste resulting
from construction, remodeling, repair and demolition of structures,
road building and land clearing, and such wastes include bricks,
concrete and other masonry materials, soil, rock and lumber, road
spoils, paving material and tree and brush stumps. Construction and
demolition debris does not include:
White goods such as refrigerators, stoves, household appliances,
water heaters and the like.
(1)
(2) Tires and batteries.
(3) Paint cans and paint in other containers.
§ 235-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 235-16
1:261
DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC WORKS — The Department of Public Works
of the Town of Ramapo.
DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC WORKS — The Director of Public Works of the
Town of Ramapo.
ESTABLISHMENT — Any generator of refuse except a resident.
GARBAGE — Putrescible animal and vegetable waste resulting from the
preparation, handling, cooking and consumption of food.
MULTIFAMILY RESIDENCE — Any residence legally containing in
excess of two families.
PERSON — Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company or organization of any kind.
RECYCLABLES — Include the following:
REFUSE — All putrescible and nonputrescible solid wastes (except
body wastes), including garbage, wastepaper, trash, construction and
(4) Garbage.
(5) Septage.
(6) Sewage sludge.
(7) Liquid wastes.
Containers, (cans and/or drums that held solvents, paint thinner,
oil, etc.).
(8)
(9) Putrescible waste.
(10)Pesticides.
(11)Cardboard or wastepaper.
(12)Contaminated soil.
(13)Significant quantities of wallboard.
(14) Industrial waste.
(15)Hazardous waste as defined in 6 NYCRR 371.
(1) Newspapers.
(2) Magazines.
(3) Telephone books.
(4) Junk mail.
(5) Cardboard.
(6) Leaves.
§ 235-16 RAMAPO CODE § 235-16
1:262
§ 235-17. License required. [Amended 2-6-2012 by L.L. No. 2-2012]
No person shall engage in the business of collecting, removing or
transporting refuse in the Town without first obtaining from the Town Clerk
of the Town a license to carry on such business in the Town.
§ 235-18. Fees. [Amended 2-6-2012 by L.L. No. 2-2012; 9-14-2016
by L.L. No. 1-2016]
The fee for a license to engage in the business described in this article and
vehicle fee shall be set forth by the Town Board and shall be in accordance
with the Standard Schedule of Fees of the Town of Ramapo. The application
fee and vehicle fee shall be payable to the Town Clerk of the Town of
Ramapo prior to the issuance of the license.
demolition debris and ashes. Refuse shall not be deemed to include
dead animals or abandoned automobiles.
RESIDENT — Any generator of refuse in a one- or two-family house.
SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT FACILITY — Any facility employed
beyond the initial solid waste collection process, including but not
limited to: storage areas or facilities; transfer stations; rail-haul or
barge-haul facilities; processing facilities, including resource recovery
facilities; sanitary landfills; incinerators; land-spreading facilities;
composting facilities, surface impoundment; and waste oil storage,
reprocessing and rerefining facilities.
TOWN — The Town of Ramapo.
TRASH — Any item of solid waste that is nontoxic and/or nonputrescible
and is placed in a clearly fastened container bag which is filled at a
maximum weight of 60 pounds and a maximum volume capacity of 30
gallons. Said items include, but are not limited to:
Discardable household items of a durable nature such as furniture,
cardboard cartons or packaging, and household appliances, except
for large appliances such as refrigerators, washing machines,
dryers, dishwashers and hot-water heaters. [Amended 2-6-2012
by L.L. No. 2-2012]
(1)
Garden, yard and lawn waste such as clippings, leaves, only if
placed in containers, cartons or bags which are securely fastened
and Christmas trees, tree branches and fallen trees cut into
sections less than four feet long and tied or weighing no more than
60 pounds per piece.
(2)
Ashes and other refuse resulting from the burning of wood or coal
in a residence for heating purposes, so long as placed in containers,
cartons or bags.
(3)
Motor vehicle tires and parts, except for junk vehicles, vehicle
bodies or engine blocks.
(4)
§ 235-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 235-19
1:263
§ 235-19. Issuance of license; applications.
§ 235-20. Fees for collection. [Amended 2-6-2012 by L.L. No.
2-2012]
Fees for commercial establishments and multifamily residences housing
more than three families shall be negotiated between the owner and the
collector.
§ 235-21. Insurance requirements.
A. The Director of Public Works is hereby authorized to grant licenses
under his hands through the office of the Town Clerk, to be
countersigned and sealed with the Corporate Seal of the Town by the
Town Clerk at the direction of the Director of Public Works. [Amended
2-6-2012 by L.L. No. 2-2012]
B. All applications for licenses shall be made by the applicant on forms to
be provided by the Town Clerk. Said applications shall set forth the
name, business and residence address of the applicant, the names and
residence addresses of the officers and stockholders or partners if the
applicant is a corporation or partnership, whether the applicant, any
partner, stockholder or corporate officer has been convicted of a
misdemeanor or felony, a statement of the ownership interest by said
applicant, stockholder, officer or partner in any other garbage
collection business in the State of New York, a statement of the number,
type and kinds of vehicles to be used by the applicant, including their
unladen weight and capacity, trade name, body type, serial and motor
number and state registration, a list of roll-off containers with their
capacity, the kind of service the applicant desires to perform in the
Town and such other information as may be required by the Director of
Public Works, and supplementary applications shall be verified by the
applicant; if a partnership, by one of the partners; and if a corporation,
by one of its officers. [Amended 2-6-2012 by L.L. No. 2-2012]
C. Within five days of the occurrence of any change in the facts stated in
any application, the applicant shall report the same in a supplementary
application to the Town Clerk. All changes made on any license shall be
made only by the Town Clerk in conjunction with the Director of Public
Works. [Amended 2-6-2012 by L.L. No. 2-2012]
D. All applications shall be referred by the Town Clerk to the Police
Department of the Town and the Town Attorney of the Town for their
review and comments with regard to the applicant and the issuance of
the license. The Town Clerk, upon receipt of the review and comments,
shall transmit the same, together with a copy of the application, to the
Director of Public Works. The Director of Public Works shall thereafter,
within a reasonable time, issue or refuse to grant a license to the
applicant. The refusal by the Director of Public Works to issue a license
shall be subject to review by an Article 78 proceeding.
§ 235-19 RAMAPO CODE § 235-21
1:264
§ 235-22. Term of license.
All licenses issued under this article shall be granted for a term to end on
the 31st day of December next following the issuance thereof.
§ 235-23. Refusal and revocation of license. [Amended 2-6-2012 by
L.L. No. 2-2012; 9-14-2016 by L.L. No. 1-2016]
A. Each applicant for a license shall file with the Town Clerk's office
evidence in the form of a certificate or other evidence of insurance in
the amounts as set by the Town Board and reflected in the refuse
license application. [Amended 9-14-2016 by L.L. No. 1-2016]
B. Such policies or certificate of insurance shall name the Town of Ramapo
as an additional insured and shall state the following: "with respect to
the insurance for which the Town of Ramapo is designated as a Named
Insured, this insurance will be primary to the Town of Ramapo."
[Amended 2-6-2012 by L.L. No. 2-2012; 9-14-2016 by L.L. No.
1-2016]
C. Each applicant shall file with the Town Clerk's office evidence in the
form of a certificate of insurance that the proper workmen's
compensation is in force and effect covering each and every person
employed by the applicant in the collection of such refuse.
D. Said certificates of insurance shall be approved by the Town Attorney.
The insurance policies shall have a term of one year or, if written for a
term of less than one year, shall expire on December 31 of the license
year. Within three months of the filing of a certificate of insurance, the
applicant shall furnish to the Town Clerk a copy of the top sheet of the
applicable insurance policy.21 [Amended 2-6-2012 by L.L. No.
2-2012]
A. A license may be refused or revoked if the applicant or any partner,
stockholder or corporate officer shall have been convicted of a
misdemeanor or felony which, in the judgment of the Director of Public
Works, renders the applicant unfit or undesirable to carry on the trade
or occupation involved herein. The Director of Public Works may also
refuse or revoke a license to any person who, in his judgment, shall be
unfit, undesirable or incapable of conducting the trade or business
involved herein or who fails to comply with the provisions of this article.
The granting, refusal or revocation of such license by the Director of
Public Works shall be subject to review by an Article 78 proceeding.
B. The Director of Public Works may consider various factors in the review
of the applicant's refuse license application. Such factors may include,
but will not be limited to, the record and determination of other
21.Editor's Note: Original § 208-9, Bond required, as amended 2-8-1995 by L.L. No. 3-1995,
which immediately followed this section, was repealed 2-6-2012 by L.L. No. 2-2012
§ 235-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 235-23
1:265
§ 235-24. Duties of licensee.
The unreasonable refusal to comply with the following regulations shall be
grounds for revocation of the license.
§ 235-25. Duties of residents and establishments.
municipalities/governmental agencies/authorities in considering
applicant's refuse license application and violation history.
C. Should an application be refused or license revoked, pursuant to this
section, a request for a hearing may be requested in writing to the Town
Clerk of the Town of Ramapo, within 15 days of receipt of the Town's
refusal or revocation letter. The Director of Public Works must conduct
a hearing within 60 days of receipt of a written request for a hearing.
Only those written materials which are submitted to the Town Clerk of
the Town of Ramapo at least five business days prior to the hearing will
be entered into the hearing record. Testimony will be permitted at the
hearing from the applicant or revoked licensee, as well as any other
members from the public with relevant testimony.
A. Every licensee under this article shall:
(1) Carry a Town of Ramapo license in each vehicle used in the
licensee's business which shall be exhibited on demand of the
property owner where collection is being made or by the Town
police. [Amended 2-6-2012 by L.L. No. 2-2012]
(2) Render efficient, reliable, quiet and courteous service at all times.
(3) Pick up any refuse which is dropped by him.
(4) Park his vehicle as far off the road as is possible.
(5) Refrain from operating the licensed business after expiration of his
license or during any period the license is revoked or suspended.
(6) Avoid all forbidden, improper or unnecessary practices or
conditions which do or may affect the public health, morals or
welfare of the Town.
(7) Be prohibited from furnishing such service prior to 6:00 a.m.
B. The licensee must provide forthwith and at all times during the year a
telephone and be prepared to receive and answer messages from 9:00
a.m. to 5:00 p.m. every business day of the year.
A. Residents and establishments must purchase their own containers
according to standards established by the Director of Public Works,
except that as to residents, the Town shall furnish, free of charge, initial
containers for the pickup of recyclables.
§ 235-23 RAMAPO CODE § 235-25
1:266
§ 235-26. Nonassignability of license.
A license shall not be assignable. Any holder of a license granted under this
article who allows it to be used by any other person, and any person who
uses a license granted to any other person, shall be each guilty of a violation
of this article.
§ 235-27. Vehicles.
§ 235-28. Powers of the Director of Public Works.
B. All refuse and recyclables must be in the containers. The licensee shall
not be required to collect any refuse which is not placed therein.
C. For collection pursuant to a schedule set forth by contract, refuse bags
and/or containers from which refuse is collected shall be placed
alongside the building behind the building line. [Amended 8-5-1998
by L.L. No. 9-1998]
A. The vehicles to be used by collectors of refuse shall have been
inspected and approved by the Rockland County Health Department,
whose inspection certificate signed by a sanitary inspector shall be filed
with the application, and shall be so constructed as to make impossible
the spilling or leakage of refuse, and in transporting such materials
through the Town, the vehicle shall be covered in such manner that
none of the contents can spill on Town roads. Any refuse falling to the
streets or roads in said Town must be immediately cleaned up.
B. The licensee must keep all vehicles clean, sanitary and neatly painted
and shall wash, clean and disinfect such vehicles at least once a week.
C. The licensee must keep all vehicles readily identifiable by lettering the
names of the owners and their Town of Ramapo permit numbers, in
letters of suitable size, upon the vehicles.
A. The Director of Public Works shall have the following powers in order to
further the purposes of this article:
(1) To investigate all violations of this article and any grievances
reported by residents or establishments and the refuse collection
industry.
(2) To take testimony concerning violations of this article, grievances
of residents and establishments and the refuse collection industry
and petitions for revised rates.
(3) To hold public hearings on 10 days' written notice to the offending
licensee. However, in the event the Director of Public Works is the
complainant, the matter shall be heard by the Town Attorney, or his
designee, who shall have the same powers as does the Director of
Public Works to dispose of the matter and levy penalties with
respect thereto.
§ 235-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 235-28
1:267
§ 235-29. Penalties for offenses.
§ 235-30. Enforcement.
The Police Department of the Town of Ramapo and/or the enforcement
official as designated in Chapter 376, Zoning, § 376-140 of the Code of
the Town of Ramapo shall have the power, right and authority to issue an
appearance ticket, as the same is defined in Article 150 of the Criminal
Procedure Law of the State of New York, for the violation of any section of
this article.
(4) To reasonably discipline licensees for noncompliance with rules,
regulations or directives of the Director of Public Works or for
noncooperation in an investigation or hearing, including but not
limited to suspension or revocation of licenses issued pursuant to
§ 235-17 of this article and the levying of a fine of not more than
$10,000 for each act of noncompliance or noncooperation.
B. The Director of Public Works shall have all other powers granted herein
and all other powers necessary, incidental or implied to proper
functions of this article.
A. Except as provided herein, any person, firm or corporation collecting
refuse in the Town of Ramapo without a license or violating any of the
provisions of this article, including any rules and regulations adopted
pursuant hereto, shall be guilty of an offense against this article. Upon
conviction, such person, firm or corporation shall be punishable by a
fine imposed by the Director of Public Works of not more than $10,000.
Each and every day such violation is committed or permitted to
continue shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as
such hereunder.22
B. Any person, firm or corporation who or which knowingly gives false
information upon any application for a license, or renewal thereof, or
who or which conceals any conviction of a misdemeanor or a felony by
any individual, partner, stockholder or corporate officer, or who or
which allows another person to use the license issued to himself or
itself, or who or which unreasonably refuses to comply with the
regulations of § 235-25 herein, shall suffer revocation of his license.
C. Any act stated herein to be grounds for revocation of a license shall
result in a revocation of said license by order of the Director of Public
Works after due notice and public hearing.
D. Any person violating § 235-25C of this article shall be guilty of a Class 3
violation, as defined in Chapter 1, § 1-15 et seq., of the Revised Code of
the Town of Ramapo and shall be punished according to the provisions
thereunder. [Added 8-5-1998 by L.L. No. 9-1998]
22.Editor's Note: Original § 208-17B, which immediately followed this subsection and
provided for additional fines, was repealed 2-6-2012 by L.L. No. 2-2012.
§ 235-28 RAMAPO CODE § 235-31
1:268
§ 235-31. Relation to State Sanitary Code.
Nothing in this article shall be construed to supersede the minimum
standards contained in Part 19 of the State Sanitary Code which shall
govern when and where any provisions of this article are found to be
inconsistent with said standards.
§ 235-32. Interpretation.
Nothing contained in this article shall be construed or interpreted to make
the Town a party to any contract for refuse removal.
§ 235-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 235-32
1:269
Chapter 237
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND SEDIMENT AND
EROSION CONTROL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Aquifer and well field protection zone — See
Ch. 96.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 149.
Sewers — See Ch. 218.
Streams and watercourses — See Ch. 240.
Zoning — See Ch. 376.
§ 235-32 RAMAPO CODE § 235-32
1:270
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 237-1. Findings of fact.
It is hereby determined that:
§ 237-2. Purpose and objectives.
The purpose of this chapter is to establish minimum stormwater
management requirements and controls to protect and safeguard the
general health, safety, and welfare of the public residing within this
jurisdiction and to address the findings of fact in § 237-1 hereof. This
chapter seeks to meet those purposes by achieving the following objectives:
A. Land development activities and associated increases in site impervious
cover often alter the hydrologic response of local watersheds and
increase stormwater runoff rates and volumes, flooding, stream
channel erosion, or sediment transport and deposition.
B. This stormwater runoff contributes to increased quantities of
waterborne pollutants, including siltation of aquatic habitat for fish and
other desirable species.
C. Clearing and grading during construction tend to increase soil erosion
and add to the loss of native vegetation necessary for terrestrial and
aquatic habitat.
D. Improper design and construction of stormwater management
practices can increase the velocity of stormwater runoff, thereby
increasing stream bank erosion and sedimentation.
E. Impervious surfaces allow less water to percolate into the soil, thereby
decreasing groundwater recharge and stream base flow.
F. Substantial economic losses can result from these adverse impacts on
the waters of the municipality.
G. Stormwater runoff, soil erosion and nonpoint source pollution can be
controlled and minimized through the regulation of stormwater runoff
from land development activities.
H. The regulation of stormwater runoff discharges from land development
activities in order to control and minimize increases in stormwater
runoff rates and volumes, soil erosion, stream channel erosion, and
nonpoint source pollution associated with stormwater runoff is in the
public interest and will minimize threats to public health and safety.
I. Regulation of land development activities by means of performance
standards governing stormwater management and site design will
produce development compatible with the natural functions of a
particular site or an entire watershed and thereby mitigate the adverse
effects of erosion and sedimentation from development.
§ 237-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 237-2
1:271
§ 237-3. Statutory authority.
This chapter is adopted pursuant to the authority granted by § 10 of the
Municipal Home Rule Law of the State of New York.
§ 237-4. Applicability.
A. Meet the requirements of minimum measures 4 and 5 of the New York
State Department of Environmental Conservation State Pollutant
Discharge Elimination System (SPDES) General Permit for Stormwater
Discharges from Municipal Separate Stormwater Sewer Systems
(MS4s), Permit No. GP-02-02, or as amended or revised;
B. Require land development activities to conform to the substantive
requirements of the NYS Department of Environmental Conservation
State Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (SPDES) General Permit
for Construction Activities GP-02-01, or as amended or revised;
C. Minimize increases in stormwater runoff from land development
activities in order to reduce flooding, siltation, increases in stream
temperature, and stream bank erosion and maintain the integrity of
stream channels;
D. Minimize increases in pollution caused by stormwater runoff from land
development activities which would otherwise degrade local water
quality;
E. Minimize the total annual volume of stormwater runoff which flows
from any specific site during and following development to the
maximum extent practicable; and
F. Reduce stormwater runoff rates, volumes, soil erosion and nonpoint
source pollution wherever possible through stormwater management
practices and ensure that these management practices are properly
maintained and eliminate threats to public safety.
A. This chapter shall be applicable to all land development activities as
defined in this chapter.
B. The Town of Ramapo has designated a Stormwater Management Officer
who shall accept and review all stormwater pollution prevention plans
and forward such plans to the applicable municipal board. The
Stormwater Management Officer may:
(1) Review the plans;
(2) Upon approval by the Town Board of the Town of Ramapo, engage
the services of a registered professional engineer to review the
plans, specifications and related documents at a cost not to exceed
a fee schedule established by said governing board; or
(3) Accept the certification of a licensed professional that the plans
conform to the requirements of this chapter.
§ 237-2 RAMAPO CODE § 237-4
1:272
§ 237-5. Exemptions.
The following activities may be exempt from review under this chapter.
C. All land development activities subject to review and approval by the
Town Board, Planning Board and/or Zoning Board of Appeals of the
Town of Ramapo under subdivision, site plan, and/or special permit
regulations shall be reviewed subject to the standards contained in this
chapter.
D. All land development activities not subject to review as stated in
Subsection C shall be required to submit a stormwater pollution
prevention plan (SWPPP) to the Stormwater Management Officer who
shall approve the SWPPP if it complies with the requirements of this
chapter.
A. Agricultural activity as defined in this chapter.
B. Silvicultural activity, except that landing areas and log haul roads are
subject to this chapter.
C. Routine maintenance activities that disturb less than five acres and are
performed to maintain the original line and grade, hydraulic capacity or
original purpose of a facility.
D. Repairs to any stormwater management practice or facility deemed
necessary by the Stormwater Management Officer.
E. Any part of a subdivision if a plat for the subdivision has been approved
by the Town of Ramapo on or before the effective date of this chapter.
F. Land development activities for which a building permit has been
approved on or before the effective date of this chapter.
G. Cemetery graves.
H. Installation of fence, sign, telephone, and electric poles and other kinds
of posts or poles.
I. Emergency activity immediately necessary to protect life, property or
natural resources.
J. Activities of an individual engaging in home gardening by growing
flowers, vegetables and other plants primarily for use by that person
and his or her family.
K. Landscaping and horticultural activities in connection with an existing
structure.
§ 237-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 237-5
1:273

ARTICLE II
Stormwater Control
§ 237-6. Definitions.
The terms used in this chapter or in documents prepared or reviewed under
this chapter shall have the meaning as set forth in this section:
AGRICULTURAL ACTIVITY — The activity of an active farm, including
grazing and watering livestock, irrigating crops, harvesting crops, using
land for growing agricultural products, and cutting timber for sale, but
shall not include the operation of a dude ranch or similar operation, or the
construction of new structures associated with agricultural activities.
CHANNEL — A natural or artificial watercourse with a definite bed and
banks that conducts continuously or periodically flowing water.
DESIGN MANUAL — The New York State Stormwater Management Design
Manual that serves as the official guide for stormwater management
principles, methods and practices. For purposes of this chapter, if the New
York State Department of Environmental Conservation ("DEC") determines
that a particular version of the Design Manual applies to a particular
project, then the Town shall accept the DEC determination.[Amended
4-9-2014 by L.L. No. 3-2014]
EROSION — The removal of soil particles by the action of water, ice, wind
or other geological agent.
EROSION CONTROL MANUAL — The most recent version of the New York
Standards and Specifications for Erosion and Sediment Control Manual,
commonly known as the "Blue Book."
INDUSTRIAL STORMWATER PERMIT — A State Pollutant Discharge
Elimination System permit issued to a commercial industry or group of
industries which regulates the pollutant levels associated with industrial
stormwater discharges or specifies on-site pollution control strategies.
INFILTRATION — The process of percolating stormwater into the subsoil.
LAND DEVELOPMENT ACTIVITY — Activity, including clearing, grading,
excavating, soil disturbance or placement of fill, that results in land
disturbance of equal to or greater than one acre, or of total land area
that is part of a larger common plan of development or sale, even though
multiple separate and distinct land development activities may take place at
different times on different schedules.[Amended 10-10-2018 by L.L. No.
5-2018]
LANDOWNER — The legal or beneficial owner of land, including those
holding the right to purchase or lease the land, or any other person holding
proprietary rights in the land.
MAINTENANCE AGREEMENT — A legally recorded document that acts as
a property deed restriction and which provides for long-term maintenance
of stormwater management practices.
§ 237-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 237-6
1:275
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORMWATER SEWER SYSTEMS (MS4) — New
York State Department of Environmental Conservation term for municipal
and nonmunicipal systems of underground pipes, and also systems of
streets and roads with drainage, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches,
channels or storm drains, whether or not the system is owned by the
municipality.
NONPOINT SOURCE POLLUTION — Pollution from any source other than
from any discernible, confined, and discrete conveyances, and shall include
but not be limited to pollutants from agricultural, silvicultural, mining,
construction, subsurface disposal and urban runoff sources.
NYSDEC — The New York State Department of Environmental
Conservation.
POLLUTANT OF CONCERN — Sediment or a water quality measurement
that addresses sediment (such as total suspended solids, turbidity or
siltation) and any other pollutant that has been identified as a cause of
impairment of any water body that will receive a discharge from the land
development activity.
QUALIFIED PROFESSIONAL — A certified professional in erosion and
sediment control (CPESC), professional engineer (PE), registered landscape
architect and/or soil scientist.
RECHARGE — The replenishment of underground water reserves.
SEDIMENT CONTROL — Measures that prevent eroded sediment from
leaving the site.
SPDES GENERAL PERMIT FOR CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITIES GP-02-01
— A permit under the New York State Pollutant Discharge Elimination
System (SPDES) issued to developers of construction activities to regulate
disturbance of one or more acres of land.
SPDES GENERAL PERMIT FOR STORMWATER DISCHARGES FROM
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORMWATER SEWER SYSTEMS GP-02-02 — A
permit under the New York State Pollutant Discharge Elimination System
(SPDES) issued to municipalities to regulate discharges from municipal
separate storm sewers for compliance with EPA established water quality
standards and/or to specify stormwater control standards.
STABILIZATION — The use of practices that prevent exposed soil from
eroding.
STORMWATER — Rainwater, surface runoff, snowmelt and drainage.
STORMWATER HOT SPOT — A land use or activity that generates higher
concentrations of hydrocarbons, trace metals or toxicants than are found in
typical stormwater runoff, based on monitoring studies.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT — The use of structural or nonstructural
practices that are designed to reduce stormwater runoff and mitigate its
adverse impacts on property, natural resources and the environment.
§ 237-6 RAMAPO CODE § 237-6
1:276
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT FACILITY — One or a series of stormwater
management practices installed, stabilized and operating for the purpose of
controlling stormwater runoff.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT OFFICER (SMO) — An employee or officer
designated by the municipality to accept and review stormwater pollution
prevention plans, forward the plans to the applicable municipal board and
inspect stormwater management practices.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (SMPS) — Measures, either
structural or nonstructural, that are determined to be the most effective,
practical means of preventing flood damage and preventing or reducing
point source or nonpoint source pollution inputs to stormwater runoff and
water bodies.
STORMWATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PLAN (SWPPP) — A plan for
controlling stormwater runoff and pollutants from a site during and after
construction activities.
STORMWATER RUNOFF — Flow on the surface of the ground, resulting
from precipitation.
SURFACE WATERS OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK —
WATERCOURSE — Any permanent or intermittent natural or artificial
stream, river, creek, ditch, channel, canal, conduit, culvert, drain, waterway,
gully, or ravine, in and including any area adjacent thereto, in which water
normally flows.
WETLAND — An area that is inundated or saturated by surface water or
groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support a prevalence
of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions,
commonly known as "hydrophytic vegetation."
§ 237-7. Stormwater pollution prevention plan required.
No application for approval of a land development activity shall be approved
until the appropriate board has received a stormwater pollution prevention
Lakes, bays, sounds, ponds, impounding reservoirs, springs, wells,
rivers, streams, creeks, estuaries, marshes, inlets, canals, the Atlantic
ocean within the territorial seas of the State of New York and all
other bodies of surface water, natural or artificial, inland or coastal,
fresh or salt, public or private (except those private waters that do
not combine or effect a junction with natural surface or underground
waters), which are wholly or partially within or bordering the state or
within its jurisdiction.
A.
Storm sewers and waste treatment systems, including treatment ponds
or lagoons which also meet the criteria of this definition are not waters
of the state. This exclusion applies only to man-made bodies of water
which neither were originally created in waters of the state (such as a
disposal area in wetlands) nor resulted from impoundment of waters of
the state.
B.
§ 237-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 237-7
1:277
plan (SWPPP) prepared in accordance with the specifications in this
chapter.
§ 237-8. Contents of stormwater pollution prevention plans.
A. All SWPPPs shall provide the following background information and
erosion and sediment controls:
(1) Background information about the scope of the project, including
location, type and size of project;
(2) Site map/construction drawing(s) for the project, including a
general location map at a scale no smaller then one inch equals 100
feet. At a minimum, the site map should show the total site area; all
improvements with dimensions; areas of disturbance; areas that
will not be disturbed; existing vegetation; on-site and adjacent offsite
surface water(s); wetlands and drainage patterns that could be
affected by the construction activity; existing and final slopes;
locations of off-site material, waste, borrow or equipment storage
areas; and location(s) of the stormwater discharge(s);
(3) Description of the soil(s) present at the site;
(4) Construction phasing plan describing the intended sequence of
construction activities, including clearing and grubbing, excavation
and grading, utility and infrastructure installation and any other
activity at the site that results in soil disturbance. Consistent with
the New York Standards and Specifications for Erosion and
Sediment Control (Erosion Control Manual), not more than five
acres shall be disturbed at any one time unless pursuant to an
approved SWPPP;
(5) Description of the pollution prevention measures that will be used
to control litter, construction chemicals and construction debris
from becoming a pollutant source in stormwater runoff;
(6) Description of all materials expected to be stored on site, with
updates as appropriate, and a description of controls to reduce
pollutants from these materials, including storage practices to
minimize exposure of the materials to stormwater and spill
prevention and response;
(7) Temporary and permanent structural and vegetative measures to
be used for soil stabilization, runoff control and sediment control
for each stage of the project from initial land clearing and grubbing
to project closeout;
(8) A site map/construction drawing(s) specifying the location(s),
size(s) and length(s) of each erosion and sediment control practice;
§ 237-7 RAMAPO CODE § 237-8
1:278
(9) Dimensions, material specifications and installation details for all
erosion and sediment control practices, including the siting and
sizing of any temporary sediment basins;
(10) Temporary practices that will be converted to permanent control
measures;
(11) Implementation schedule for staging temporary erosion and
sediment control practices, including the timing of initial
placement and duration that each practice should remain in place;
(12) Maintenance schedule to ensure continuous and effective
operation of the erosion and sediment control practice;
(13) Name(s) of the receiving water(s);
(14) Delineation of SWPPP implementation responsibilities for each
part of the site;
(15) Description of structural practices designed to divert flows from
exposed soils, store flows, or otherwise limit runoff and the
discharge of pollutants from exposed areas of the site to the degree
attainable; and
(16) Any existing data that describes the stormwater runoff at the site.
B. Land development activities as defined in § 237-6 of this article and
meeting Condition A, B or C below shall also include water quantity and
water quality controls (post-construction stormwater runoff controls) as
set forth in Subsection C below as applicable:
(1) Condition A. Stormwater runoff from land development activities
discharging a pollutant of concern to either an impaired water
identified on the NYSDEC 303(d) list of impaired waters or a total
maximum daily load (TMDL) designated watershed for which
pollutants in stormwater have been identified as a source of the
impairment.
(2) Condition B. Stormwater runoff from land development activities
disturbing five or more acres.
(3) Condition C. Stormwater runoff from land development activity
disturbing between one and five acres of land during the course of
the project, exclusive of the construction of single-family
residences and construction activities at agricultural properties.
C. SWPPP requirements for Condition A, B and C:
(1) All information in Subsection A of this section.
(2) Description of each post-construction stormwater management
practice.
§ 237-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 237-8
1:279
§ 237-9. Other permits.
The applicant shall assure that all other applicable permits have been or
will be acquired for the land development activity prior to approval of the
final stormwater design plan.
§ 237-10. Contractor certification.
(3) Site map/construction drawing(s) showing the specific location(s)
and size(s) of each post-construction stormwater management
practice.
(4) Hydrologic and hydraulic analysis for all structural components of
the stormwater management system for the applicable design
storms.
(5) Comparison of post-development stormwater runoff conditions
with predevelopment conditions.
(6) Dimensions, material specifications and installation details for each
post-construction stormwater management practice.
(7) Maintenance schedule to ensure continuous and effective
operation of each post-construction stormwater management
practice.
(8) Maintenance easements to ensure access to all stormwater
management practices at the site for the purpose of inspection and
repair. Easements shall be recorded on the plan and shall remain in
effect with transfer of title to the property.
(9) Inspection and maintenance agreement binding on all subsequent
landowners served by the on-site stormwater management
measures in accordance with § 237-16 of this chapter.
(10) For Condition A, the SWPPP shall be prepared by a landscape
architect, a certified professional in erosion and sediment control
(CPESC) or professional engineer and must be signed by the
professional preparing the plan, who shall certify that the design of
all stormwater management practices meets the requirements in
this chapter.
A. Each contractor and subcontractor identified in the SWPPP who will be
involved in soil disturbance and/or stormwater management practice
installation shall sign and date a copy of the following certification
statement before undertaking any land development activity: "I certify
under penalty of law that I understand and agree to comply with the
terms and conditions of the stormwater pollution prevention plan. I also
understand that it is unlawful for any person to cause or contribute to a
violation of water quality standards."
§ 237-8 RAMAPO CODE § 237-10
1:280
§ 237-11. Records retention.
A copy of the SWPPP and all inspection reports shall be retained at the
site of the land development activity during construction from the date of
initiation of construction activities to the date of final stabilization.
§ 237-12. Performance and design criteria.
All land development activities shall be subject to the following performance
and design criteria:
§ 237-13. Maintenance, inspection and repair of stormwater
facilities during construction.
B. The certification must include the name and title of the person
providing the signature; address and telephone number of the
contracting firm; the address (or other identifying description) of the
site; and the date the certification is made.
C. The certification statement(s) shall become part of the SWPPP for the
land development activity.
A. Technical standards. For the purpose of this chapter, the following
documents shall serve as the official guides and specifications for
stormwater management. Stormwater management practices that are
designed and constructed in accordance with these technical
documents shall be presumed to meet the standards imposed by this
chapter:
(1) The New York State Stormwater Management Design Manual
(hereinafter referred to as the "Design Manual"). [Amended
4-9-2014 by L.L. No. 3-2014]
(2) New York Standards and Specifications for Erosion and Sediment
Control (Empire State Chapter of the Soil and Water Conservation
Society, 2005, most current version or its successor, hereafter
referred to as the "Erosion Control Manual").
B. Equivalence to technical standards. Where stormwater management
practices are not in accordance with technical standards, the applicant
or developer must demonstrate equivalence to the technical standards
set forth in Subsection A of this section and the SWPPP shall be
prepared by a licensed professional.
C. Water quality standards. Any land development activity shall not cause
an increase in turbidity that will result in substantial visible contrast to
natural conditions in surface waters of the State of New York (6 NYCRR
703.2).
A. The applicant or developer of the land development activity or their
representative shall at all times properly operate and maintain all
facilities and systems of treatment and control (and related
§ 237-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 237-13
1:281
§ 237-14. Maintenance easement.
Prior to the issuance of any approval that has a stormwater management
facility as one of the requirements, the applicant or developer must execute
a maintenance easement that shall be binding on all subsequent landowners
served by the stormwater management facility. The easement shall provide
for access to the facility for periodic inspection by the Town of Ramapo to
ensure that the facility is maintained in proper working condition to meet
design standards and any other provisions established by this chapter. The
easement shall be recorded by the grantor in the office of the County Clerk
after approval by the counsel for the Town of Ramapo. This easement shall
not impose any obligation on the Town of Ramapo to maintain or repair the
stormwater management facility.
§ 237-15. Maintenance after construction.
The owner or operator of permanent stormwater management practices
installed in accordance with this chapter shall ensure they are operated
and maintained to achieve the goals of this chapter. Proper operation and
maintenance also include, at a minimum, the following:
appurtenances) which are installed or used by the applicant or
developer to achieve compliance with the conditions of this chapter.
Sediment shall be removed from sediment traps or sediment ponds
whenever their design capacity has been reduced by 50%.
B. For land development activities as defined in § 237-6 of this article and
meeting Condition A, B or C in § 237-8B, the applicant shall have a
qualified professional conduct site inspections and document the
effectiveness of all erosion and sediment control practices every seven
days or more often as required by the SMO and within 24 hours of any
storm event producing 0.5 inch of precipitation or more. Inspection
reports shall be maintained in a site log book.
C. The applicant or developer or their representative shall be on site at all
times when construction or grading activity takes place and shall
inspect and document the effectiveness of all erosion and sediment
control practices.
A. A preventive/corrective maintenance program for all facilities and
systems of treatment and control (or related appurtenances) which are
installed or used by the owner or operator to achieve the goals of this
chapter.
B. Written procedures for operation and maintenance and training of
maintenance personnel.
C. Discharges from the SMPs shall comply with design criteria and shall
not cause or contribute to water quality standard violations in
accordance with § 237-12C.
§ 237-13 RAMAPO CODE § 237-16
1:282
§ 237-16. Maintenance agreement.
The Town of Ramapo shall approve a formal maintenance agreement for
stormwater management facilities binding on all subsequent landowners
and recorded in the office of the County Clerk as a deed restriction on the
property prior to final plan approval. The maintenance agreement shall be
consistent with the terms and conditions of Schedule A of this chapter titled
"Sample Stormwater Control Facility Maintenance Agreement."23 The Town
of Ramapo, in lieu of a maintenance agreement, at its sole discretion, may
accept dedication of any existing or future stormwater management facility,
provided that such facility meets all the requirements of this chapter and
includes adequate and perpetual access and sufficient area, by easement or
otherwise, for inspection and regular maintenance.
23.Editor's Note: The sample agreement is on file at the office of the Town Clerk.
§ 237-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 237-16
1:283

ARTICLE III
Administration and Enforcement
§ 237-17. Erosion and sediment control inspection.
A. The Town of Ramapo Stormwater Management Officer may require
such inspections as necessary to determine compliance with this
chapter and may either approve that portion of the work completed or
notify the applicant wherein the work fails to comply with the
requirements of this chapter and the stormwater pollution prevention
plan (SWPPP) as approved.
(1) To obtain inspections, the applicant shall notify the Town of
Ramapo enforcement official at least 48 hours before any of the
following as required by the Stormwater Management Officer:
(a) Start and/or resumption of construction.
(b) Installation of sediment and erosion control measures.
(c) Completion of site clearing.
(d) Completion of rough grading.
(e) Completion of final grading.
(f) Close of the construction season.
(g) Completion of final landscaping.
(h) Successful establishment of landscaping in public areas.
(2) If any violations are found, the applicant and developer shall be
notified in writing of the nature of the violation and the required
corrective actions. No further work shall be conducted except for
site stabilization until any violations are corrected and all work
previously completed has received approval by the Stormwater
Management Officer.
B. Stormwater management practice inspections. The Town of Ramapo
Stormwater Management Officer is responsible for conducting
inspections of stormwater management practices (SMPs). All applicants
are required to submit as-built plans for any stormwater management
practices located on site after final construction is completed. The plan
must show the final design specifications for all stormwater
management facilities and must be certified by a professional engineer.
C. Inspection of stormwater facilities after project completion. Inspection
programs shall be established on any reasonable basis, including but
not limited to routine inspections; random inspections; inspections
based upon complaints or other notice of possible violations; inspection
of drainage basins or areas identified as higher than typical sources of
sediment or other contaminants or pollutants; inspections of businesses
§ 237-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 237-17
1:285
§ 237-18. Performance guarantee; maintenance guarantee;
recordkeeping.
or industries of a type associated with higher than usual discharges
of contaminants or pollutants or with discharges of a type which are
more likely than the typical discharge to cause violations of state or
federal water or sediment quality standards or the SPDES stormwater
permit; and joint inspections with other agencies inspecting under
environmental or safety laws. Inspections may include, but are not
limited to, reviewing maintenance and repair records; sampling
discharges, surface water, groundwater, and material or water in
drainage control facilities; and evaluating the condition of drainage
control facilities and other stormwater management practices.
D. Submission of reports. The Town of Ramapo Stormwater Management
Officer may require monitoring and reporting from entities subject to
this chapter as are necessary to determine compliance with this
chapter.
E. Right of entry for inspection. When any new stormwater management
facility is installed on private property or when any new connection is
made between private property and the public stormwater system, the
landowner shall grant to the Town of Ramapo the right to enter the
property at reasonable times and in a reasonable manner for the
purpose of inspection.
A. Construction completion guarantee. In order to ensure the full and
faithful completion of all land development activities related to
compliance with all conditions set forth by the Town of Ramapo in its
approval of the stormwater pollution prevention plan, the Town of
Ramapo may require the applicant or developer to provide, prior to
construction, a performance bond, cash escrow, or irrevocable letter of
credit from an appropriate financial or surety institution which
guarantees satisfactory completion of the project and names the Town
of Ramapo as the beneficiary. The security shall be in an amount to be
determined by the Town of Ramapo based on submission of final design
plans, with reference to actual construction and landscaping costs. The
performance guarantee shall remain in force until the surety is released
from liability by the Town of Ramapo, provided that such period shall
not be less than one year from the date of final acceptance or such other
certification that the facility(ies) has been constructed in accordance
with the approved plans and specifications and that a one-year
inspection has been conducted and the facilities have been found to be
acceptable to the Town of Ramapo. Per annum interest on cash escrow
deposits shall be reinvested in the account until the surety is released
from liability.
B. Maintenance guarantee. Where stormwater management and erosion
and sediment control facilities are to be operated and maintained by the
developer or by a corporation that owns or manages a commercial or
industrial facility, the developer, prior to construction, may be required
§ 237-17 RAMAPO CODE § 237-18
1:286
§ 237-19. Enforcement; penalties for offenses.
to provide the Town of Ramapo with an irrevocable letter of credit from
an approved financial institution or surety to ensure proper operation
and maintenance of all stormwater management and erosion control
facilities both during and after construction and until the facilities
are removed from operation. If the developer or landowner fails to
properly operate and maintain stormwater management and erosion
and sediment control facilities, the Town of Ramapo may draw upon
the account to cover the costs of proper operation and maintenance,
including engineering and inspection costs.
C. Recordkeeping. The Town of Ramapo may require entities subject to
this chapter to maintain records demonstrating compliance with this
chapter.
A. Notice of violation. When the Town of Ramapo determines that a land
development activity is not being carried out in accordance with the
requirements of this chapter, it may issue a written notice of violation to
the landowner. The notice of violation shall contain:
(1) The name and address of the landowner, developer or applicant.
(2) The address when available or a description of the building,
structure or land upon which the violation is occurring.
(3) A statement specifying the nature of the violation.
(4) A description of the remedial measures necessary to bring the land
development activity into compliance with this chapter and a time
schedule for the completion of such remedial action.
(5) A statement of the penalty or penalties that shall or may be
assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation is
directed.
(6) A statement that the determination of violation may be appealed to
the municipality by filing a written notice of appeal within 15 days
of service of notice of violation.
B. Stop-work orders. The Stormwater Management Officer (SMO) may
issue a stop-work order for violations of this chapter. Persons receiving
a stop-work order shall be required to halt all land development
activities, except those activities that address the violations leading to
the stop-work order. The stop-work order shall be in effect until the
SMO confirms that the land development activity is in compliance and
the violation has been satisfactorily addressed. Failure to address a
stop-work order in a timely manner may result in civil or criminal
penalties or injunction in accordance with the enforcement measures
authorized in this chapter.
§ 237-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 237-19
1:287
C. Violations. Any land development activity that is commenced or is
conducted contrary to this chapter may be restrained by injunction or
otherwise abated in a manner provided by law.
D. Penalties.
(1) In addition to or as an alternative to any penalty provided herein or
by law, any person who violates the provisions of this chapter shall
be guilty of a violation punishable by a fine not exceeding $1,000
for conviction of a first offense; for conviction of a second offense
both of which were committed within a period of five years,
punishable by a fine not less than $1,000 nor more than $2,500 or
imprisonment for a period not to exceed 15 days, or both; and upon
conviction for a third or subsequent offense all of which were
committed within a period of five years, punishable by a fine not
less than $2,500 nor more than $5,000 or imprisonment for a
period not to exceed 15 days, or both. However, for the purposes of
conferring jurisdiction upon courts and judicial officers generally,
violations of this chapter shall be deemed offenses. Each week's
continued violation shall constitute a separate additional offense.
(2) In addition to any other penalties provided for herein, any person
who violates any provision of this chapter shall be liable for a civil
penalty not to exceed $3,000 for each such violation. No such
penalty shall be imposed until the Town Board has held a public
hearing, upon due notice, and has made a determination that such
violation has occurred and has made findings of fact relating to said
determination. The alleged violator shall have a right to
specification of the charges and to be represented by counsel at
such hearing. Each day such violation shall continue shall be
deemed to be a separate, distinct and additional offense. Any civil
penalty or order issued by the Town Board shall be reviewable
pursuant to Article 78 of the Civil Practice Law and Rules within 30
days after filing of such penalty or order in the office of the Town
Clerk and mailing a copy thereof to the violator.
E. Certificate of occupancy. No certificate of occupancy (CO) shall be
issued for any building or structure in connection with any land
development activity that is subject to this chapter unless the SMO has
certified that the work has been installed or conducted in compliance
with this chapter.
F. Restoration of lands. Any violator may be required to restore land to its
undisturbed condition. In the event that restoration is not undertaken
within the time stated in the notice, the Town of Ramapo may take
necessary corrective action, the cost of which shall become a lien in the
nature of a tax lien upon the property until paid. In addition, any fees,
penalties or other costs imposed by the municipality against the violator
in order to obtain compliance with this chapter shall be assessed
against the property in the nature of a tax lien until paid. No such lien
shall take effect until the Town Board has held a public hearing upon 10
§ 237-19 RAMAPO CODE § 237-19
1:288
§ 237-20. Fees for services.
The Town of Ramapo may require any person undertaking land development
activities regulated by this chapter to pay reasonable costs at prevailing
rates for review of SWPPPs, inspections, or SMP maintenance performed
by the Town of Ramapo or performed by a third party for the Town of
Ramapo. The municipality shall determine the amount to be paid by said
person into an escrow account to be held by the municipality. The costs
incurred by the municipality shall be reimbursed from the escrow account.
The escrow account shall be replenished by the person undertaking the land
development activity on an as-needed basis.
days' notice to the violator advising him/her that a lien will be imposed
upon the affected property and the amount thereof. The violator shall
have an opportunity to appear and give evidence at the public hearing
and to be represented by counsel. Any person aggrieved by a decision
of the Town Board may appeal such decision to the New York State
Supreme Court in an Article 78 proceeding pursuant to the Civil
Practice Law and Rules within 30 days after such decision has been
filed in the office of the Town Clerk and a copy mailed by regular mail
to the violator.
§ 237-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 237-20
1:289

ARTICLE IV
Subdivision Regulation Amendment
§ 237-21. Final subdivision plat approval.
A stormwater pollution prevention plan consistent with the requirements
of Articles I and II of this chapter and with the terms of preliminary plan
approval shall be required for final subdivision plat approval as set forth
in the Subdivision Regulations of the Town of Ramapo. The SWPPP shall
meet the performance and design criteria and standards in Article II of this
chapter. The approved final subdivision plat shall be consistent with the
provisions of this chapter.
§ 237-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 237-21
1:291

ARTICLE V
Site Plan Review Regulation Amendment
§ 237-22. Site plan approval.
A stormwater pollution prevention plan consistent with the requirements of
Articles I and II of this chapter shall be required for site plan approval as
set forth in the Site Development Plan Rules and Regulations Town Code.
The SWPPP shall meet the performance and design criteria and standards
in Article II of this chapter. The approved site plan shall be consistent with
the provisions of this chapter.
§ 237-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 237-22
1:293

ARTICLE VI
Emergency Situations
§ 237-23. Suspension of MS4 discharge access.
The SMO may, without prior notice, suspend MS4 discharge access to a
person when such suspension is necessary to stop an action which presents
or may present imminent and substantial danger to the environment, to the
health or welfare of persons, or to the MS4. The SMO shall notify the person
of such suspension within a reasonable time thereafter in writing and of the
reasons for the suspension. If the violator fails to comply with a suspension
order issued in an emergency, the SMO may take such steps as deemed
necessary to prevent or minimize damage to the MS4 or to minimize danger
to persons.
§ 237-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 237-23
1:295
Chapter 240
STREAMS AND WATERCOURSES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Aquifer and Well Field Protection Zone — See
Ch. 96
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 149.
Landscapers — See Ch. 173.
Littering — See Ch. 178.
Parks and recreation — See Ch. 195.
Stormwater management and sediment and
erosion control — See Ch. 237.
§ 240-1. Legislative intent.
§ 240-2. Prohibited acts.
Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful for any person, firm,
entity or corporation to:
A. The rapid growth in the Town of Ramapo and consequent improvement
and construction of buildings, paved surfaces, roads and other
improvements has altered in the past and continues to alter the natural
flow of surface waters on the land which, together with the construction
of culverts, drains and ditches for the carrying off of surface water, has
both increased the quantity of storm and surface drainage and
amplified in quantity and intensity the extent of runoff and surface flow,
thus leading to present and potential flooding of property and homes,
soil erosion, danger to health, injury and destruction of property. The
development of appropriate facilities to meet the needs of the
community has been inadequate, with the consequent result that a
serious problem and danger has arisen to the health, welfare, wellbeing
and property in the Town of Ramapo. It is the intention of the
Town Board to protect the citizens of the Town of Ramapo, to prevent
the dangers arising from improper drainage, improper drainage
facilities in areas of poor drainage and high groundwater, inadequate
construction of drainage facilities and unwise diversion, use and
obstruction of streams and watercourses and to plan for the present
and future use of drainage systems and watercourses. [Amended
6-14-1972 by L.L. No. 3-1972]
B. The provisions of this chapter shall be applicable to those portions of
the Town of Ramapo outside the limits of any incorporated village.
A. Place, deposit or permit to be placed or deposited any debris, fill, sand,
stone or other solid materials of any kind or nature or construction of
any kind into or across any stream, pond, ditch, culvert, pipe,
watercourse or other drainage system, whether artificial or natural,
shown on the Official Map of the Town of Ramapo.
§ 237-23 RAMAPO CODE § 240-2
1:296
§ 240-3. Correction of existing conditions. [Amended 6-14-1972 by
L.L. No. 3-1972]
Except as hereinafter provided, all existing obstructions, dams, diversions,
construction of any kind, deposits of debris, fill, sand, stone or other solid
materials or other alterations or diversions of the natural flow of water or
the intensity or quantity of flow through, across or to any stream, pond,
ditch, culvert, watercourse or other drainage system shown on the Official
Map of the Town of Ramapo which causes the inundation of real property
and/or buildings on other premises; or in the determination of the Town
Engineer constitutes an undue burden upon or hampers the proper present
or future course of development of the aforesaid drainage system; or in
the determination of the Town Engineer presently constitutes or in the
reasonably foreseeable future will constitute a danger or hazard to the wellbeing,
safety or general welfare of the residents of the Town or any property
located therein shall be removed or corrected by the owners of the premises
upon which said obstructions, dams, diversions, construction, deposits or
other alterations of the natural flow of water are situated, within a period to
be set by the Town Engineer, not to exceed 60 days after written notice to
remove or correct the same from the Town Board.
§ 240-4. Permitted acts.
B. Construct and/or place any ditch, pipe, culvert or artificial watercourse
of any kind or nature which shall collect and direct the flow of natural
surface waters or drainage or increase in intensity or quantity the flow
of surface waters or drainage from paved surfaces, structures, roads or
improvements directly into any stream, pond, ditch, culvert, pipe or
watercourse or other drainage system shown on the Official Map of the
Town of Ramapo.
C. Fill, obstruct, dam, divert or otherwise change or alter the natural or
artificial flow of waters or drainage or the intensity or quantity of flow
through any stream, ditch, pipe, pond, culvert, watercourse or other
improvement or drainage system shown on the Official Map of the Town
of Ramapo.
A. The prohibited acts and correction of existing conditions set forth in
§§ 240-2 and 240-3 hereof shall have no application to work done
pursuant to the authority of an agency of the Town of Ramapo, County
of Rockland, State of New York and/or United States of America.
B. The acts set forth in § 240-2 hereof are permissible if done pursuant to
the terms and conditions of a permit obtained from the Director of
Building, Planning and Zoning of the Town of Ramapo or pursuant to an
approved and filed subdivision map or a building permit or special
permit carrying site development plan approval by the Planning Board.
[Amended 2-6-2012 by L.L. No. 2-2012]
§ 240-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-5
1:297
§ 240-5. Procedure for obtaining permit. [Amended 6-14-1972 by
L.L. No. 3-1972]
§ 240-6. Duties and powers of the Town Engineer. [Amended
6-14-1972 by L.L. No. 3-197224]
A. All applicants for a permit to do any of the acts prohibited by § 240-2 or
to fill, divert, dam or in any way alter the flow of a stream, pond, ditch,
culvert, watercourse or other drainage system, natural or artificial,
shown on the Official Map of the Town of Ramapo, except an applicant
filing a proposed subdivision with the Planning Board, shall present
plans and specifications prepared by a licensed professional engineer
for the proposed change to the Town Engineer. However, where, in the
opinion of the Town Engineer, the cost of the proposed improvement
does not exceed the sum of $100, the plans and specifications do not
have to be prepared by a licensed professional engineer. Wherever an
application for a permit to do an act as set forth above affects land lying
partly within and partly without lands requiring subdivision approval or
site development plan approval, an application for a permit for that part
of the premises lying outside of the subdivision or outside of the land
requiring site plan approval shall be submitted to the Town Engineer.
[Amended 2-6-2012 by L.L. No. 2-2012]
B. Within 45 days after receipt of an applicant's proposed plans and
specifications, the Town Engineer shall communicate his determination
to the applicant and, if the changes are approved, issue a permit
therefor.
C. Wherever the approval of the Town Engineer shall, in the opinion of the
Town Engineer, affect or require a change or addition to the Official
Map, the Town Engineer shall, prior to the issuance of any permit, place
the matter on the agenda of the Town Board for a public hearing. At
least 10 days' notice of a public hearing on the proposed action with
reference to the change in the Official Map shall be published in the
official newspaper of the Town. Prior to making any such addition or
change, the Town Board shall refer the matter to the Planning Board for
report thereon, which report shall be returned by the Planning Board
within 30 days of such reference. The addition and change, when
adopted, shall become a part of the Official Map of the Town of Ramapo
and shall be deemed to be final and conclusive with respect to the
location of the drainage systems shown thereon.
D. Prior to the issuance of the permit above, each applicant shall pay to the
Town Engineer a fee of 5% of the estimated cost of improvements or
construction, as determined by the Town Engineer or consulting
engineer, representing the actual cost to the Town for review and
inspection of the applicant's plans and specifications. [Amended
2-6-2012 by L.L. No. 2-2012]
24.Editor's Note: This local law also repealed original § 14-6, Creation and organization of
the Drainage Commission.
§ 240-5 RAMAPO CODE § 240-6
1:298
§ 240-7. Penalties for offenses; corrective action.
A. The Town Engineer shall investigate and recommend action to the Town
Board regarding violations of the provisions of this chapter.
B. The Town Engineer shall investigate and report upon drainage
problems referred to him by the Town Board, Town officials or any
commission or agency of the Town.
C. The Town Engineer shall have the power to review and recommend to
the Town Board all proposed changes to the Official Map of the Town of
Ramapo concerning drainage systems, except those shown upon
subdivision plats or site plan approvals passed upon by the Planning
Board.
D. Upon request of the Planning Board, the Town Engineer shall have the
power to review and make recommendations to the Planning Board
concerning any of the following:
(1) Drainage and groundwater conditions lying within a subdivision or
any premises for which site plan approval is required of the
Planning Board and proper requirements for treating such
conditions if feasible.
(2) Proper requirements for all off-site easements, construction,
servitudes, ditches, ponds, culverts, pipes, watercourses and
drainage systems, whether natural or artificial, not lying within a
proposed subdivision or premises for which site plan approval is
required, in order to properly conduct surface water and runoff and
groundwater from a proposed subdivision or premises for which
site plan approval is required to a stream, ditch, culvert,
watercourse or other drainage system shown on the Official Map of
the Town of Ramapo.
E. The Town Engineer shall cause studies to be made of matters
concerning drainage and shall recommend and propose to the Town
Board legislation concerning drainage, involving ordinances, local laws
or amendments to the subdivision regulations.
F. The Town Engineer shall coordinate Town drainage programs with
drainage programs of villages and municipalities within the Town and
with adjacent municipalities and towns and the County of Rockland.
A. Any person, firm, entity or corporation found to be violating any
provisions of this chapter shall be served with a written notice at the
direction of the Director of Building, Planning and Zoning stating the
nature of the violation and providing a time limit of not less than 10
days nor more than 60 days, as specified in the Town Engineer's
recommendations of such action to the Director of Building, Planning
and Zoning, for the satisfactory correction thereof, except that, upon
recommendation of the Town Engineer requesting immediate action on
the violation, said written notice shall provide a minimum ten-day time
§ 240-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-7
1:299
Chapter 243
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Numbering of buildings — See Ch. 109.
Littering — See Ch. 178.
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 199.
Snowplowing — See Ch. 228.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 267.
period. The offender shall, within the period stated in such notice,
correct and/or remove all violations. [Amended 6-14-1972 by L.L.
No. 3-1972; 2-6-2012 by L.L. No. 2-2012]
B. Any person, firm, entity or corporation and/or principal of a corporation
who or which shall continue any violation beyond the time limit
provided for in Subdivision A above shall be guilty of a misdemeanor
and, upon conviction thereof, shall be subject to a fine in an amount not
exceeding $5,000 for each violation and/or up to 15 days' imprisonment
for the active officer. Each week in which such violation shall continue
shall be deemed a separate offense. [Amended 2-6-2012 by L.L. No.
2-2012]
C. In the event that any person, firm, entity or corporation shall continue
any violation beyond the time limit provided for in Subdivision A above,
or upon resolution of the Town Engineer finding an emergency
condition, the Town Board may direct the Town Attorney to apply to the
Supreme Court in the Ninth Judicial District for an immediate injunctive
order directing that the violation be corrected or removed and that all
costs and expenses incurred by the Town of Ramapo in connection with
the proceedings, including the actual cost of correction or removal,
shall be assessed against the offenders and shall be added to the next
year's tax roll and become a lien against said property. [Amended
6-14-1972 by L.L. No. 3-1972]
D. In the event that any person, firm, entity or corporation shall continue
any violation beyond the time limit provided for in Subdivision A and the
Town Engineer finds imminent danger to the Town's residents of
flooding or other serious drainage conditions, the Town, by resolution of
the Town Board, may forthwith enter said property and correct the
violation and assess the cost of the same to the offenders, and said costs
shall be added to the next year's tax roll and become a lien against the
property. [Amended 6-14-1972 by L.L. No. 3-1972]
E. Any person, firm, entity or corporation violating any of the provisions of
this chapter shall become liable to the Town for any expense or loss or
damage occasioned the Town by reason of such violation in any civil
action brought by the Town.
§ 240-7 RAMAPO CODE § 240-7
1:300
ARTICLE I
Sidewalk Maintenance
[Adopted 3-8-1965 by L.L. No. 1-1965 as Ch. 38 of the 1965 Code]
§ 243-1. Duties of owners and occupants.
After the enactment of this article, the owner and occupant of premises
abutting on any street where a sidewalk has been laid are hereby required
to keep the sidewalk in front of said premises free and clear from snow, ice,
dirt and other obstruction.
§ 243-2. Time limit.
Such cleaning must take place within 12 hours from the time the snow, ice,
dirt or other obstruction falls or is placed upon such sidewalk.
§ 243-3. Removal by Town; charges.
In the event of the failure of the owner and occupant of said premises to
clean said sidewalk and remove the snow, ice, dirt or other obstruction
therefrom within the time above provided for, the Town Board may remove
the same and charge the expense thereof to the owners of such premises.
Said charge shall become a lien upon the premises benefited thereby until
paid, and, in addition thereto, the owner and occupant of said premises shall
be personally liable for the payment thereof.
§ 243-4. Exceptions.
This article shall not apply to any property or sidewalk located within the
limits of an incorporated village.25
§ 243-5. Enforcement.
The Town Board may also enforce obedience to this article and restrain
violations thereof by injunction and may proceed against all violators hereof
by any and every other means or method provided by law, although not
herein specifically referred to.
25.Editor's Note: Original § 38-5, Disorderly conduct, which immediately followed this
section, was repealed 2-6-2012 by L.L. No. 2-2012.
§ 243-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 243-5
1:301

ARTICLE II
Visual Obstructions
[Adopted 1-11-1971 by L.L. No. 2-1971]
§ 243-6. Title.
This article shall be cited and may be referred to hereinafter as the "Visual
Road Obstruction Law."
§ 243-7. Legislative intent.
The Town Board of the Town of Ramapo hereby finds that road obstructions
such as shrubbery, hedges, trees, vegetation, rock walls and fences create
highway hazards by interfering with vision and proper sight distance at
corners and intersections. It is the aim of the Town Board to reduce such
road hazards caused by the above and similar objects which are responsible
for causing property damage, personal injury and fatalities due to vehicular
accidents.
§ 243-8. Applicability.
This article shall apply only in the unincorporated area, outside of the
villages, in the Town of Ramapo.
§ 243-9. Scope.
No shrubbery, hedge or other natural growth or fence (except a transparent
fence such as chicken wire, in which the solid area is not more than 5%
of the total area of the fence) or wall over three feet higher than the apex
at the center line of the street shall be located within the triangular area
shown shaded in Sketch A at the intersection of two roads, nor shall the
limbs or foliage on any tree obstruct vision or be permitted to grow nearer
to the ground than eight feet where such limbs or foliage overhangs or is
over or upon land within the triangular area as shown in Sketch A.
§ 243-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 243-9
1:303
§ 243-10. Enforcement.
This article shall be administered and enforced by the Highway Department
of the Town of Ramapo with the assistance of the Police Department of the
Town of Ramapo as set forth below:
A. Upon the determination of the Highway Department that a violation
exists, pursuant to the provisions of § 243-9 hereof, it shall send a
written notice specifying the violations and requiring compliance within
10 days thereafter. Such notice shall be served upon a person of
suitable discretion in charge of the subject premises and by mailing a
copy thereof addressed to the owner of record of such land if he is other
than the person served at the address shown on the last preceding
assessment roll. If said land is vacant and there is no one available to be
served on said property, then a certified mailing of such violation notice
to the owner of record shall be sufficient.
B. In the event the notice specified in Subsection A of this section is not
complied with after a period of 10 days from date of service, then the
Police Department shall issue a summons to be returnable in the Justice
§ 243-9 RAMAPO CODE § 243-10
1:304
§ 243-11. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 2-6-2012 by L.L. No.
2-2012]
Any violation by a person, firm or corporation of this article shall be deemed
an offense punishable by a fine not to exceed $250 or imprisonment for a
period not to exceed 60 days, or both.
Court of the Town of Ramapo upon the filing of an information alleging
the violation herein. [Amended 2-6-2012 by L.L. No. 2-2012]
C. In addition to any other penalty provided under the law for
noncompliance, the Town Board may, in its legislative discretion,
authorize the Superintendent of Highways to remove the visual
obstruction.
D. The expenses incurred by the Superintendent of Highways, pursuant to
Subsection C of this section, shall be paid by the owner or occupant of
the premises or by the person who caused or maintained such
obstruction. The Superintendent of Highways shall file among his
records an affidavit stating with fairness and accuracy the items of
expense incurred in removing said obstruction. The Town Board may
institute a suit to recover such expenses against any person liable for
such expenses or may cause such expenses to be charged against the
property as a lien.
E. To effectuate the purpose and objectives of this article, the Police
Department shall cooperate with and assist the Highway Department as
above set forth and otherwise as may seem proper or required in the
circumstances.
§ 243-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 243-11
1:305

ARTICLE III
Notification of Defects
[Adopted 7-13-1977 by L.L. No. 4-1977]
§ 243-12. Prior notice of defects or obstructions required.
[Amended 2-6-2012 by L.L. No. 2-2012]
No civil action shall be maintained against the Town or Town
Superintendent of Highways for damages or injuries to person or property
sustained by reason of any parking lot, highway, sidewalk, bridge or culvert
being defective, out of repair, unsafe, dangerous or obstructed unless
written notice of such defective, unsafe, dangerous or obstructed condition
of such parking lot, highway, sidewalk, bridge or culvert was actually given
to the Town Clerk or Town Superintendent of Highways and there was a
failure or neglect within a reasonable time after the giving of such notice
to repair or remove the defect, danger or obstruction complained of; but
no such action shall be maintained for damages or injuries to person or
property sustained solely in consequence of the existence of snow or ice
upon any parking lot, highway, sidewalk, bridge or culvert unless written
notice thereof, specifying the particular place, was actually given to the
Town Clerk or Town Superintendent of Highways and there was a failure
or neglect to cause such snow or ice to be removed or to make the place
otherwise reasonably safe within a reasonable time after the receipt of such
notice.
§ 243-13. Presentation of notices.
The Town Superintendent of Highways shall transmit in writing to the Town
Clerk, within five days after the receipt thereof, all written notices received
by him pursuant to this article and Subdivision 2 of § 65-a of the Town
Law. The Town Clerk shall cause all written notices received by him or her
pursuant to this article and Subdivision 2 of § 65-a of the Town Law to be
presented to the Town Board within five days of the receipt thereof or at the
next succeeding Town Board meeting, whichever shall be sooner.
§ 243-14. Statutory provisions superseded.
This article shall supersede in its application to the Town of Ramapo
Subdivisions 1 and 3 of § 65-a of the Town Law.
§ 243-15. Record of notices. [Added 2-6-2012 by L.L. No. 2-2012]
The Town Clerk shall keep an indexed record, in a separate book, of all
written notices which he/she shall receive of the existence of a defective,
unsafe, dangerous or obstructed condition in or upon, or of an accumulation
of ice or snow upon any parking lot, highway, sidewalk, bridge or culvert,
which record shall state the date of receipt of the notice, the nature and
location of the condition stated to exist, and the name and address of
the person from whom the notice is received. All such written notices
shall be indexed according to the location of the alleged defective, unsafe,
§ 243-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 243-15
1:307
dangerous or obstructed condition, or the location of accumulated snow or
ice. The record of each notice shall be preserved for a period of five years
after the date it is received.
§ 243-15 RAMAPO CODE § 243-15
1:308
Chapter 253
TAXATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Deputy Receivers of Taxes — See Ch. 37, Art.
I.
§ 243-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 243-15
1:309

ARTICLE I
Senior Citizen Tax Exemption
[Adopted 3-28-1979 by L.L. No. 2-1979 as Ch. 299 of the 1979 Code]
§ 253-1. Legislative intent. [Amended 10-26-1983 by L.L. No.
13-1983; 1-24-1990 by L.L. No. 1-1990]
The Town Board of the Town of Ramapo, being ever mindful of its
responsibility and obligation to provide for the welfare and financial
independence of the senior citizens of this Town who have made a vital
contribution to the growth, development and progress of our community,
intends by the enactment of this article to provide protection for the elderly
limited-income homeowner from the increased cost of living. The purpose
of this article is to grant a partial exemption from taxation in accordance
with a graduated schedule, as provided for in § 467 of the Real Property Tax
Law, for real property which is owned by said persons with limited income
who are 65 years of age or over and who meet the requirements set forth in
§ 467 of the Real Property Tax Law.
§ 253-2. Grant of exemption. [Amended 10-26-1983 by L.L. No.
13-1983; 1-24-1990 by L.L. No. 1-1990]
All real property owned by persons 65 years of age or over shall be exempt
from Town of Ramapo taxes in accordance with a graduated schedule, as
provided for in § 467 of the Real Property Tax Law, provided also that the
requirements set forth in § 253-3 below are complied with.
§ 253-3. Qualifications for exemption.
In order to qualify for an exemption, the following requirements must be
met:
A. All of the owners of real property must be 65 years of age or over on the
date the application is filed. However, where said property is owned
jointly by a husband and wife, only one spouse must be 65 years of age
or over on the date of filing the application. Any person otherwise
qualifying under this section shall not be denied an exemption if he
becomes 65 years of age after taxable status date and before December
31 of the same year. [Amended 1-24-1990 by L.L. No. 1-1990]
B. Title to the property shall have been vested in the owner of the property
or, if more than one, in all of the owners, for at least 24 consecutive
months prior to the date the application is filed; provided, however, that
in the event of the death of either a husband or wife in whose name title
of property shall have been vested at the time of death and then
becomes vested solely in the survivor by virtue of devise by or descent
from the deceased husband or wife, the time of ownership of the
property by the deceased husband or wife shall be deemed also a time
of ownership by the survivor, and such ownership shall be deemed
continuous for the purposes of computing such period of 24 months,
§ 253-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 253-3
1:311
provided further that in the event of a transfer by either a husband
or wife to the other spouse of all or part of the title to the property,
the time of ownership of the property by the transferor spouse shall be
deemed also a time of ownership by the transferee spouse, and such
ownership shall be deemed continuous for the purposes of computing
such period of 24 months, and provided further that where property of
the owner or owners has been acquired to replace property formerly
owned by such owner or owners and taken by eminent domain or other
involuntary proceeding, except a tax sale, and further provided that
where a residence is sold and replaced with another within one year
and is in the same assessment unit, the period of ownership of the
former property shall be combined with the period of ownership of the
property for which application is made for exemption, and such periods
of ownership shall be deemed to be consecutive for purposes of this
section.
C. The property must be used exclusively for residential purposes and
occupied in whole or in part by the owner or owners and constitute the
legal residence of the owner or owners.
D. Pursuant to § 467 of the Real Property Tax Law, the percentage of the
assessed valuation of real property which is exempt from taxation will
be determined on the basis of annual income in accordance with the
graduated schedule set forth below. "Annual income" refers to the
income of the owner or the combined income of all of the owners for the
income tax year immediately preceding the date that the application is
filed. Where title of the property is vested in either a husband or wife,
annual income is the combined income of the husband and wife. In
computing net rental income or net income from self-employment, no
depreciation deduction shall be allowed for the exhaustion, wear and
tear of real or personal property held for the production of income.
Such income shall include social security and retirement benefits,
interest, dividends, total gains from sale or exchange of a capital asset
in the same tax year, net rental income, salary or earnings, and net
income from self-employment but shall not include a return of capital,
gifts or inheritances received during the twelve-month period and
medical and prescription drug expenses that are not reimbursed or paid
by insurance. Veteran's disability compensation shall not be included in
the calculation of income limits for the partial tax exemption contained
in § 467 of the Real Property Tax Law. [Last amended 2-25-2009 by
L.L. No. 1-2009]
Effective July 1, 2006
Annual Income
Percentage of Assessed
Valuation Exempt from Taxation
Less than $26,000 50%
$26,000 but less than $27,000 45%
$27,000 but less than $28,000 40%
§ 253-3 RAMAPO CODE § 253-3
1:312
Effective July 1, 2006
Annual Income
Percentage of Assessed
Valuation Exempt from Taxation
$28,000 but less than $29,000 35%
$29,000 but less than $29,900 30%
$29,900 but less than $30,800 25%
$30,800 but less than $31,700 20%
$31,700 but less than $32,600 15%
$32,600 but less than $33,500 10%
$33,500 but less than $34,400 5%
Effective July 1, 2007
Annual Income
Percentage of Assessed
Valuation Exempt from Taxation
Less than $27,000 50%
$27,000 but less than $28,000 45%
$28,000 but less than $29,000 40%
$29,000 but less than $30,000 35%
$30,000 but less than $30,900 30%
$30,900 but less than $31,800 25%
$31,800 but less than $32,700 20%
$32,700 but less than $33,600 15%
$33,600 but less than $34,500 10%
$34,500 but less than $35,400 5%
Effective July 1, 2008
Annual Income
Percentage of Assessed
Valuation Exempt from Taxation
Less than $28,000 50%
$28,000 but less than $29,000 45%
$29,000 but less than $30,000 40%
$30,000 but less than $31,000 35%
$31,000 but less than $31,900 30%
$31,900 but less than $32,800 25%
$32,800 but less than $33,700 20%
$33,700 but less than $34,600 15%
$34,600 but less than $35,500 10%
$35,500 but less than $36,400 5%
§ 253-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 253-3
1:313
§ 253-4. Application for exemption; late filing. [Amended 1-24-1990
by L.L. No. 1-1990]
An application for an exemption pursuant to this article must be made by
the owner or all of the owners of the property on forms prepared by the
Town Assessor's office, and the application must be filed in the Assessor's
office on or before taxable status date.
Effective July 1, 2009
Annual Income
Percentage of Assessed
Valuation Exempt from Taxation
Less than $29,000 50%
$29,000 but less than $30,000 45%
$30,000 but less than $31,000 40%
$31,000 but less than $32,000 35%
$32,000 but less than $32,900 30%
$32,900 but less than $33,800 25%
$33,800 but less than $34,700 20%
$34,700 but less than $35,600 15%
$35,600 but less than $36,500 10%
$36,500 but less than $37,400 5%
E. Ownership is limited to dwellings with three or fewer dwelling units or
ownership of a single dwelling unit where title is vested in the owner in
a dwelling containing four or more dwelling units and the dwelling unit
is separately assessed to the individual owner or owners and to trailers
or mobile homes which are separately assessed to the owner or owners
of the property. Exemptions are not available to corporations, to
persons leasing property or to an owner or owners of property with an
interest less than a life estate or to cooperative ownership where title is
held by a corporation.
A. In the event the owner, or all of the owners, of property which has
received an exemption pursuant to § 467 oft the Real Property Tax Law
on the preceding assessment roll fail to file the application pursuant to
§ 467 on or before the taxable status date, such owner or owners may
file the application, executed as if such application had been filed
before the taxable status date, with the Assessor on or before the date
for the hearing of complaints. [Amended 11-29-2007 by L.L. No.
4-2007]
B. Any person who has been granted an exemption pursuant to this article
on five consecutive completed assessment rolls shall not be subject to
the application requirements set forth above and shall be automatically
granted an exemption pursuant to this article on such subsequent
assessment roll; provided, however, that when tax payment is made by
§ 253-3 RAMAPO CODE § 253-4
1:314
§ 253-5. Amount of exemption. [Amended 10-26-1983 by L.L. No.
13-1983; 1-24-1990 by L.L. No. 1-1990]
Upon the determination by the Assessor that the requirements of this
article have been met, the exemption shall be allowed in accordance with a
graduated schedule, as provided for in § 467 of the Real Property Tax Law,
for property which so qualifies. The exemption does not apply to special ad
valorem levies or special assessments.
§ 253-6. Burden of proof.
The burden of proof is upon the applicant to show eligibility pursuant to this
article and the rules and regulations of the Town Assessor.
§ 253-7. Cooperative apartment property. [Added 2-11-1998 by L.L.
No. 4-1998]
§ 253-8. Penalties for offenses.
Any person convicted of making a willful or false statement in the
application for exemption under this article shall be punished by a fine of
not more than $100 and shall be disqualified from further exemption for a
period of five years.
such person, a sworn affidavit on forms prescribed by the State Board
of Real Property Services must be included with such payment which
shall state that such person continues to be eligible for such exemption.
If such affidavit is not included with the tax payment, the collecting
officer shall proceed pursuant to § 551-a of the Real Property Tax Law.
[Amended 2-6-2012 by L.L. No. 2-2012]
A. Legislative intent. The Real Property Tax Law provides senior citizens
owning "qualifying real property" with a tax exemption. The scope of
"qualifying residential real property" did not include cooperative
apartments owned by senior citizens. Section 467 of the Real Property
Tax Law has been amended to permit towns, by adoption of a local law,
to include cooperative housing within the meaning of "qualifying
residential real property."
B. Eligible property. Pursuant to § 467 of the Real Property Tax Law, the
percentage of cooperative shares owned by senior citizens in a
cooperative apartment corporation shall be eligible to be included in
"qualifying residential real property" for the purposes of determining
eligibility for a senior citizen's real property tax exemption.
§ 253-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 253-8
1:315

ARTICLE II
Real Property Tax Limitation
[Adopted 10-6-1981 by L.L. No. 4-1981]
§ 253-9. Legislative intent.
§ 253-10. Tax limitation.
Hereafter, in the Town of Ramapo, the amount of taxes to be raised by the
General Fund, the Part-Town Fund and the Part-Town Police Fund in any
fiscal year, in addition to providing for the interest on and the principal of all
indebtedness, shall not exceed an amount equal to 8/10 of 1% of the average
full valuation of taxable real estate in the Town, based on a prior five-year
average, less the amount to be raised by tax on real estate in such year
for the payment of the interest on and redemption of certificates or other
evidence of indebtedness described in Subdivisions A and D of § 5 of Article
VIII of the Constitution of the State of New York, or renewals thereof.
§ 253-11. Determination of average full valuation.
The average full valuation of taxable real estate of the Town shall be
determined by taking the assessed valuations of taxable real estate on the
last completed assessment roll and the four preceding rolls of the Town and
applying thereto the ratio which such assessed valuation on each of such
rolls bears to the full valuation, as determined by the State Tax Commission
or by such other state officer or agency as the Legislature shall by law
direct. The Legislature shall prescribe the manner by which such ratio shall
be determined by the State Tax Commission or by such other state officer
or agency.
A. In recent years, the real property tax burden on residents of suburban
towns, such as the Town of Ramapo, has approached confiscatory
levels. This is due to the imposition of taxes at various levels of local
government, i.e., county, village, town and school district. Should
present trends continue unchanged, projections indicate no substantial
relief in this regard. Article VIII, § 10, of the Constitution of the State of
New York imposes specific limitations on the amounts which counties,
cities, villages and certain school districts may raise by levies upon real
property. However, towns and central school districts have never been
included in such constitutional provisions, except for debt limitations.
B. The Town of Ramapo believes that the time has come to adopt
restrictions on a town's taxing authority, such as those provided by
Article VIII, § 10, of the State Constitution for other levels of local
government. Therefore, it is the intent of this article to establish a tax
limitation on the Town tax in the Town of Ramapo. It is believed that no
local government should have an unlimited power to tax and that all
local governments should be included within constitutional provisions.
This article is Ramapo's contribution to such an effort.
§ 253-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 253-11
1:317

ARTICLE III
Tax Exemption for Physically Disabled Persons
[Adopted 6-27-1984 by L.L. No. 9-1984]
§ 253-12. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to exempt from real property taxes property
owned by certain physically disabled persons, as authorized by § 459 of the
New York State Real Property Tax Law.
§ 253-13. Grant of exemption.
Pursuant to the provisions of § 459 of the New York State Real Property
Tax Law, an improvement to any real property used solely for residential
purposes as a one-, two- or three-family residence shall be exempt from
taxation to the extent of any increase in value attributable to such
improvement, if such improvement is used for the purpose of facilitating
and accommodating the use and accessibility of such real property by a
resident owner of the real property who is physically disabled and who
resides on the premises at least 10 months per year or a member of the
resident owner's household who is physically disabled, if such member
resides in the real property.
§ 253-14. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
MEMBER OF HOUSEHOLD — A blood relative of the family.
§ 253-15. Applicability. [Amended 11-14-1984 by L.L. No. 14-1984]
Such exemption shall apply to improvements constructed prior to the
effective date of this article.
§ 253-16. Resident owners.
Resident owners of said property, as defined in § 253-13 of this article,
shall be defined as a person or persons possessing legal ownership of the
property at least one year prior to submitting an application for exemption.
§ 253-17. Validity of exemption.
An exemption granted under this article is valid for one year and must be
reapplied for on a year-to-year basis.
§ 253-18. Effect of transfer of title.
An exemption granted under this article is extinguished on transfer of title
on the premises in question.
§ 253-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 253-19
1:319
§ 253-19. Applicability of assessment rolls.
This article shall apply to assessment rolls prepared on the basis of taxable
status dates occurring on or after May 1, 1984.
§ 253-19 RAMAPO CODE § 253-19
1:320
ARTICLE IV
Tax Exemption for Affordable Housing
[Adopted 10-23-1991 by L.L. No. 13-1991]
§ 253-20. Legislative intent.
Pursuant to § 421-e of the Real Property Tax Law of the State of New York,
a town may adopt a local law to provide that any cooperative, condominium
or rental project which received grants, payments or loans pursuant to
Article 18 or 19 of the Private Housing Finance Law shall be exempt from
real property taxation imposed by the Town of Ramapo. It is the intent of
the Town Board to adopt a local law to exempt any new construction and
conversion of existing structures of a cooperative, condominium or rental
project which receives grants, payments or loans pursuant to Article 18 or
19 of the Private Housing Finance Law from real property taxation, other
than assessments for local improvements, imposed by the Town of Ramapo.
§ 253-21. Grant of exemption.
A. A. Pursuant to the authority of § 421-e of the Real Property Tax Law, all
conversion of existing structures and all new construction of
cooperatives, condominiums or rentals constructed or converted after
the effective date of this local law and receiving payments, grants or
loans pursuant to Article 18 or 19 of the Private Housing Finance Law
shall be partially exempt, as per schedule below, from real property
taxes imposed by the Town of Ramapo, other than for assessments for
local improvements, for a period of 10 years from the taxable status
date immediately following the completion or conversion of said
project.
Year Exemption
1 50%
2 45%
3 40%
4 35%
5 30%
6 25%
7 20%
8 15%
9 10%
10 5%
B. Said exemption shall be in addition to any other exemptions or
abatement authorized by law.
§ 253-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 253-21
1:321
§ 253-22. Procedure.
C. This exemption shall terminate upon the unit receiving the exemption
no longer being subject to or qualifying under the provisions of Article
18 or 19 of the Private Housing Finance Law.
A. Anyone seeking an exemption pursuant to this section must submit a
written request for said exemption to the Assessor of the Town of
Ramapo. Said request must include the following information:
(1) Name and address of project.
(2) Section and lot number.
(3) Statement as to eligibility for affordable housing designation.
(4) Statement as to zoning approval.
(5) Proof that all prior taxes on subject property have been paid.
B. Such request must be submitted on or before taxable status date of any
calendar year to be eligible for said exemption for said calendar year.
C. If such request is received after taxable status date, such exemption
shall not be granted until the next calendar year.
§ 253-21 RAMAPO CODE § 253-22
1:322
ARTICLE V
Alternative Veterans Tax Exemption
[Adopted 3-26-1997 by L.L. No. 4-1997]
§ 253-23. Legislative intent.
It is the intent of the Town Board of the Town of Ramapo to accept the
option to increase the veterans tax exemption.
§ 253-24. Increase in maximum exemption. [Amended 2-25-2004 by
L.L. No. 4-2004; 9-28-2005 by L.L. No. 5-2005; 2-22-2006 by L.L. No.
1-2006; 2-14-2018 by L.L. No. 2-2018]
As authorized by § 458-a of the Real Property Tax Law, the Town of Ramapo
does hereby increase the maximum exemption allowable in paragraphs
(a), (b) and (c) of this subdivision to $75,000, $50,000, and $250,000,
respectively.
§ 253-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 253-24
1:323

ARTICLE VI
Veterans Tax Exemption
[Adopted 11-12-1997 by L.L. No. 9-1997]
§ 253-25. Legislative intent.
The Real Property Tax Law provides veterans owning qualifying real
property with a tax exemption. The scope of "qualifying residential real
property" did not include cooperative apartments owned by veterans.
Section 458 of the Real Property Tax Law has been amended to permit
towns, by adoption of a local law, to include cooperative housing within the
meaning of "qualifying residential real property."
§ 253-26. Eligible property.
Pursuant to § 458 of the Real Property Tax Law, the percentage of
cooperative shares owned by veterans in a cooperative apartment
corporation shall be eligible to be included in "qualifying residential real
property" for the purposes of determining eligibility for a veterans real
property tax exemption.
§ 253-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 253-26
1:325

ARTICLE VII
Converted Condominium Units
[Adopted 2-11-1998 by L.L. No. 2-1998]
§ 253-27. Legislative intent.
Condominium units presently receive a beneficial real property tax
assessment pursuant to Real Property Law § 339-y and Real Property Tax
Law § 581. Under the provisions, the aggregate assessment of their units
plus common interests cannot exceed the total valuation of the property
assessed as a parcel. Based on these provisions, condominium units often
pay less property taxes than other real property of similar value. This
has created a situation where certain people are converting property into
condominium ownership to receive the preferential treatment under the
law. Pursuant to an amendment of §§ 581 and 339-y, the Town can, by
local law, provide that the provisions of § 581, Subdivision 1(a), and § 339-y,
Subdivision 1(b) shall not apply to a converted condominium units within
the Town.
§ 253-28. Definition.
For the purposes of this article, a converted condominium unit shall mean
a dwelling unit held in condominium form of ownership that has previously
been on an assessment roll as a dwelling unit in other than condominium
form of ownership and has not been previously subjected to the provisions
of §§ 581 of the Real Property Tax Law and 339-y of the Real Property Law.
§ 253-29. Application.
The provisions of § 581, Subdivision 1(a), of the Real Property Tax Law and
§ 339-y, Subdivision 1(b), of the Real Property Law shall not apply to any
converted condominium unit within the Town of Ramapo.
§ 253-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 253-29
1:327

ARTICLE VIII
Tax Exemption for Persons with Disabilities
[Adopted 2-11-1998 by L.L. No. 3-1998]
§ 253-30. Legislative intent.
Pursuant to the amendment of the Real Property Tax Law by the addition of
a new § 459-c, real property owned by one or more persons with disabilities
and whose income is limited by reason of such disability may be partially
exempt from taxation provided the Town, by local law, grants the partial
exemption. Such partial exemption shall be subject to the income limits
established by § 459-c of the Real Property Tax Law.
§ 253-31. Eligibility.
The persons who meet the eligibility requirements as set forth in § 459-c of
the Real Property Tax Law are entitled to the partial tax exemption as set
forth below.
§ 253-32. Exemption. [Amended 12-13-2000 by L.L. No. 7-2000;
3-26-2003 by L.L. No. 1-2003; 2-25-2004 by L.L. No. 1-2004;
4-25-2007 by L.L. No. 2-2007]
Pursuant to § 459-c of the Real Property Tax Law, the percentage of the
assessed valuation which is exempt from taxation will be determined on the
basis of income in accordance with the following graduated schedule:
Effective July 1, 2006
Annual Income
Percentage of Assessed Valuation
Exempt from Taxation
Less than $26,000 50%
$26,000 but less than $27,000 45%
$27,000 but less than $28,000 40%
$28,000 but less than $29,000 35%
$29,000 but less than $29,900 30%
$29,900 but less than $30,800 25%
$30,800 but less than $31,700 20%
$31,700 but less than $32,600 15%
$32,600 but less than $33,500 10%
$33,500 but less than $34,400 5%
§ 253-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 253-32
1:329
Effective July 1, 2007
Annual Income
Percentage of Assessed
Valuation Exempt from Taxation
Less than $27,000 50%
$27,000 but less than $28,000 45%
$28,000 but less than $29,000 40%
$29,000 but less than $30,000 35%
$30,000 but less than $30,900 30%
$30,900 but less than $31,800 25%
$31,800 but less than $32,700 20%
$32,700 but less than $33,600 15%
$33,600 but less than $34,500 10%
$34,500 but less than $35,400 5%
Effective July 1, 2008
Annual Income
Percentage of Assessed
Valuation Exempt from Taxation
Less than $28,000 50%
$28,000 but less than $29,000 45%
$29,000 but less than $30,000 40%
$30,000 but less than $31,000 35%
$31,000 but less than $31,900 30%
$31,900 but less than $32,800 25%
$32,800 but less than $33,700 20%
$33,700 but less than $34,600 15%
$34,600 but less than $35,500 10%
$35,500 but less than $36,400 5%
Effective July 1, 2009
Annual Income
Percentage of Assessed
Valuation Exempt from Taxation
Less than $29,000 50%
$29,000 but less than $30,000 45%
$30,000 but less than $31,000 40%
$31,000 but less than $32,000 35%
$32,000 but less than $32,900 30%
$32,900 but less than $33,800 25%
§ 253-32 RAMAPO CODE § 253-32
1:330
Effective July 1, 2009
Annual Income
Percentage of Assessed
Valuation Exempt from Taxation
$33,800 but less than $34,700 20%
$34,700 but less than $35,600 15%
$35,600 but less than $36,500 10%
$36,500 but less than $37,400 5%
§ 253-32.1. Medical and drug expenses. [Added 1-3-2019 by L.L. No.
1-2019]
Applicants may deduct from their income all medical and prescription drug
expenses which are not reimbursed or paid by insurance.
§ 253-32 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 253-32.1
1:331

ARTICLE IX
Tax Exemption for Housing Developments
[Adopted 10-27-1999 by L.L. No. 9-1999]
§ 253-33. Legislative intent.
Pursuant to § 421-d of the New York Real Property Tax Law, a town having a
population of less than one million is authorized and empowered to adopt a
local law to provide that any new or rehabilitated housing development, as
defined in § 42 of the Private Housing Finance Law, subject to a mortgage,
the loan for which was made or financed by notes, bonds or other
obligations of the New York State Housing Finance Agency, the interest
on which is exempt from taxation pursuant to the Internal Revenue Code
of 1954, as amended, shall be exempt from taxation as provided by such
local law. The Town of Ramapo, for the benefit of low- and moderate-income
citizens of the community, desires to provide a property tax exemption
for such housing developments pursuant to § 421-d of the New York Real
Property Tax Law, and the Town Board hereby finds and declares that
the provision of such a property tax exemption will foster and enable
the development of eligible housing projects for the benefit of low- and
moderate-income citizens of the community.
§ 253-34. Exemption granted.
A. Pursuant to § 421-d of the New York Real Property Tax Law, any new or
rehabilitated housing development, as defined in § 42 of the Private
Housing Finance Law, which is subject to an outstanding mortgage, the
loan for which was made or financed by notes, bonds or other
obligations of the New York State Housing Finance Agency, the interest
on which is exempt from taxation pursuant to the Internal Revenue
Code of 1954, as amended, shall be exempt from real property taxes
imposed by the Town of Ramapo, including those imposed by or on
behalf of the applicable school district, other than special assessments
and special ad valorem levies, to the extent hereafter set forth.
B. During construction or rehabilitation of the housing development and
until a permanent certificate of occupancy is issued therefor, but for no
longer than a period of three years, the owner of the housing
development shall pay taxes to the Town of Ramapo, the applicable
school district and the County of Rockland in an annual amount equal to
the annual amount of taxes paid on the land and any improvements
thereon during the fiscal year immediately preceding the
commencement of such construction or rehabilitation.
C. Upon conclusion of the period described in Subsection B above and for
a period of 15 years thereafter, the owner of the housing development
shall pay taxes to the Town of Ramapo, the applicable school district
and the County of Rockland in an amount equal to the taxes on the
assessed value of the land upon which the housing development is
situated, plus a tax on any improvements situated upon such land,
§ 253-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 253-34
1:333
§ 253-35. Procedure.
which tax shall be subject to the following exemption, expressed as a
percentage of the assessed value of such improvements:
Year Exemption Percentage
1 95%
2 95%
3 95%
4 75%
5 60%
6 60%
7 60%
8 60%
9 60%
10 40%
11 40%
12 40%
13 20%
14 20%
15 20%
D. Notwithstanding anything contained herein to the contrary, taxes shall
be paid during any year after the taxable status date immediately
following the completion of construction or rehabilitation at least in the
amount of taxes paid on such land and any improvements thereon
during the fiscal year preceding commencement of such construction or
rehabilitation.
E. The exemptions set forth above shall remain in effect for the periods
described therein but only so long as the housing development is
subject to an outstanding mortgage which secures a loan from the New
York State Housing Finance Agency, the interest on which is exempt
from taxation pursuant to the Internal Revenue Code of 1954, as
amended, and the housing development is used for residential unit
purposes.
F. The aforesaid exemption from taxes shall not be availed of concurrently
under any other law.
A. Persons seeking an exemption pursuant to this article must submit a
written request for said exemption to the Assessor of the Town of
Ramapo, which request must include the following information:
(1) Name and address of project;
§ 253-34 RAMAPO CODE § 253-35
1:334
(2) Section and lot number;
(3) A statement as to eligibility;
(4) Statement as to zoning approval; and
(5) Proof that all prior taxes on subject property have been paid.
B. Such request must be submitted on or before the taxable status date of
any tax year to be eligible for said exemption for said tax year.
C. If such request is received after the taxable status date, such exemption
shall not be granted until the next tax year.
D. Upon a determination by the Assessor that the requirements of § 421-d
of the New York Real Property Tax Law and this article have been met,
the Assessor shall forward the request for an exemption to the Town
Board for approval of a tax exemption agreement. Prior to approval by
the Town Board, the Town Board shall forward the request to the
applicable school district and village, if applicable, for their comments.
[Added 2-6-2012 by L.L. No. 2-2012]
E. An applicant who is granted an exemption pursuant to this article shall
not commence any legal proceedings, whether by tax certiorari or
otherwise, to alter the assessed valuation of the land so long as the
assessed valuation does not change, using as a basis the assessed
valuation determined pursuant to the Real Property Tax Law during the
first year of the exemption.
§ 253-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 253-35
1:335

ARTICLE X
Tax Exemption for Volunteer Fire and Ambulance Companies
[Adopted 2-9-2000 by L.L. No. 2-2000]
§ 253-36. Legislative intent.
The Real Property Tax Law has been amended by the addition of a new
§ 466-A which permits a town to grant a partial tax exemption on real
property owned by an enrolled member of an incorporated volunteer fire
company, fire department or incorporated voluntary ambulance service or
such enrolled member and spouse. Said partial exemption can be 10% of the
assessed value of such property for all Town, part Town and special district
purposes.
§ 253-37. Grant of exemption.
An exemption of 10% of assessed value of property owned by an eligible
person as set forth below is hereby granted from taxation with respect
to Town, part Town and special district charges. In no event shall the
exemption exceed $3,000 multiplied by the latest state equalization rate for
the Town.
§ 253-38. Eligibility.
Such exemption shall be granted to an enrolled member of an incorporated
volunteer fire company, fire department or incorporated voluntary
ambulance service residing in such county provided that:
A. The applicant resides in the Town or village which is served by such
incorporated volunteer fire company or fire department or incorporated
voluntary ambulance service;
B. The property is the primary residence of the applicant;
C. The property is used exclusively for residential purposes; provided,
however, that in the event any portion of such property is not used
exclusively for the applicant's residence but is used for other purposes,
such portion shall be subject to taxation and the remaining portion only
shall be entitled to the exemption provided by this section; and
D. The applicant has been certified by the authority having jurisdiction for
the incorporated volunteer fire company or fire department as an
enrolled member of such incorporated volunteer fire company or fire
department for at least five years or the applicant has been certified by
the authority having jurisdiction for the incorporated voluntary
ambulance service as an enrolled member of such incorporated
voluntary ambulance service for at least five years. The applicant must
submit proof of such certification together with the application for an
exemption.
§ 253-36 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 253-39
1:337
§ 253-39. Grant of lifetime exemption.
Any enrolled member of an incorporated volunteer fire company, fire
department or incorporated voluntary ambulance service who accrues more
than 20 years of active service and is so certified by the authority having
jurisdiction for the incorporated volunteer fire company, fire department or
incorporated voluntary ambulance service shall be granted the ten-percent
exemption as authorized by this article for the remainder of his or her life
as long as his or her primary residence is located within such county.
§ 253-40. Application. [Amended 2-6-2012 by L.L. No. 2-2012]
Application for such exemption shall be filed with the Assessor on or before
the taxable status date on a form as prescribed by the State Board of Real
Property Services.
§ 253-41. No diminution of benefits. [Amended 2-6-2012 by L.L. No.
2-2012]
No applicant who is a volunteer fire fighter or volunteer ambulance worker
who by reason of such status is receiving any benefit under the provisions
of Article 4 of the Real Property Tax Law on the effective date of this article
shall suffer any diminution of such benefit because of the provisions of this
article.
§ 253-39 RAMAPO CODE § 253-41
1:338
ARTICLE XI
Tax Exemptions for Cold War Veterans
[Adopted 11-14-2007 by L.L. No. 3-2007; amended in its entirety
6-26-2019 by L.L. No. 6-2019]
§ 253-42. Legislative intent.
Section 458-b of the Real Property Tax Law authorizes the Town to adopt a
local law granting a partial tax exemption for Cold War veterans.
§ 253-43. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ACTIVE DUTY — Full-time duty in the United States armed forces, other
than active duty for training.
ARMED FORCES — The United States Army, Navy, Marine Corps, Air Force,
and Coast Guard.
COLD WAR VETERAN — A person, male or female, who served on active
duty for a period of more than 365 days in the United States armed forces,
during the time period from September 2, 1945 to December 26, 1991, was
discharged or released therefrom under honorable conditions and has been
awarded the Cold War recognition certificate as authorized under Public
Law 105-85, the 1998 National Defense Authorization Act.
LATEST STATE EQUALIZATION RATE — The latest final state equalization
rate or special equalization rate established by the commissioner pursuant
to Article 12 of the Real Property Tax Law. The commissioner shall establish
a special equalization rate if it finds that there has been a material change
in the level of assessment since the establishment of the latest state
equalization rate, but in no event shall such special equalization rate exceed
100. In the event that the state equalization rate exceeds 100, then the
state equalization rate shall be 100 for the purposes of this article. Where
a special equalization rate is established for purposes of this article, the
assessor is directed and authorized to recompute the Cold War veterans
exemption on the assessment roll by applying such special equalization rate
instead of state equalization rate applied in the previous year and to make
the appropriate corrections on the assessment roll, notwithstanding the
fact that such assessor may receive the special equalization rate after the
completion, verification and filing of such final assessment roll. In the event
that the assessor does not have custody of the roll when such recomputation
is accomplished, the assessor shall certify such recomputation to the local
officers having custody and control of such roll, and such local officers are
hereby directed and authorized to enter the computed Cold War veterans
exemption certified by the assessor on such roll.
LATEST CLASS RATIO — The latest final class ratio established by the
commissioner pursuant to Title 1 of Article 12 of the Real Property Tax Law
§ 253-42 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 253-43
1:339
for use in a special assessing unit as defined in § 1801 of the Real Property
Tax Law.
QUALIFIED OWNER — A Cold War veteran, the spouse of a Cold War
veteran, or the unremarried surviving spouse of a deceased Cold War
veteran. Where property is owned by more than one qualified owner, the
exemption to which each is entitled may be combined. Where a veteran is
also the unremarried surviving spouse of a veteran, such person may also
receive any exemption to which the deceased spouse was entitled.
QUALIFIED RESIDENTIAL REAL PROPERTY — Property owned by a
qualified owner which is used exclusively for residential purposes; provided,
however, that in the event that any portion of such property is not used
exclusively for residential purposes, but is used for other purposes, such
portion shall be subject to the exemption provided by this section. Such
property shall be the primary residence of the Cold War veteran or the
unremarried surviving spouse of a Cold War veteran; unless the Cold War
veteran or unremarried surviving spouse is absent from the property due to
medical reasons or institutionalization for up to five years.
SERVICE CONNECTED — With respect to disability or death, that such
disability was incurred or aggravated, or that the death resulted from a
disability incurred or aggravated, in line of duty on active military, naval or
air service.
§ 253-44. Grant of exemption.
A. Qualifying residential real property shall be exempt from taxation to the
extent of 15% of the assessed value of such property; provided however,
that such exemption shall not exceed $12,000 or the product of $12,000
multiplied by the latest state equalization rate for the assessing unit, or,
in the case of a special assessing unit, the latest class ratio, whichever
is less.
B. In addition to the exemption provided by Subsection A of this section
where the Cold War veteran received a compensation rating from the
United States Veterans Affairs or from the United States Department of
Defense because of a service-connected disability, qualifying residential
real property shall be exempt from taxation to the extent of the product
of the assessed value of such property, multiplied by 50% of the Cold
War veteran disability rating; provided, however, that such exemption
shall not exceed $40,000, or the product of $40,000 multiplied by the
latest state equalization rate for the assessing unit.
C. If a Cold War veteran received the exemption under § 458 or 458-a of
the Real Property Tax Law, the Cold War veteran shall not be eligible to
receive the exemption under this section.
D. The exemption provided by Subsection A of this section shall be granted
for a period of 10 years. The commencement of such ten-year period
shall be governed pursuant to this subsection. Where a qualified owner
owns qualifying residential real property on the effective date of this
§ 253-43 RAMAPO CODE § 253-44
1:340
article, such ten-year period shall be measured from the assessment
roll prepared pursuant to the first taxable status date occurring on or
after the effective date of this article. Where a qualified owner does
not own qualifying residential real property on the effective date of this
article, such ten-year period shall be measured from the assessment
roll prepared pursuant to the first taxable status date occurring at
least 60 days after the date of purchase of qualifying residential real
property; provided, however, that should the veteran apply for and be
granted an exemption on the assessment roll prepared pursuant to a
taxable status date occurring within 60 days after the date of purchase
of residential real property, such ten-year period shall be measured
from the first assessment roll in which the exemption occurs. If, before
the expiration of such ten-year period, such exempt property is old and
replaced with other residential real property, such exemption may be
granted pursuant to this subsection for the unexpired portion of the tenyear
exemption period.
E. Application for exemption shall be made by the owner, or all of the
owners, of the property on a form prescribed by the State Board. The
owner or owners shall file the completed form in the assessor's office on
or before the first appropriate taxable status date. The owner or owners
of the property shall be required to refile each year. Applicants shall
refile on or before the appropriate taxable status date. Any applicant
convicted of willfully making any false statement in the application for
such exemption shall be subject to the penalties prescribed in the penal
law.
F. The above exemption shall be retroactive to January 1, 2018.
§ 253-44 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 253-44
1:341

ARTICLE XII
Filing Requirements for Income-Producing Properties
[Adopted 12-15-2009 by L.L. No. 3-2009]
§ 253-45. Findings; authority.
It is hereby found and declared by the Town Board of the Town of Ramapo
that assessments of all real property should be fair and uniform and that
it is the right of property owners of income-producing property to have
fair and equitable assessments. The Town Board further recognizes that the
valuation of income-producing property is often made by a capitalization
of income approach to market value and, therefore, the Assessor requires
income and expense statements from owners of said income-producing
property in order to properly evaluate the assessments. Finally, the Town
Board recognizes that owners of income-producing property enjoy certain
privacy rights in connection with income and expense statements filed with
the Assessor. This article is pursuant to the authority of Article 2, § 10,
Subdivision 1(ii)d(3) of the Municipal Home Rule Law of the State of New
York.
§ 253-46. Filing of annual income and expense statements for
income-producing property.
A. Income and expense statements. Where real property is incomeproducing
property, the owner shall be required to submit annually to
the Assessor, not later than the first of March 2010 for those statements
due in 2010 and not later than the first day of July on all succeeding
years, a statement of all income derived from all expenses attributed to
the operation of such property as follows:
(1) Where the owner's books and records reflecting the operation of
the property are maintained on a calendar-year basis, the
statement shall be for the calendar year preceding the date the
statement shall be filed.
(2) Where the owner's books and records reflecting the operation of
the property are maintained on a fiscal-year basis for federal
income tax purposes, the statement shall be for the last fiscal year
concluded as of the first day of January preceding the date the
statement shall be filed.
(3) Notwithstanding the provisions of Subsection A(1) and (2) of this
section, where the owner of the property has not operated the
property and is without knowledge of the income and expenses of
the operation of the property for a consecutive twelve-month
period concluded as of the first day of January preceding the date
the statement shall be filed, then the statement shall be for the
period of ownership.
§ 253-45 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 253-46
1:343
(4) The Assessor may for good cause shown extend the time for filing
an income and expense statement by a period not to exceed 30
days.
B. Declaration. Such statements shall contain the following declaration: "I
certify that all information contained in this statement is true and
correct to the best of my knowledge and belief. I understand that the
willful making of any false statement of material herein will subject me
to the provisions of law relevant to the making and filing of false
instruments and will render this statement null and void."
C. Form. The form on which such statement shall be submitted shall be
prepared by the Assessor and copies of such form shall be made
available at said Assessor's office in the Town of Ramapo.
D. Failure to file statement; penalties; enforcement procedures.
(1) In the event that an owner of income-producing property fails to file
an income and expense statement within the time prescribed in
Subsection A of the section (including any extension of time for
filing), the Board of Assessment Review shall deny any complaint
filed in relation to the assessment of such owner's property for said
year.
(2) In the event that an income and expense statement required under
the provisions of this section has not been timely filed, the Assessor
may compel by subpoena a production of the books and records of
the owner relevant to the income and expenses of the property and
may also make application to any court of competent jurisdiction
for an order compelling the owner to furnish the required income
and expense statement and the books and records to the income
expenses of the property. In the event that such a order is issued,
the Assessor shall be entitled to recover from the owner the costs
and expenses, including attorney's fees, incurred by the Town in
connection with the proceeding to obtain and enforce the order.
E. Definition of "income-producing property." As used in this section, the
term "income producing property" means property owned for the
purpose of securing an income from the property itself, but shall not
include residential property containing three or fewer dwelling units or
property classified in Class one as defined in Article 18 of the Real
Property Tax Law.
F. Penalties for disclosure of information. Except in accordance with
proper judicial order or as otherwise provided by law, it shall be
unlawful for the Assessor, or any official or employee of the Town, any
member of the Board of Assessment Review, any person engaged or
retained by the Town, or any person who, pursuant to this section, is
permitted to inspect any income and/or expense statement or to whom
a copy, an abstract or a portion of any such statement is furnished, to
divulge or make known in any manner the amount of income and/or
expense or any particulars set forth or disclosed in any such statement
§ 253-46 RAMAPO CODE § 253-46
1:344
required under this section. The officers charged with custody of such
statements shall not be required to produce any income and expense
statement or evidence of anything contained in said statement in any
action or proceeding in any court, except on behalf of the Town or
Assessor. Nothing herein shall be construed to prohibit the delivery to
an owner or his duly authorized representative of a certified copy of any
statement filed by such owner pursuant to this section or to prohibit
the publication of statistics so classified as to prevent the identification
of particular statements and the items thereof, or delivery of a copy
to a legal representative or other professional retained by the Town or
Board of Assessment Review retained with respect to a proceeding to
review said assessment and for no other purpose. Any violation of the
provisions of this subsection shall be punished by a fine not exceeding
$1,000 or by imprisonment not exceeding one year, or both, at the
discretion of the court, and if the offender is an officer or employee of
the Town or member of the Board of Assessment Review, the offender
shall be dismissed from office upon compliance with the Civil Service
Law and/or all applicable laws.
§ 253-46 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 253-46
1:345

ARTICLE XIII
Tax Exemption for Gold Star Parents
[Adopted 2-20-2014 by L.L. No. 2-2014]
§ 253-47. Legislative intent.
Pursuant to § 458-a of the Real Property Tax Law, a Gold Star Parent is
defined as a parent of a child who died in the line of duty while serving in
the United States Armed Forces during a period of war. Section 458-a of the
Real Property Tax Law permits a town to adopt a local law to include a Gold
Star Parent within the definition of a qualified owner to therefore be eligible
for the alternative veterans exemption. The Town wishes to adopt such local
law.
§ 253-48. Inclusion of Gold Star Parent as qualified owner.
For the purposes of eligibility for an alternative veterans exemption
authorized by § 458-a of the Real Property Tax Law, a Gold Star Parent,
as defined by § 458-a of the Real Property Tax Law, is included within the
definition of a qualified owner and to include property owned by a Gold Star
Parent within the definition of "qualifying residential property," provided
that such property shall be the primary residence of the Gold Star Parent.
§ 253-47 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 253-48
1:347

ARTICLE XIV
Late Filing of Renewal Application for Partial Tax Exemption for
Senior Citizens
[Adopted 12-14-2016 by L.L. No. 5-2016]
§ 253-49. Legislative intent.
New York State has recently amended § 467 of the Real Property Tax Law
by adding a new subdivision, 8-a, which permits a municipal corporation
to adopt a local law providing that, where a renewal application for the
exemption authorized by § 467 of the Real Property Tax Law has not been
filed on or before the taxable status date, and the owner believes that
good cause existed for the failure to file the renewal application by that
date, the owner may, no later than the last day for paying taxes without
incurring interest or penalty, submit a written request to the assessor
asking him or her to extend the filing deadline and grant the exemption.
Such request shall contain an explanation of why the deadline was missed,
and shall be accompanied by a renewal application, reflecting the facts and
circumstances as they existed on the taxable status date. The assessor may
extend the filing deadline and grant the exemption if he or she is satisfied
that 1) good cause existed for the failure to file the renewal application
by the taxable status, and that 2) the applicant is otherwise entitled to the
exemption.
§ 253-50. Late filing requirements.
Where a renewal application for the exemption authorized by § 467 of the
Real Property Tax Law has not been filed on or before the taxable status
date, and the owner believes that good cause existed for the failure to file
the renewal application by that date, the owner may, no later than the last
day for paying taxes without incurring interest or penalty, submit a written
request to the assessor asking him or her to extend the filing deadline and
grant the exemption. Such request shall contain an explanation of why the
deadline was missed, and shall be accompanied by a renewal application,
reflecting the facts and circumstances as they existed on the taxable status
date. The assessor may extend the filing deadline and grant the exemption
if he or she is satisfied that 1) good cause existed for the failure to file
the renewal application by the taxable status, and that 2) the applicant
is otherwise entitled to the exemption. The assessor shall mail notice of
his or her determination to the owner. If the determination states that
the assessor has granted the exemption, he or she shall thereupon be
authorized and directed to correct the assessment roll accordingly, or, if
another person has custody or control of the assessment roll, to direct that
person to make the appropriate corrections. If the correction is not made
before taxes are levied, the failure to take the exemption into account in
the computation of the tax shall be deemed a "clerical error," and shall be
corrected accordingly.
§ 253-49 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 253-50
1:349

ARTICLE XV
Tax Exemption for Properties Purchased by Nonprofit Organizations
[Adopted 2-27-2019 by L.L. No. 5-2019]
§ 253-51. Eligibility.
A. Nonprofit organizations who purchase property after the Town's
taxable status date, and who meets the requirements for tax exemption
pursuant to § 420-a or 420-b of the Real Property Tax Law may, within
45 days after the transfer of title, submit an application for tax
exemption to the Assessor pursuant to either § 420-a(16) or § 420-b(8).
B. The Assessor shall review said application and make a determination on
said application pursuant to the provisions set forth in the applicable
section of the Real Property Tax Law.
§ 253-51 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 253-51
1:351
Chapter 258
TREES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Landscapers — See Ch. 173. Parks and recreation — See Ch. 195.
§ 253-51 RAMAPO CODE § 253-51
1:352
ARTICLE I
Shade Trees
[Adopted 3-8-1965 by L.L. No. 1-1965 as Ch. 40 of the 1965 Code;
amended in its entirety 2-6-2012 by L.L. No. 2-2012]
§ 258-1. Title.
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Shade Tree Ordinance
of the Town of Ramapo."
§ 258-2. Definitions and word usage.
For the purposes of this article, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meanings given herein. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words in the plural number include the singular, and words in the
singular number include the plural. The word "shall" is always mandatory
and not merely directory.
DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC WORKS — The Director of the Department of Public
Works of the Town of Ramapo.
PERSON — Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company or organization of any kind.
PLANNING BOARD — The Planning Board of the Town of Ramapo, which
has the power to review and approve or disapprove plans for land
development within the Town.
SHADE TREE EASEMENT — The five-foot-wide easement developers are
required to provide, for the planting of shade trees, at the time of
subdivision approval by the Planning Board.
SHADE TREE OR TREE — A tree in a public place except where otherwise
indicated.
TOWN — The Town of Ramapo.
§ 258-3. Shade tree easements and fees required.
Any person who obtains final subdivision approval from the Planning Board
of the Town of Ramapo shall provide a five-foot-wide shade tree easement
along the street frontages of all lots. A fee, as set forth in the Town's
Standard Schedule of Fees, shall also be paid to the Town of Ramapo, to be
used for the planting of trees in the easement. The Director of Public Works,
at his/her direction, shall have planted one tree for every 40 linear feet of
shade tree easement. The easement shall expire two years after the planting
of said shade trees.
§ 258-4. Waiver; right to refuse plantings.
The Planning Board shall grant a waiver if there are trees growing along
the street frontage or on the abutting property which, in the opinion of the
§ 258-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 258-4
1:353
Director of Public Works or his/her assistants, comply with the intent of this
article. In addition, prior to planting, the property owner shall have the right
to refuse tree plantings. Said refusal must be in writing, and a copy of the
refusal shall remain in the building file for that lot. The fee shall remain
the property of the Town and may be used for general municipal purposes
relating to Town beautification and landscaping.
§ 258-5. Approval of trees and planting required.
A. Selection of tree size and species shall be at the discretion of the
Director of Public Works. The Director of Public Works shall secure
written permission from the property owner prior to planting the shade
trees. The shade tree fee paid by the developer shall not be returned in
the event the property owner chooses to refuse the plantings.
B. The Town of Ramapo shall guarantee the survival of the trees for a
period of one year after the initial planting. The trees must remain
planted in the original location. In the event a tree dies, the Town shall
plant a replacement tree.
C. If the tree survives, it shall, at the end of one year, become the property
of the lot owner. Appropriate language shall be placed in the easement
stating that the shade tree easement shall then become null and void
and the property owner shall be responsible for the tree.
§ 258-4 RAMAPO CODE § 258-5
1:354
Chapter 267
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
GENERAL REFERENCES
Traffic Violations Bureau — See Ch. 69.
Vehicles in parks — See Ch. 195, § 195-14.
Snowplowing — See Ch. 228.
§ 267-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited hereinafter as the "Vehicle
and Traffic Law of the Town of Ramapo." It is the aim of the Town Board
of the Town of Ramapo to provide for safety of motor vehicle operation
on Town roads and highways and for regulation, maintenance and
management of vehicular safety in public places with respect to movement
of traffic, parking, ingress and egress and vehicular safety in shopping
centers and other places accessible to the public in the unincorporated area
of the Town of Ramapo. This chapter shall not apply to individual residential
lots.
§ 267-2. Legislative intent.
It is the aim of the Town Board of the Town of Ramapo to promote the public
health, welfare and safety of its residents by:
§ 267-3. Word usage; definitions.
A. Regulating the use and operation of motor vehicles upon the streets,
highways and public places accessory to or connected with industrial,
commercial, professional, educational or recreational facilities and
other services or facilities accessible to the public in the
unincorporated portions of the Town.
B. Regulating the construction, reconstruction, management and
maintenance of open areas, avenues of access or parking spaces for
motor vehicles at the foregoing or similar uses and activities.
C. Designating fire lanes or zones in shopping centers.
D. Disposing of unattended and abandoned motor vehicles in fire lanes or
other public places or zones duly marked restricted by the Police
Department or on any other public road or public area similarly
restricted during periods of public emergency by a Town of Ramapo
agency in the interest of safety or during the winter season where the
same impedes or interferes with snow removal or safe motor vehicle
traffic.
§ 258-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 267-3
1:355
§ 267-4. Speed limit.
No person shall operate his motor vehicle upon any public highway, private
road or other area open to motor vehicle traffic within the unincorporated
area of the Town of Ramapo at a rate of speed in excess of 30 miles per hour,
except that the rate of speed on other roads, highways or areas accessible
to public vehicular travel in the unincorporated area of the Town of Ramapo
shall not be in excess of any other duly posted speed limit. This section shall
not apply to ambulances, fire vehicles or police vehicles when on emergency
A. All words, terms and phrases herein relating to the use and operation of
motor vehicles shall be defined as set forth in the Vehicle and Traffic
Law of the State of New York, and, if no specific definition is set forth
therein, all words shall have their usual meanings in the English
language.
B. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
FIRE ZONE — An unobstructed passageway marked or designated to
permit free ingress and egress of police and other emergency vehicles
and equipment from a public highway.
OWNER — The registered owner of a vehicle found in violation of this
chapter shall be presumed to be the owner and shall be held prima
facie responsible for compliance with any requirement hereunder or
violation thereof.[Amended 2-6-2012 by L.L. No. 2-2012]
PARKING, PARK OR PARKED — Stopping upon any public road or
highway and leaving a motor vehicle or motorcycle unattended by a
person lawfully permitted to operate it.
PERSON — A person, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company or organization of any kind.
PROPERTY — Any real property within the Town which is not a street
or highway.
SIDEWALKS — The portion of the street between the physically
established curblines and the designated property lines.
STAND — The stopping of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, otherwise
than temporarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged in
receiving or discharging passengers.[Added 5-11-1994 by L.L. No.
1-1994]
STREET OR HIGHWAY — The entire width between the boundary lines
of every publicly maintained way or road when any part thereof is open
to the public for use or vehicular travel.
VEHICLE — An automobile, truck, trailer, motorcycle, all-terrain
vehicle, tractor, buggy and wagon or any other machine propelled by
motive power and designed to travel along the ground on wheels,
treads, runners or slides and to transport persons or property or pull
machinery.[Amended 2-6-2012 by L.L. No. 2-2012]
§ 267-3 RAMAPO CODE § 267-4
1:356
trips, and they shall operate as required with due regard to the emergency
and due observance of safety in the circumstances, nor shall this chapter
apply to state highways maintained by the State of New York.
§ 267-5. Trucks excluded.
A. The following highways within the Town of Ramapo may not be used for
travel or operation by trucks, commercial vehicles, tractors or tractortrailer
combinations: [Amended 9-13-1989 by L.L. No. 13-1989;
1-9-1991 by L.L. No. 2-1991; 11-17-1993 by L.L. No. 7-1993]
(1) Shuart Road from New Jersey state line to Smith Hill Road.
(2) Church Road from New Jersey state line to South Airmont Road.
(3) Cragmere Road from New Jersey state line to Campbell Avenue.
(4) Campbell Avenue from Route 59 to South Airmont Road.
(5) Summit Park Road from Sanatorium Road to Pomona Road.
(6) Mile Road for the full length thereof.
(7) Mayer Drive for the full length thereof.
(8) Montebello Road from Hemion Road to Route 202.
(9) Park Place for the full length thereof.
(10) Noe Avenue for the full length thereof.
(11) Brookside Avenue for the full length thereof.
(12) Hall Avenue for the full length thereof.
(13) Reigate Place for the full length thereof.
(14) Carlton Road from Spook Rock Road to College Road.
B. The following highways within the Town of Ramapo may not be used for
travel or operation by trucks, commercial vehicles, tractors or tractortrailer
combinations if the weight of said vehicles exceeds five tons:
[Added 9-13-1989 by L.L. No. 13-1989]
(1) South Airmont Road from New Jersey state line to New York State
Route 59.
C. In addition to the foregoing streets, roads or highways listed under
Subsections A and B, the prohibition shall likewise apply to all other
public roads which have been duly posted by the Police Department to
indicate such prohibition or restriction. [Amended 9-13-1989 by L.L.
No. 13-1989]
D. Notwithstanding the foregoing, this section shall not be construed to
prevent the delivery to or pickup of merchandise or other property with
§ 267-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 267-5
1:357
§ 267-6. Commercial buses excluded; exemptions.
respect to dwellings situated along such highways, nor shall any person
be prevented from traveling on said highways to and from his place of
residence.
A. All commercial buses for hire and other coach-type buses for the
carrying of passengers for hire are excluded from the use for travel or
operation of all streets and highways within the Town of Ramapo and/or
under the jurisdiction of the Town of Ramapo, except for the following
streets, roads and highways:
(1) All county and state roads.
(2) Maple Avenue, Monsey Boulevard.
(3) Saddle River Road to Grove Street.
(4) Carlton Road from Maple Avenue to Blauvelt Road.
(5) Blauvelt Road from Carlton Road North to Route 306.
(6) Suzanne Drive from Maple Avenue to Francis Place.
(7) Francis Place between Suzanne Drive and Ida Road.
(8) Ida Road between Francis Place and Rita Avenue.
(9) Rita Avenue between Ida Road and Jill Lane.
(10) Jill Lane between Rita Avenue and Kearsing Parkway.
(11)Kearsing Parkway.
(12) Miriam Drive from West Maple Avenue to Sophia Lane.
(13) Sophia Lane from Miriam Drive to Smolley Drive.
(14) Smolley Drive from Sophia Lane to West Maple Avenue.
(15)Waverly Place from Carlton Road to Sutton Road.
(16) Sutton Road from Waverly Place to Briarcliff Drive.
(17) Briarcliff Drive from Waverly Place to Carlton Road.
(18) Carlton Road from West Maple Avenue to College Road.
(19) Hilltop Place between Highview Avenue and Mountain Avenue.
(20) Mountain Avenue between Hilltop Place and West Maple Avenue.
(21)Ralph Boulevard between Route 306 and Jill Lane. [Added
6-10-1987 by L.L. No. 12-1987]
§ 267-5 RAMAPO CODE § 267-6
1:358
§ 267-7. Dimensions and weights of vehicles. [Added 10-14-1998 by
L.L. No. 10-1998]
B. The following vehicles are specifically exempt from the application of
this section:
(1) Buses carrying children for school, educational or recreational
purposes, provided that such buses use the excluded highways for
the purpose of picking up or discharging children at their
respective homes.
(2) The following buses operated by or in the County of Rockland:
Transportation Resources Intra-County for Physically
Handicapped, Senior Citizens (TRIPS), Transport of Rockland
(TOR) buses, the Spring Valley Jitney and the Monsey Shopper.
[Amended 2-6-2012 by L.L. No. 2-2012]
(3) Buses utilized for the transportation of senior citizens on organized
tours, provided that such buses use the excluded highways for the
purpose of picking up or discharging senior citizens at senior
citizen complexes.
C. Notwithstanding the foregoing, this section shall not be construed to
prevent the delivery or pickup of merchandise or other property along
the highways from which such vehicles are otherwise excluded.
A. Except as expressly permitted by the United States or the New York
State Department of Transportation, and except where the requirement
for local delivery will permit no alternate legal route, no person shall
operate or move or cause or knowingly permit to be operated or moved
on any public street in the unincorporated Town of Ramapo any vehicle
or combination of vehicles of a size or weight exceeding the limitations
provided for this section.
B. Width.
(1) The width of a vehicle, inclusive of load, shall be not more than 96
inches, plus safety devices, on any Town highway in the
unincorporated Town of Ramapo.
(2) The provisions of Subsection B(1) of this section shall not apply to
vehicles and implements or combinations thereof not over 13 feet
in width, used solely for farm purposes, during the period from
sunrise to sunset, provided that at least two red flags not smaller
than 24 inches square are displayed on the left front and rear of
each vehicle or implement or combination thereof in such manner
as to be clearly visible from the front and rear for a distance of at
least 500 feet.
(3) The provisions of Subsection B(1) of this section shall not apply to
omnibuses or buses used solely for the transportation of children to
§ 267-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 267-7
1:359
and from school, but the width of such omnibuses shall not exceed
98 inches.
(4) Notwithstanding the provisions of Subsection B(1) of this section,
racks for carrying hay, straw or unthreshed grain may have a width
of 10 feet at the top of the rack. In no case shall the width at the
base of the rack exceed 102 inches at any portion thereof while on
any Town highway.
C. The height of a vehicle from the underside of tire to the top of the
vehicle, inclusive of load, shall be not more than 13 1/2 feet. Any
damage to highways, bridges or highway structures resulting from the
use of a vehicle exceeding 13 feet in height where such excess height is
the proximate cause of the accident shall be compensated for by the
owner and operator of such vehicle.
D. Length.
(1) The length of a single vehicle, inclusive of load and bumpers, shall
not be more than 40 feet unless otherwise provided in this
subsection.
(2) The length of a semitrailer or trailer shall not exceed 45 feet except
as provided in this subsection; provided, however, that the length of
any trailer or semitrailer being operated in combination with
another trailer or semitrailer shall not exceed 28 1/2 feet.
(3) The length of buses having a carrying capacity of more than seven
passengers shall not exceed 45 feet, except that the length of
articulated buses shall not exceed 62 feet.
(4) The provisions of this subsection shall not apply to fire vehicles.
(5) Any semitrailer with a length not to exceed 48 feet may be operated
on any Town highway, provided that the total length of a
combination of vehicles, including such a semitrailer, does not
exceed 60 feet.
E. Additional restriction on length; exceptions.
(1) The total length of a combination of vehicles, inclusive of load and
bumpers, shall not be more than 60 feet.
(2) The provisions of Subsection E(1) of this section shall not apply to:
(a) Vehicles of a corporation which are subject to the jurisdiction
of the Interstate Commerce Commission, the Public Service
Commission or other regulatory body and which are used in
the construction, reconstruction, repair or maintenance of its
property or facilities, provided that any such vehicle complies
with the safety requirements of the laws and regulations of the
United States and of New York State pertaining to over-length
vehicles;
§ 267-7 RAMAPO CODE § 267-7
1:360
(b) Vehicles hauling poles, girders, columns or other similar
objects of excess length, provided that any such vehicle
complies with the safety requirements of the laws and
regulations of the United States and of New York State
pertaining to such over-length vehicles;
(c) Fire vehicles;
(d) Any vehicle or combination of vehicles which is disabled and
unable to proceed under its own power and is being towed for
a distance not in excess of 10 miles for the purpose of repairs
or removal from the highway; and
(e) State and/or municipally owned vehicles engaged in
snowplowing, ice clearing or other emergency-type operations.
(3) Notwithstanding the provisions of Subsection E(1) of this section, a
bumper overhang of not more than a total of three feet on the front
and four feet on the rear of the vehicle shall be permitted.
F. In determining the number of wheels and axles on any vehicle or
combination of vehicles within the meaning of this section, only two
wheels shall be counted for each axle, and axles which are less than 46
inches apart from center to center shall be counted as one axle.
However, in the case of multiple tires or multiple wheels, the sum of the
widths of all the tires on a wheel or combination of wheels shall be
taken in determining tire width.
G. Subject to the provisions of the section of this chapter governing
maximum vehicle gross weights, the weight per inch width of tire on
any one wheel of a single vehicle or a combination of vehicles equipped
with pneumatic tires, when loaded, shall be not more than 800 pounds.
H. Subject to the provisions of the section of this chapter governing
maximum vehicle gross weights, the weight on any one wheel of a
single vehicle or a combination of vehicles equipped with pneumatic
tires, when loaded, shall be not more than 11,200 pounds.
I. Subject to the provisions of the section of this chapter governing
maximum vehicle gross weights, the weight on any one axle of a single
vehicle equipped with pneumatic tires, when loaded, shall be not more
than 22,400 pounds.
J. Subject to the provisions of the section of this chapter governing
maximum vehicle gross weights, the weight on any two consecutive
axles of a single vehicle or a combination of vehicles equipped with
pneumatic tires, when loaded, and when such axles are spaced less
than eight feet from center to center, shall be not more than 36,000
pounds, except where axles are spaced eight feet or greater, but less
than 10 feet, the weight on those two axles shall not exceed that
permitted by Subsection K(2) of this section and, in addition, shall not
§ 267-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 267-7
1:361
exceed 40,000 pounds. Axles shall be counted as provided in Subsection
F of this section.
K. Subject to the provisions of the section of this chapter governing
maximum vehicle gross weights, a single vehicle, or a combination of
vehicles having three axles or more and equipped with pneumatic tires,
when loaded, may have a total weight on all axles not to exceed 34,000
pounds, plus 1,000 pounds for each foot and major fraction of a foot of
the distance from the center of the foremost axles to the center of the
rearmost axles. Axles are to be counted as provided in Subsection F of
this section. In no case, however, shall the total weight exceed 80,000
pounds. For any vehicles or combination of vehicles having a total gross
weight less than 71,000 pounds, the higher of the following shall apply:
(1) The total weight on all axles shall not exceed 34,000 pounds, plus
1,000 pounds for each foot and major fraction of a foot of the
distance from the center of the foremost axles to the center of the
rearmost axles; or
(2) The overall gross weight on a group of two or more consecutive
axles shall not exceed the weight produced by application of the
following formula:
W = 500 [(L XN)/(N-1) + (12XN) + 36]
Where:
W = Overall gross weight on any group of two or more
consecutive axles to the nearest 500 pounds;
L = Distance in feet from the center of the foremost axle to the
center of the rearmost axle of any group of two or more
consecutive axles; and
N = The number of axles in the group under consideration,
except that two consecutive sets of tandem axles may carry
a gross load not to exceed 34,000 pounds, provided that
the overall distance between the first and last axles of such
consecutive sets of tandem axles is 36 feet or more.
(3) For any vehicle or combination of vehicles having a total gross
weight of 71,000 pounds or greater, Subsection K(2) shall apply to
determine maximum gross weight which is permitted hereunder,
subject to the provisions of the subsection of this section governing
maximum vehicle gross weights.
L. No vehicle shall be operated on the public streets of the Town of
Ramapo other than on pneumatic tires.
M. For the purpose of this section, the width of pneumatic tires shall be
ascertained by measuring the greatest width of the tire casing when the
tire is inflated.
§ 267-7 RAMAPO CODE § 267-7
1:362
N. No person shall operate or move a vehicle or a combination of vehicles
over, on or through any bridge or structure on any highway if the
weight of such vehicle, or combination of vehicles, and load is greater
than the posted capacity of the structure or exceeds the height of the
posted clearance as shown by an official sign.
O. If a vehicle or combination of vehicles is operated in violation of this
section, an appearance ticket or summons may be issued to the
registrant of the vehicle or, if a combination of vehicles, to the
registrant of the hauling vehicle, rather than the operator. In the event
that the vehicle is operated by a person other than the registrant, any
appearance ticket or summons issued to the registrant shall be served
upon the operator, who shall be deemed the agent of the registrant only
for the purpose of receiving such appearance ticket or summons. In
addition, a notice containing all pertinent information relating to the
charge which is contained on the summons or appearance ticket shall
be mailed by or on behalf of the person who issued the appearance
ticket or summons to the registrant at the address given on the
registration certificate for the vehicle or, if no registration certificate is
produced at the time the appearance ticket or summons is issued, to the
address of the registrant on file with the Department of Motor Vehicles
of said state within five days after the date of issuance of the
appearance ticket or summons, but at least five days before the return
date specified on the appearance ticket or summons. Proof of mailing to
the registrant under this section shall be filed with the court in which
the appearance ticket or summons is returnable on or before the return
date. The provisions of this subsection shall not apply to owneroperators
of any motor vehicle or to any motor vehicle or trailer which
is registered in the name of a person whose principal business is the
lease or rental of motor vehicles or trailers unless the motor vehicle or
trailer is being operated by an employee of the registrant or for a
community of interest other than the lease or rental agreement
between the parties to the lease or rental agreement.
P. In any case wherein the charge laid before the court alleges a violation
of this section, any plea of guilty thereafter entered in satisfaction of
such charge must include at least a plea of guilty to a violation of one of
the subsections of this section. No other disposition by plea of guilty to
any other charge in satisfaction of such shall be authorized; provided,
however, that if the prosecuting attorney, upon reviewing the available
evidence, determines that the charge of a violation of this section is not
warranted, he may consent, and the court may allow, a disposition by
plea of guilty to that or another charge in satisfaction of such charge;
provided, however, that the court must impose at least the minimum
fine as authorized in this section for the offense.
Q. Violations and penalties.
(1) A violation of the provisions of this section shall be punishable by a
fine of not less than $200 nor more than $500 or by imprisonment
for not more than 30 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment,
§ 267-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 267-7
1:363
for the first offense and by a fine of not less than $500 nor more
than $1,000 or by imprisonment for not more than 60 days, or by
both such fine and imprisonment, for the second or subsequent
offense, in both cases plus the fine provided in Subsection Q(2) of
this section.
(2) A violation of the provisions of this section by any vehicle or
combination of vehicles whose weight exceeds the weight
limitations as set forth in any of these sections or the weight
limitations specified by a permit issued by the United States or
New York State Department of Transportation shall be punishable
by fines levied on the registered owner of the vehicle or vehicles,
whether at the time of the violation the vehicle was in the charge of
the registered owner or his agent or lessee in accordance with the
following schedule [in addition to the fines as prescribed in
Subsection Q(1) of this section]:
Excess Total Weight1
(pounds)
Greater Than
Less Than or
Equal to Amount of Fine
0 2,000 $50
2,000 3,000 $75
3,000 4,000 $100
4,000 5,000 $200
5,000 6,000 $300
6,000 7,000 $400
7,000 8,000 $500
8,000 9,000 $600
9,000 10,000 $700
10,000 15,000 $1,200
15,000 20,000 $1,700
20,000 25,000 $2,200
25,000 30,000 $2,700
30,000 $2,700 plus 0.06/
pound2
§ 267-7 RAMAPO CODE § 267-7
1:364
NOTES:
1Where the excess total weight is greater than the limits specified
by a United States or New York State Department of
Transportation excess weight permit, the permit shall, for the
purposes of computing the fine, be deemed void, and the amount
of fine shall be determined in accordance with the maximum
weight which would have been in effect for the operation of such
vehicle if the permit to exceed such maximum weight had not been
issued.
2The six-cent per pound in addition to the $2,700 is for each pound
greater than 30,000 pounds.
(3) A violation of the provisions of this section by any vehicle or
combination of vehicles whose weight exceeds the weight
limitations specified by a permit issued by the United States or
New York State Department of Transportation shall be punishable
by fines levied on the registered owner of the vehicle or vehicles,
whether at the time of the violation the vehicle was in the charge of
the registered owner or his agent or lessee, in accordance with the
following schedule in addition to the fines as prescribed in
Subsection Q(1) of this section:
Percentage of Excess Weight
Greater Than1
Less Than or
Equal to Amount of Fine
0% 5.0% $100
5.0% 10.0% $200
10.0% 15.0% $350
15.0% 20.0% $600
20.0% 25.0% $1,000
25.0% 30.0% $1,600
30.0% $2,450
NOTES:
1Where the excess axle or axles' weight is greater than the limits
specified by a permit issued by the United States or New York
State Department of Transportation, the permit shall, for the
purposes of computing the fine, be deemed void, and the amount
of the fine shall be determined in accordance with the maximum
weight which would have been in effect for the operation of such
vehicle if the permit to exceed such maximum weight had not been
issued.
(4) In connection with the weighing of a vehicle or combination of
vehicles, if it is found that there is a violation of Subsection K and
§ 267-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 267-7
1:365
§ 267-8. Traffic regulations and fire zones in shopping centers.
also of Subsections I and J or both Subsections I and J of this
section, there shall be a single fine imposed, and the maximum
amount of such fine shall not exceed the highest fine that could be
imposed under this section.
A. Authority to regulate and control traffic in shopping centers. The Town
Board of the Town of Ramapo finds that the assembly of increasing
numbers of persons and motor vehicles at shopping centers and other
large commercial and public areas affects the safety of its citizens and
that the health, welfare and safety of the community will be promoted
by the promulgation of regulations with respect to use of motor vehicles
in such public areas. Accordingly, and pursuant to the authority granted
under § 1660-a of the Vehicle and Traffic Law of the State of New York,
the Town Board of the Town of Ramapo does hereby authorize the
Highway Department, upon the advice of the Community Design
Review Committee, to perform the following functions, in the discharge
of which the Highway Department may, as required, request the
assistance of the Police Department, which shall cooperate and provide
such necessary aid as may be indicated or required in the
circumstances:
(1) Order stop signs, yield signs or flashing signals erected at specified
entrance locations to a parking area or designate any intersection
in the parking area as a stop intersection or as a yield intersection
and order like signs or signals at one or more entrances to such
intersection; and designate and mark any separate roadway in the
parking area for one-way traffic; and cause removal of other
obstruction and safety hazards in or on such premises; and install
or cause to be installed pavement markings, curbing, barriers or
other channelization devices or traffic control devices and facilities
at the expense of the owner of the premises and have the cost of
same assessed against the owner of record of said premises, said
cost to be levied by the office of the Assessor and collected in the
manner of any other tax or assessment imposed upon or levied
against the premises.
(2) Regulate movement of traffic and standing of motor vehicles to
prevent obstruction in the parking area, including regulation by
means of traffic control signals.
(3) Prohibit or regulate the turning of any vehicles at intersections or
other designated locations in the parking area.
(4) Regulate the crossing of any roadway in the parking area by
pedestrians.
(5) Prohibit, regulate, restrict or limit the stopping, standing or
parking of vehicles in specified areas of the parking area.
§ 267-7 RAMAPO CODE § 267-8
1:366
§ 267-9. Parking or standing in certain areas prohibited;
exceptions.
B. Illegally parked and abandoned vehicles.
(1) In addition to the foregoing, the Police Department of the Town of
Ramapo is hereby authorized and directed to remove and store:
(a) Vehicles parked or abandoned in the parking area during
snowstorms, floods, fires or other public emergencies; or
(b) Unattended vehicles in the parking area when they obstruct
traffic or when stopping, standing or parking is prohibited.
(2) The owner or operator of any such vehicle shall pay the reasonable
charges for the removal and storage of any motor vehicle removed
and stored under the foregoing provisions.
C. Establishment and marking of fire zones. The Chief of the Bureau of
Fire Prevention, in cooperation with the Chief of Police, and upon the
advice of the Community Design Review Committee, is hereby
authorized, pursuant to the authority granted under § 1660-a of the
Vehicle and Traffic Law of the State of New York, to determine and
establish appropriate fire lanes in all shopping centers. Thereupon, the
Highway Department of the Town of Ramapo shall cause to be erected
or installed adequate signs, markings and other devices to delineate
said fire lanes. Signs, markings and other devices erected or installed
on such privately owned premises shall be at the cost of the owner and
may be billed for and collected in the same manner as hereinabove set
forth in Subsection A.
D. Taxicabs. [Added 11-13-1991 by L.L. No. 14-1991]
(1) No taxicab shall use an area designated for public parking for the
pickup or discharge of passengers or for the making of repairs to
said taxicab.
(2) No taxicab shall use an area designated for public parking as a
waiting area for the pickup of passengers.
(3) No taxicab shall stand, park or remain in any area designated as a
"Fire Zone" except when actually loading or discharging
passengers.
(4) No taxicab shall be permitted to repeatedly drive through a
shopping center for the sole purpose of making itself available for
prospective passengers who have not requested pickup from said
taxicab.
(5) The provisions of § 375, Subdivision 50, of the New York State
Vehicle and Traffic Law regarding equipment requirements for
taxicabs are not required. [Added 5-25-2011 by L.L. No. 3-2011]
§ 267-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 267-9
1:367
A. Fire zones.
(1) No motor vehicle shall stand, park or remain unattended in an
established fire zone or in an area designated as a no-parking area,
except when actually loading or unloading passengers, materials or
goods.
(2) Whenever any motor vehicle is found parked or stopped in violation
of this chapter, the Police Department of the Town of Ramapo and/
or the enforcement official as designated in Chapter 376, Zoning,
§ 376-140 of the Code of the Town of Ramapo shall have the power,
right and authority to issue an appearance ticket, as the same is
defined in Article 150 of the Criminal Procedure Law of the State of
New York, and/or a traffic parking summons of the Ramapo Justice
Court, for the violation of this section. [Amended 6-10-1987 by
L.L. No. 12-1987]
(3) If there is no response in the Justice Court to the appearance ticket
or traffic parking summons issued, the court shall issue a summons
to the owner of the motor vehicle to which the appearance ticket or
traffic parking summons was affixed and direct that the same be
served upon said owner. In any prosecution charging a violation of
§ 267-9, proof that the vehicle was parked in violation of this
section, together with proof that the defendant named in the
summons issued by the court was, at the time of violation, the
registered owner thereof, shall constitute a presumption that the
registered owner of such vehicle was the person who parked or
placed the vehicle at the point where and for the time during which
such violation occurred. [Amended 6-10-1987 by L.L. No.
12-1987]
B. Other areas and time limitations. The Chief of Police may declare
certain areas, streets, roads and highways in the Town restricted to
parking of motor vehicles and may designate the length of time for
lawful parking in said areas, and he shall cause to be erected and
installed appropriate signs or markers, except that during the winter
season and during periods of snow removal, the Police Department, in
cooperation with the Highway Department, may further restrict such
streets and highways as may be necessary in the public safety, and it
shall give such notice thereof as may be practicable in the
circumstances.
C. Parking permit zones.
(1) It shall be unlawful to park a motor vehicle in any area designated
by the Chief of Police as a parking permit zone, during the hours of
6:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, unless there is
displayed on the left rear window a parking permit issued
hereunder by the Town Clerk of the Town of Ramapo, for which
permit only residents of the Town of Ramapo shall be eligible. The
Chief of Police shall cause to be erected adequate signs and
§ 267-9 RAMAPO CODE § 267-9
1:368
§ 267-10. Handicapped parking.
markers delineating such restrictions. Said signs shall be
maintained by the Highway Department of the Town of Ramapo.
[Amended 6-10-1987 by L.L. No. 12-1987]
(2) Any resident of the Town of Ramapo desiring a parking permit shall
make application therefor to the Town Clerk of the Town of Ramapo
on forms to be provided for that purpose. Said application shall
contain the name and address of the applicant, together with the
description and license plate number of the motor vehicle for which
a parking permit is desired.
(3) Permits issued hereunder are not transferable, and a separate
permit must be secured for each vehicle to be parked in a parking
permit zone.
(4) Upon compliance with the foregoing requirements, the Town Clerk
shall issue a parking permit, which permit shall expire on the first
day of January next preceding issuance of said permit.
D. Parking in designated spaces. It shall be unlawful for any person to park
a motor vehicle in any parking space at Ramapo Town Hall which is
designated for parking by a specific Town employee or official, unless
said person is the employee or official designated to use said space, or
has the permission of said employee or official to park in said space.
[Added 3-8-1989 by L.L. No. 5-1989]
A. Use of permit.
(1) Any vehicle bearing a handicapped parking permit issued pursuant
to § 1203-a of the Vehicle and Traffic Law of the State of New York
is authorized to park in any area in the Town of Ramapo designated
for parking for the handicapped.
(2) The Town Clerk shall keep a list of designated parking areas in the
Town of Ramapo, a copy of which can be obtained at the Town
Clerk's office.
B. Establishment of spaces for parking for handicapped persons. The
Planning Board of the Town of Ramapo is hereinafter empowered to
require the inclusion of spaces for handicapped parking in any site plan
for the construction of shopping centers and all office uses in the Town
of Ramapo.
C. Use of permit by unauthorized person. Any person to whom a permit
has not been issued and who shall use a permit issued pursuant to Town
Board Resolution No. 78-260 and this chapter for any purpose other
than parking a motor vehicle while transporting a physically
handicapped person shall be guilty of a traffic infraction within the
meaning of § 1800 of the Vehicle and Traffic Law.
§ 267-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 267-10
1:369
§ 267-11. Towing away of vehicles.
§ 267-12. Prohibited acts; exceptions.
D. Parking permit; limitations on use. A vehicle bearing such parking
permit for the handicapped shall be deemed in violation of the
applicable rules and regulations governing parking in the Town of
Ramapo when such vehicle shall be parked in a bus stop, a taxi stand,
within 15 feet of a fire hydrant, a fire zone, a fire lane, a firehouse, a
driveway or a crosswalk or is double parked.26
A. Any motor vehicle found standing in an established fire zone or
violating other provisions of this chapter may, upon the direction of a
police officer, be towed to any public or private parking facility, and the
expense of such towing and subsequent storage shall be borne by the
registered owner of such vehicle.
B. No motor vehicle shall remain or stand unattended in any unrestricted
public place or parking lot unless the engine is stopped and the ignition
is shut off and the ignition key removed from the vehicle, with brake
effectively set thereon; and, when standing upon any grade, the front
wheels shall be turned to the curb or side of the highway or otherwise
secured as required in the circumstances.
C. Whenever any police officer shall find a motor vehicle standing
unattended with the ignition key in the vehicle, in violation of this
section, such police officer is authorized to remove such key from such
vehicle and to deliver such key to the police officer in charge of Town
police headquarters, and said vehicle may be dealt with or disposed of
as set forth in § 267-13 herein or otherwise as may seem indicated in
the circumstances.
D. No vehicle shall be parked in front of any private driveway or in front of
or within 10 feet, measured along the curb, of the entrance to any
theater, auditorium, church or other public building or any firehouse,
except for such reasonable time as may be necessary for taking on or
discharging passengers or merchandise.
A. The following acts are hereby prohibited:
(1) The parking of unlicensed automobiles upon any part of the public
street.
(2) All-night parking. "All-night parking" is hereby defined as
continuous parking between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 6:00
a.m., inclusive, during the period from November 1 to April 1,
inclusive. This prohibition shall be in addition to any other
elsewhere imposed herein on motor vehicles. [Amended
6-10-1987 by L.L. No. 12-1987; 2-6-2012 by L.L. No. 2-2012]
26.Editor's Note: Original § 383-9E, Violation, which immediately followed this subsection,
was repealed 5-11-1988 by L.L. No. 6-1988. See now § 267-15, Penalties for offenses.
§ 267-10 RAMAPO CODE § 267-12
1:370
§ 267-13. Impounding of vehicles.
(3) Abandoning any vehicle within the Town or leaving any vehicle at
any place within the Town for such time and under such
circumstances as to give a reasonable appearance of abandonment.
(4) Leaving any partially dismantled, nonoperating, wrecked or junked
vehicle on any street or highway within the Town.
(5) Allowing any partially dismantled, nonoperating, wrecked, junked
or discarded vehicle to remain longer than 24 hours on the
property of any owner, tenant, occupant, lessee or other person in
charge or control thereof, and no person shall leave any such
vehicle on any property within the Town for a longer time than 24
hours.
(6) Parking or standing of vehicles in restricted areas or areas at the
time of hazard or emergency.
B. Exceptions. This chapter shall not apply to any vehicle:
(1) In an enclosed building;
(2) Operated in a lawful place and manner on the premises of a
business enterprise when necessary to the operation of such
business enterprise; or
(3) In an appropriate storage place or depository maintained by the
Town or any private person performing a similar function as herein
provided for.27
A. The Chief of Police and/or the Superintendent of Highways, as the
circumstances may warrant, is hereby authorized to remove or have
removed any vehicle left at any place within the Town under
circumstances which reasonably indicate that such vehicle is in
violation of this chapter or lost, stolen or unclaimed or where it
constitutes an obstruction to traffic or is a hazard during a storm, flood,
fire or other public emergency duly declared by the Supervisor of the
Town.
B. Such vehicle shall be impounded by the Chief of Police, Director of
Public Works or the Superintendent of Highways, as the case may be,
and stored in the Town of Ramapo impound area or such place as shall
be authorized by the Supervisor. Vehicles may be reclaimed and shall be
subject to a mandatory towing charge and a per-day storage charge as
set for such services by the County of Rockland or the rate set by the
towing entity it its regular course of business, whichever is less. If the
vehicle is not reclaimed within 30 days from impounding, the Town
shall dispose of the vehicle impounded and deposit such funds received,
27.Editor's Note: Original § 383-11C, Special vehicle identification permits, which
immediately followed this subsection, was repealed 6-10-1987 by L.L. No. 12-1987.
§ 267-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 267-13
1:371
§ 267-14. Effect on other legislation.
This chapter is not in limitation of any other law, rule, regulation or order
which may affect any premises subject to this chapter or any penalty, fine
or liability thereunder but is in addition thereto. An inconsistent local law,
regulation, order or certificate or part thereof in conflict with this chapter
is hereby repealed insofar as it may affect the enforcement of this chapter.
§ 267-15. Penalties for offenses.
if any, to the credit of the general fund.28 [Amended 9-26-1990 by
L.L. No. 4-1990; 2-6-2012 by L.L. No. 2-2012]
C. Storage and charges. After removal of any vehicles as provided in this
chapter, the Chief of Police, Director of Public Works or Superintendent
of Highways may store such vehicle on property owned by the Town of
Ramapo at the expense of the owner. Such owner may redeem the same
upon payment to the Town of the amount of all towing expenses actually
and necessarily incurred not to exceed $25, together with storage
charges not to exceed $15 per day for outdoor storage and not to
exceed $25 per day for inside storage. [Amended 9-26-1990 by L.L.
No. 4-1990; 2-6-2012 by L.L. No. 2-2012]
D. Disposition of vehicle. The disposition of the impounded vehicle shall be
pursuant to the applicable provisions of the Vehicle and Traffic Law of
the State of New York. [Amended 6-10-1987 by L.L. No. 12-1987;
2-6-2012 by L.L. No. 2-2012]
E. When a vehicle is impounded by the Police Department pursuant to its
duties and the owner of said vehicle fails to claim the vehicle within 14
days of notification by the Police Department to the last known owner of
the vehicle by certified mail that said vehicle has been released for
police purposes, the vehicle shall be deemed abandoned pursuant to
the provisions of § 1224 of the Vehicle and Traffic Law governing
abandoned vehicles. [Added 2-6-2012 by L.L. No. 2-2012]
F. If an abandoned vehicle, at the time of abandonment, has no number
plates affixed and is of a wholesale value, taking into consideration the
condition of the vehicle, of $750 or less, title shall immediately vest in
the local authority having jurisdiction thereof. [Added 5-24-1989 by
L.L. No. 10-1989]
A. Except as otherwise provided herein, any police officer of the Town of
Ramapo be and is hereby authorized and empowered to issue or cause
to be issued a summons returnable in the Justice Court of the Town of
Ramapo, or any other court of competent jurisdiction, for any motor
vehicle in violation of the traffic and safety provisions of this chapter;
and, likewise, the Building Inspector be and hereby is authorized and
28.Editor's Note: Original § 383-12C, which immediately followed this subsection and dealt
with abandoned vehicles impounded by the Town, was repealed 2-6-2012 by L.L. No.
2-2012.
§ 267-13 RAMAPO CODE § 267-15
1:372
§ 267-16. Penalties for nonpayment. [Added 8-24-1988 by L.L. No.
9-1988]
With respect to any summons issued for violation of the above chapter:
empowered to issue such summons for any violation involving the
operation, maintenance and control of any premises.
B. Specific violations. [Amended 5-11-1988 by L.L. No. 6-1988]
(1) Any violation by a person, firm or corporation of this chapter,
except §§ 267-7, 267-9A and 267-10, shall be decreed an offense
punishable by a fine of not less than $50 nor more than $150.
[Amended 6-23-1993 by L.L. No. 4-1993; 10-14-1998 by L.L.
No. 10-1998; 2-6-2012 by L.L. No. 2-2012]
(2) Any violation of §§ 267-9A and 267-10 shall, for a first conviction
thereof, be punished by a fine of not less than $75 nor more than
$250 or by imprisonment for not more than 15 days, or by both
such fine and imprisonment; for a second such conviction within 18
months thereafter, such person shall be punished by a fine of not
less than $100 nor more than $500 or by imprisonment for not
more than 45 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment; upon a
third or subsequent conviction within 18 months after the first
conviction, such person shall be punished by a fine of not less than
$500 nor more than $750 or by imprisonment for not more than 90
days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. [Amended
5-11-1994 by L.L. No. 1-1994]
(3) Any violation of § 267-7 shall be punishable pursuant to the fine
provisions of § 267-7Q. [Added 10-14-1998 by L.L. No. 10-1998]
C. In the case of a continuing violation of this chapter, each day that such
violation exists shall constitute a separate and distinct violation.
A. All summonses shall be subject to an additional penalty of $10 if not
answered by the return date on the summons.
B. In addition, a further penalty of $10 shall be assessed if said summons
is not answered within 15 days after the return date on said summons.
C. In addition, a further penalty of $10 shall be assessed if said summons
is not answered within 30 days after the return date of said summons.
§ 267-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 267-16
1:373
Chapter 376
ZONING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Planning Board and Zoning Board of
Appeals — See Ch. 42.
Aquifer and Well Field Protection Zone — See
Ch. 96.
Blasting — See Ch. 104.
Numbering of buildings and property — See
Ch. 109.
Unsafe buildings — See Ch. 112.
Consultant fees — See Ch. 122.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 144.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 149.
Noise — See Ch. 188.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 204.
Scenic Road District — See Ch. 215.
Signs — See Ch. 223.
Stormwater management and sediment and
erosion control — See Ch. 237.
Streams and watercourses — See Ch. 240.
Visual obstructions in streets — See Ch. 243,
Art. II.
§ 267-16 RAMAPO CODE § 267-16
1:374
ARTICLE I
Title, Purpose and Word Usage
§ 376-1. Long title.
The long title shall be as follows: "A Law Regulating and Restricting the
Location, Construction and Use of Buildings and Structures and the Use
of Land in the Unincorporated Area in the Town of Ramapo, County of
Rockland, State of New York."
§ 376-2. Short title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Zoning Law of the
Town of Ramapo, New York."
§ 376-3. Purposes.
There is hereby established a new Comprehensive Zoning Law for the
Town of Ramapo, which law is set forth in the text, tables and map that
constitute this chapter. Said law is adopted for all of the purposes set forth
in Article 16 of the Town Law, and all power and authority granted therein
are hereby adopted. The Zoning Law implements the policies for land use in
the Town of Ramapo Comprehensive Plan and is adopted for the protection
and promotion of the public health, safety, morals and general welfare of
the community as follows:
A. To guide the future growth and development of the Town in accordance
with a Comprehensive Plan of land use and population density that
represents the most beneficial and convenient relationships among the
residential, nonresidential and public areas within the Town,
considering the suitability of each area for such uses, as indicated by
existing conditions, trends in population and modes of living and having
regard for the use of land, building development and economic activity,
considering such conditions and trends both within the unincorporated
areas of the Town and with respect to the relation of the Town to areas
outside thereof.
B. To provide adequate light, air and privacy; to promote safety from fire,
flood and other dangers; and to prevent overcrowding of the land and
undue congestion of the population.
C. To protect the character and the social and economic stability of all
parts of the Town and to encourage the orderly and beneficial
development of all parts of the Town.
D. To protect and conserve the value of land throughout the Town and the
value of buildings appropriate to the various districts established by
this chapter.
E. To bring about the gradual conformity of the uses of land and buildings
through the Comprehensive Zoning Plan set forth in this chapter, and to
minimize the conflicts among the use of land and buildings.
§ 376-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 376-3
1:375
§ 376-4. General word usage.
F. To promote the most beneficial relation between the use of land and
buildings and the circulation of traffic throughout the Town, having
particular regard to the avoidance of congestion in the streets and the
provision of safe and convenient vehicular and pedestrian traffic
movements appropriate to the various uses of land and buildings
throughout the Town.
G. To provide a guide for public policy and action in the efficient provision
of public facilities and services and for private enterprise in building
development, investment and other economic activity relating to uses of
land and buildings throughout the Town.
H. To limit development to the availability and anticipated capacity of
public facilities and services.
I. To prevent the pollution of watercourses and wetlands; to safeguard the
water table; to avoid hazardous conditions and excessive damage
resulting from stormwater runoff and flooding; and to encourage the
appropriate use and sound management of natural resources
throughout the Town.
J. To preserve the natural beauty of the physiography of the Town; to
protect the Town against unsightly, obtrusive and obnoxious land uses
and operations; to enhance the aesthetic aspect of the natural and manmade
elements of the Town and to ensure appropriate development
with regard to those elements.
A. Unless otherwise listed below, the numbers, abbreviations, terms and
words used herein shall have the meanings of common usage as set
forth in the latest edition of Webster's New Collegiate Dictionary. Terms
of law shall have the meanings as set forth in the latest edition of
Black's Law Dictionary.
B. Unless the context clearly indicates to the contrary, words used in the
present tense include the future tense; words used in the singular
number include the plural; words used In the plural number include the
singular; the word "herein" means in this chapter; the word
"requirements" means chapter; and the words "this chapter" shall mean
this chapter and the maps included herein as enacted or subsequently
amended.
C. The word "person," as used in this chapter, shall be defined to include,
but not be limited to, an individual, a partnership, a joint venture, a
corporation, limited liability company, an unincorporated association, a
firm or any other form of entity, contractors, subcontractors or
journeymen; "used" or "occupied," as applied to any land or building,
shall be construed to include the words "intended, arranged or
designed to be used or occupied."
§ 376-3 RAMAPO CODE § 376-4
1:376
§ 376-5. Definitions.
As used in the chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ACCESSORY — The term applied to a building, structure or use which is
clearly incidental or subordinate to, and customarily in connection with,
the principal building, structure or use and which is located on the same
lot with the principal building, structure or use. Any accessory building or
structure attached to a principal building or structure is deemed to be part
of such principal building or structure in applying the bulk requirements
to such building or structure. No use shall be considered accessory where
such use requires a greater area of a lot or larger setbacks or yards or for
which greater restrictions than for the principal use on the lot are imposed
by this chapter.
ACCESSORY APARTMENT — A dwelling unit which is incidental and
subordinate to a permitted principal residence use and is located within the
principal dwelling.[Amended 6-14-2006 by L.L. No. 4-2006]
ACTIVE ADULT HOUSING DEVELOPMENT — Age-restricted residential
development primarily for active and independent functioning persons over
55 years of age.
ADJOINING — Physically touching or bordering upon or sharing a common
property line or major portion thereof.
ADULT STUDENT — Full-time married student attending a postsecondary
level educational institution whether for general or religious instruction.
ADULT STUDENT HOUSING — Housing designated to be used only for
adult married students, faculty, spouses and minor children while the adult
student is pursuing full-time postsecondary education at an educational
institution.
ANIMAL HOSPITAL or VETERINARY CLINIC — A facility for the care
and treatment of animals, including shelters and like facilities, other than
animal kennels as defined herein.
ANIMAL KENNELS — Any building, structure or premises in which animals
are kept, boarded or trained in excess of the size, number or species
limitations prescribed for accessory use of a residence.
D. The "Town" is the Town of Ramapo in the County of Rockland, State of
New York; the "Town Board," "Board of Appeals," "Planning Board" and
"Building Inspector" are respectively the Town Board, Board of Appeals,
Planning Board and Building Inspector of the Town.
E. "Article," as a term of reference in this chapter, refers to this chapter.
F. "Shall" is always mandatory, except when applied to public officials, in
which event "shall" is directory. "Time requirements" shall,
nevertheless, be considered mandatory.
§ 376-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 376-5
1:377
APARTMENT — A dwelling unit, other than an accessory apartment, that
is located in a multifamily dwelling or in a building that is partially
nonresidential in use.
AREA, GROSS — The measure of land in a horizontal plane, uncorrected or
adjusted for legal encumbrances, surface conditions or slope.
ASSISTED LIVING — A residential facility providing a special combination
of housing, supportive services, personalized assistance and health care
designed to respond to those persons needing help with the difficulties and
activities of daily living, but who do not require nursing home care. The
facility may provide a central or private kitchen, dining, recreational and
other facilities with separate bedrooms.
AUTOMOTIVE REPAIR AND MAINTENANCE FACILITIES — The conduct
within a fully enclosed building of repairs to the drive train and chassis of
vehicles.
AUTOMOTIVE WASHING FACILITIES — A building or area of land designed
exclusively for the cleaning of motor vehicles whether by machinery line
or with hand-operated cleaning devices. The incidental washing or cleaning
of vehicles associated with other permitted uses shall not be deemed
automotive washing facilities under this chapter.
BASEMENT — See "basement" as defined in the NYS Uniform Fire
Prevention and Building Code.
BEDROOM — Any habitable space in excess of 100 square feet, other
than a living room, dining room, bathroom, hallway or kitchen.[Amended
6-14-2006 by L.L. No. 4-2006]
BILLBOARD — A sign which directs attention to a business, commodity,
service, entertainment or attraction conducted, sold, offered or existing
elsewhere than on the same lot where such sign is displayed or not for the
principal use of such lot.
BUFFER — An area of specified dimension extending between a rear or
side property line or a zoning district line and a required yard. The buffer
shall not be used or otherwise encroached upon by any activities on the
lot so as to provide for adequate separation and protection from otherwise
inharmonious or incompatible uses.
BUILDING — Any structure, or extension thereof or addition thereto, having
a roof supported by such things as columns, posts, piers or walls and
intended for the shelter, business, housing or enclosing of persons, animals
or property.
BUILDING, ACCESSORY — See "accessory."
BUILDING, PRINCIPAL — A building in which is conducted the main or
principal use of the lot on which said building is situated.
BULK — The size and shape of buildings and nonbuilding uses, and the
physical relationship of their exterior walls or their location to lot lines and
other buildings or other walls of the same building, and all open spaces
required in connection with a building. Bulk regulations include regulations
§ 376-5 RAMAPO CODE § 376-5
1:378
dealing with floor-area ratio, lot area, street frontage, lot width, height,
setback, required yards and development coverage.
BULK, NONCOMPLYING — That part of a building, structure or
nonbuilding use which does not conform to one or more of the applicable
bulk requirements of this chapter.
CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY — Official certification that a building or
structure conforms to this chapter and the New York State Uniform Fire
Prevention and Building Code, as may be amended.
CERTIFICATE OF USE — Official certification that a building or structure
or part thereof conforms to the use requirements and other pertinent
provisions of this chapter and may be used in conformity with law.
CHANGE IN USE — Any use which differs substantially from the previous
use of a building, structure or nonbuilding use.
CLUBHOUSE — A building, structure, lot or land area used as a private club
or social organization with annual membership dues, and not conducted for
profit or gain.
COMMERCIAL RECREATION — A business enterprise whose principal
function is the operation of facilities for sports and leisure, including but
not limited to swimming, skating, racquet sports, health and fitness and
customarily associated accessory uses.
COMMUNITY DESIGN REVIEW COMMITTEE — A committee established
by resolution of the Town Board, whose membership shall consist of
specified Town departments, agency officials and consultants retained by
the Town for the purpose of reviewing and evaluating applications or
proposals, advising Town boards and agencies, and conducting
architectural review.
COMMUNITY RECREATIONAL FACILITY — A multipurpose mixed use
facility used for recreational, sporting, social, educational and cultural
activities and events, owned and operated by a public or not-for-profit
group, agency or corporation, open to the public and/or its members, which
may contain any of the following uses: Gymnasium, swimming pool and
locker rooms; dance, aerobics, exercise rooms and/or studios; offices,
conference and meeting rooms, classrooms, arts and craft rooms and
multipurpose room; programs and facilities for early childhood
development, adult day care, adult education and for after-school and/or
evening instruction; senior center, teen center; auditoriums limited to use
by the owner of such facility and other not-for-profit entities; cafeteria,
lunchroom, cafe, snack bar and gift shop incidental to the usage of the
facility with no restaurant or food service establishment catering to the
general or outside public permitted; playgrounds, tennis and basketball
courts; playing fields for team sports, and track and field events; indoor
storage incidental to the operation of the facility.
COMMUNITY RESIDENCE FACILITY — Pursuant to § 41.34 of the Mental
Hygiene Law, a supportive living facility with four to 14 residents, or a
supervised living facility subject to licensure by the Office of Mental Health
§ 376-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 376-5
1:379
or the Office of Mental Retardation and Developmental Disabilities which
provides a residence for up to 14 mentally disabled persons, including
residential treatment facilities for children and youth.
COMPLETELY ENCLOSED BUILDING — A building separated on all sides
from adjacent open space or from other buildings by fixed exterior walls
or party walls, pierced only by windows and entrance or exit doors and
covered by a permanent roof.
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN — The materials, written and/or graphic,
including but not limited to maps, charts, studies, resolutions, reports and
other descriptive material that identify the goals, objectives, principles,
guidelines, policies, standards, devices and instruments for the immediate
and long-range protection, enhancement, growth and development of the
Town located outside the limits of any incorporated village, adopted
pursuant to Town Law § 272-a.
CONGREGATE CARE HOUSING DEVELOPMENT — A residential
development providing a shared living environment for six or more persons
primarily aged 60 or older who are able to provide for themselves most of
their activities of daily living, and who can maintain a semi-independent life
style. Residents will have separate apartments with private bedrooms and
baths, but may share dining and other living facilities.
CONTRACTOR'S STORAGE YARD — A building or area of land where
a person, firm or corporation engaged in the construction business, or
a related field, stores building materials, equipment and supplies used
exclusively in his business as a contractor. Retail or wholesale sale of any
contractor's materials or supplies is prohibited.
COUNTRY INN — A country inn is defined as an estate-type residential
structure which had in the past served as a single-family residence and in
which the following uses are permitted:[Added 11-25-2013 by L.L. No.
7-2013]
COURT — An unobstructed open area bounded on three or more sides by
the walls of a building or buildings. It does not include any such area with
no windows opening upon it, except windows on a stairway. An "outer court"
extends to a street or yard; an "inner court" does not.
COVERAGE, DEVELOPMENT — The percentage of the area of a lot covered
by buildings, parking areas, accessory structures and any impervious
materials, including natural impervious areas.
A. Inn with rooms for overnight rental.
B. Restaurant with no more than 50 seats capacity.
C. Catering facility for no more than 300 guests.
D. Farm winery/farm with required New York State license.
E. Store for retail sale of farm winery/farm products.
§ 376-5 RAMAPO CODE § 376-5
1:380
CRAWL SPACE — A space between the ceiling of one story and floor of
the next story, or between the ground and the first floor, which usually
contains pipes, ducts, wiring and lighting fixtures and permits access but is
not greater in height than three feet six inches.
DAY CAMP — Any plot of land, including any buildings or structures
thereon, if any, used for any assembly for recreational purposes on a
seasonal basis, but not including any nursery school unless the bulk
requirements for a day camp are met by said nursery school, nor including
any living quarters except for one one-family residence on the plot.
DAY-CARE CENTER — A facility with an individual and required number
of assistants providing care for seven or more children, depending on age,
in accordance with a strict staff/child ratio, for more than three hours a
day but less than 24 hours a day. Centers may be established as the sole
use in an individual building or as an accessory use in a church, school or
other building and may be run by an individual, association, corporation, or
institution licensed by the New York State Department of Social Services.
DENSITY — The permissible number of lots or units determined by dividing
the minimum lot area as set forth in § 376-41 by the number of lots or units
allowed by this chapter.[Added 6-14-2006 by L.L. No. 4-2006]
DESIGNATED STREET LINE — See "street line, designated."
DORMITORY — A building or part of a building containing private or
semiprivate rooms which open to a common hallway, which rooms are
sleeping quarters for administrative staff, faculty or students, along with
bathroom, dining, cooking, laundry, lounge and recreation facilities, as
required. Dormitory rooms shall not contain separate cooking, dining or
housekeeping facilities, except that one dwelling unit with complete
housekeeping facilities may be provided for use of a superintendent or
supervising staff for every 50 dormitory rooms, or major part thereof. No
more than one communal dining room shall be provided in the building
or structure used for dormitory purposes. Single-family, two-family and/or
other multiple residential facilities, other than that described above, are
not to be considered as dormitories. Private rooms may be occupied by
no more than one person and semiprivate rooms by no more than four
persons.[Amended 1-25-2012 by L.L. No. 1-2012]
DUMP — See "junkyard."
DWELLING UNIT — A building or entirely self-contained portion thereof
containing complete housekeeping facilities for only one family, including
any domestic servants employed on the premises, having no enclosed space
(other than vestibules, entrances or other hallways or porches) or cooking
or sanitary facilities in common with any other dwelling unit. A house
trailer, boarding- or rooming house, convalescent home, dormitory,
fraternity house, hotel, inn, lodging, nursing or other similar home or other
similar structure shall not be deemed to constitute a dwelling unit.
FAMILY — A group of persons living together as a single nonprofit
housekeeping unit and consisting of either:
§ 376-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 376-5
1:381
FAMILY DAY-CARE HOME — A residence wherein child day-care services
provided for three to six children (eight children after school hours)
depending on age, for more than three hours a day in an approved home,
licensed by the New York State Department of Social Services. The
applicant must reside in the dwelling in which the day-care home is located.
FAMILY AND GROUP CARE FACILITY (NON-PADAVAN) — A residential
facility in which groups of unrelated persons live, along with one or more
adults who serve in a supervisory role. Such a facility shall not be construed
to mean a "community residence facility" as defined in § 41.34 of the Mental
Hygiene Law.
FENCE — An unroofed barrier or unroofed enclosing structure, including
retaining walls.
FIELD CHANGE — A change or adjustment to an approved site
development plan, due to field conditions that will not substantially alter the
intent, layout or design of the approved plan.
FLOOR AREA RATIO — The gross floor area of all buildings on a lot divided
by the area of the lot.
FRONTAGE — The horizontal distance measured along the full length of a
street line abutting the lot.
GASOLINE SERVICE STATION — A building or other structure or a tract
of land used for the retail servicing of motor vehicles, including the sale
of petroleum products; sale and servicing of tires, batteries, automotive
accessories and replacement items; washing and lubrication services; and
the performance of routine automotive maintenance and repairs. Sale of
other retail products from the premises shall not be deemed to affect the
use of the facility as a gasoline service station.
GROSS FLOOR AREA — [Amended 6-14-2006 by L.L. No. 4-2006]
A. One or more persons related by blood, marriage or adoption.
Not more than four persons not necessarily related by blood, marriage
or adoption.
B.
The sum of the gross horizontal area of every floor of a building
measured from the inside perimeter of the exterior walls of the building
or from the inside perimeter of the exterior walls to the interior of the
party walls separating the two buildings, including:
Basement space, but excluding nonhabitable space below grade
(subbasement) devoted to mechanical equipment, or accessory
storage.
(1)
Attic space, whether or not a floor has been laid, over which there
is structural headroom of six feet three inches or more.
(2)
A.
Regardless of the internal arrangement of a building, it shall be deemed
to have at least one floor for each 20 feet of height or a major fraction
thereof. However, "floor area" does not include:
B.
§ 376-5 RAMAPO CODE § 376-5
1:382
GROUP FAMILY DAY-CARE CENTER — A residence wherein day-care
services are provided for up to 10 children of all ages, including not more
than four children under two years of age or up to 12 children where all
such children are over two years of age. A group family day-care center
may also provide services to two additional children of school age, before
or after school hours, licensed by the New York State Department of Social
Services. The applicant must reside in the dwelling in which the group
family day-care center is located.
HEIGHT — The vertical distance from the average elevation of the proposed
finished grade along the wall of a building (or adjacent to the side of a
nonbuilding use) to the highest point of the roof for flat roofs and to the
mean height between eaves and ridge for gable, hip and gambrel roofs
of such building (or nonbuilding uses), except as specifically exempted in
§ 376-60.
HOME OCCUPATION — An accessory use of a personal service character
customarily conducted entirely within a residence, by the residents thereof,
which use is incidental and secondary to the use of the residence for
dwelling purposes, does not change the character thereof, does not have
any exterior evidence of such accessory use other than a permitted
announcement sign, does not involve, except as otherwise permitted in
residence districts, the parking, storage or standing of any commercial
vehicles or construction equipment or the outdoor storage of materials
and which does not involve the keeping of a stock-in-trade or the sale of
any goods or the use of any chemical, mechanical or electrical equipment
which is not customary household appliance or light office equipment. Said
activity shall not occupy more than 1/2 of the ground floor area of the
residence or its equivalent elsewhere in the residence if so used. No person,
other than the residents engaged in such activity, may be employed by
them in connection with said activity. The conducting of a clinic, hospital,
barbershop, beauty parlor, photographer's salon, tearoom, tourist home,
animal hospital, boarding or breeding kennel, convalescent home, funeral
home, stores of any kind or any similar use shall not be a home occupation.
HOME PROFESSIONAL OFFICE — An accessory office or area of a person
located within a person's residence devoted to a professional service
occupation, in which knowledge in some department of science or learning
is applied to the affairs of others, either advising or guiding them, or
otherwise serving their interest or welfare through the practice of a
profession founded on such knowledge. Said office activity shall be
incidental and secondary to the use of the residence for dwelling purpose,
shall not change the character thereof and shall not have any evidence of
such accessory use other than a permitted announcement sign. Said activity
shall not occupy more than 1/2 of the ground floor area of the residence
or its equivalent elsewhere in the residence if so used. In said activity,
(1) Terraces, porches and steps.
(2) Crawl space.
(3) Stairways/stairwells.
§ 376-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 376-5
1:383
no more than two persons, including members of the family residing on
the premises, shall be employed. Permissible home professional office uses
include, but are not limited to, the following: clergymen, lawyers,
physicians, dentists, architects, engineers or accountants.
HOTEL — A building which has transient living and sleeping
accommodations for rent for 10 or more persons, provides amenities such
as maid service, linen service and dining service, and which is open for yearround
occupancy.[Amended 9-8-2014 by L.L. No. 8-2014]
HOTEL, DOWNTOWN — A hotel located within the Neighborhood Business,
Multifamily, or Community Business areas identified in the Monsey Area
Plan contained in the Draft Generic Environmental Impact Statement
prepared in connection with the Town of Ramapo Comprehensive Plan
dated January 2004.[Added 9-8-2014 by L.L. No. 8-2014]
HOTEL, HIGHWAY — A hotel that is not a downtown hotel.[Added
9-8-2014 by L.L. No. 8-2014]
HOUSE OF WORSHIP —
INDUSTRIAL SERVICE ROAD — See "road, industrial service."
JUNKYARD — An area of land, with or without buildings, used for or
occupied by a deposit, collection or storage, outside a completely enclosed
building, of used or discarded materials, such as wastepaper, rags or scrap
material or used building materials, house furnishings, machinery, vehicles
or parts thereof, with or without the dismantling, processing, salvage or sale
of other use or disposition of the same. A deposit or the storage on a plot
of two or more unregistered, wrecked or broken-down vehicles or parts of
two or more such vehicles for one week or more in a residential district,
or for three weeks or more in any other district, shall be deemed to be a
"junkyard."
LABORATORY AND RESEARCH FACILITIES — A building for
experimentation in pure or applied research, design, development and
production of prototype machines or of new products and uses accessory
thereto, wherein products are not manufactured for wholesale or retail
sale, wherein commercial servicing or repair of commercial products is not
performed and wherein there is no display of any material or products.
LOCAL — A building used exclusively for the conduct of organized
religious services with the occupancy of the sanctuary space not to
exceed 100 persons. Residence by an officiating clergyman in the
building is permitted as an accessory use. No school or outside catering
is permitted.
A.
COMMUNITY — A building used exclusively for the conduct of
organized religious services with the occupancy of the sanctuary space
exceeding 100 persons. Residence by an officiating clergyman is
permitted as an accessory use. No school is permitted. Outside catering
is permitted upon receipt of a special permit for such use.
B.
§ 376-5 RAMAPO CODE § 376-5
1:384
LIVE ENTERTAINMENT — Any act, play, show, revue, pantomime, scene,
song, dance act, or song and dance act, participated in by one or more
employees, guests, customers or any other person or persons, including the
playing of records, tapes, CDs, DVDs or other recorded music or sounds.
LOCAL CONVENIENCE COMMERCIAL — Establishments that deal in the
retail sales of convenience goods (food, drugs and sundries) and such
personal services as laundry and dry cleaning, hair styling and shoe repair.
The maximum permitted aggregate gross floor area on any site shall not
exceed 100,000 square feet. The floor area of any single store shall not
exceed 8,000 square feet, except that food stores or combined sales stores
may not exceed 45,000 square feet. Other commercial uses of any kind
elsewhere specified in this chapter shall not be deemed "local convenience
commercial."
LOCAL OFFICE - BUSINESS — Establishments that include art studios,
banks, offices of salesmen, attorneys, dentists, sales representatives,
architects, brokers, physicians, engineers, insurance agents, real estate
agents, land surveyors, musicians, antique shops, barbershops, funeral
chapels or other activity found by the Planning Board to be related to the
services of the neighborhood residents or of a character consistent in scale,
intensity of activities and traffic generation (including traffic from outside
the immediate neighborhood) with local convenience commercial activities.
Other uses of any kind elsewhere specified in this chapter shall not be
deemed "local office - business."
LOT — A designated parcel, tract or area of land established by plot,
subdivision or as otherwise permitted by this chapter to be used, developed
or built upon as a unit.
LOT AREA — The total horizontal area included within the property lines
of a lot, except that for any minimum lot area specified in this chapter, the
area shall be adjusted as set forth in § 376-42A.
LOT, CORNER — A lot at the junction of, or abutting on, two or more
intersecting streets where the interior angle of intersection does not exceed
135°. A lot abutting a curved street shall be deemed a corner lot if the
tangents to the curve at the points of intersection of the side lot lines with
the street lines intersect at an interior angle of less than 135°.
LOT LINE — Any boundary of a lot other than a street line.
LOT LINE, FRONT — The lot line which abuts or runs along the designated
street line. In the case of a lot situated to the rear of another lot, its front
lot line shall be the rear lot line of the front lot for purposes of measuring
the front setback and lot width.
LOT LINE, REAR — The lot line generally opposite the street line. If the rear
lot line is less than 10 feet in length or if the lot comes to a point in the rear,
the rear lot line shall be deemed to be a line parallel to the front lot line not
less than 10 feet long lying farthest from the front lot line.
LOT WIDTH — The distance measured along a line drawn parallel to the
front lot line at a distance equal to the minimum front setback requirement.
§ 376-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 376-5
1:385
MIKVAH — A facility providing for ritual baths.
MIKVAH, COMMUNITY — A mikvah intended for community-wide use, with
patrons either walking or driving to the facility.
MIKVAH, NEIGHBORHOOD — A mikvah intended for use by patrons
generally living within a half-mile radius of the mikvah, with patrons
primarily walking to the facility; said use shall be limited to no more than
one pool
MONOPOLE — A freestanding pole having a single point.[Added
6-14-2006 by L.L. No. 4-2006]
MULTIFAMILY DWELLING — A building containing three or more dwelling
units.29
NEIGHBORHOOD HOUSE OF WORSHIP — A portion of a multifamily
dwelling used exclusively for the conduct of organized religious services.
No school or outside catering is permitted. At least 75% of the membership
must live within a 3/4 mile radius of the house of worship. The bulk
requirements shall be the use group for the multifamily dwelling in which
the house of worship is located. No more than one house of worship per tax
lot will be permitted.[Added 1-30-2019 by L.L. No. 3-2019]
NEIGHBORHOOD RESTAURANT — An eating establishment, other than a
drive-in restaurant, providing regular table service within a fully enclosed
building. A neighborhood restaurant shall not have live entertainment.
NIER (NONIONIZING ELECTROMAGNETIC RADIATION) —
Electromagnetic radiation ranging from extremely low frequency (ELF)
to ultraviolet (UV) comprises nonionizing radiation. Nonionizing radiation
includes the spectrum of ultraviolet (UV), visible light, infrared (IR),
microwave (MW), radio frequency (RF), and extremely low frequency
(ELF).[Added 6-14-2006 by L.L. No. 4-2006]
NONCOMPLYING BUILDING — A structure lawfully existing at the
effective date of this chapter or any amendment thereto affecting such
structure, which does not comply with the bulk requirements of this chapter
for the district in which it is situated, irrespective of the use to which such
structure is put.
NONCONFORMING USE — Any use of a building or structure, lot or land,
or part thereof, lawfully existing at the effective date of this chapter or any
amendments thereto affecting such use, which does not conform to the use
requirements of this chapter for the district in which it is located.
NURSERY SCHOOL — Any private school accredited by the Education
Department of the State of New York, designed to provide daytime care or
instruction for two or more children from two to six years of age, inclusive,
operated at least five days per week and seven months per year. No nursery
school shall be operated during the months of July and August unless it
meets with the requirements of a day camp as specified in this chapter,
29.Editor's Note: The definition of "neighborhood place of worship" which immediately
followed this definition was repealed 6-14-2006 by L.L. No. 4-2006.
§ 376-5 RAMAPO CODE § 376-5
1:386
except for any school operated with a number of children no greater than
the average attendance throughout the regular school year and without use
of an outdoor swimming facility or pool.
OFFICE, PROFESSIONAL AND BUSINESS — Establishments that include
offices of salesmen, sales representatives, architects, engineers, physicians,
dentists, attorneys, insurance brokers, real estate brokers and persons with
similar occupations. Other uses of any kind elsewhere specified in this
chapter shall not be deemed "office, professional and business."
OFFICIAL MAP — The Official Map adopted and established by the Town
Board and pursuant to Town Law § 270 of that part of the Town outside of
the limits of any incorporated village, showing the streets, highways, parks
and drainage systems laid out on such map, including any references to
more detailed maps and studies. The Official Map is final and conclusive
with respect to the location and width of streets, highways, drainage
systems and parks shown thereon; and the Official Map is established to
conserve and protect the public health, safety and general welfare.
OPERATING PERMIT — A permit is required to conduct activities or to
use a category of buildings as set forth in 19 NYCRR 1203.3(g) as may be
amended.[Added 11-10-2016 by L.L. No. 4-2016]
ORDER TO REMEDY — An order to remedy any condition found to exist in,
on, or about any building in violation of the New York State Uniform Fire
Prevention and Building Code and the provisions of this chapter.[Added
11-10-2016 by L.L. No. 4-2016]
OWNERSHIP, SAME — Includes all vested or contingent interests of any
person or his agent, representative, successor or assignee and irrespective
of whether or not such interest is recorded, in the following circumstances:
Direct ownership by such person or his or her spouse, child, parent,
sibling or spouse of sibling, heir or next of kin, agent, corporation, firm,
entity, partnership or unincorporated association.
A.
Ownership of property by different corporations, firms, partnerships,
entities or unincorporated associations, in which such a person is a
stockholder, a partner or associate, or his or her spouse, child, parent,
sibling or spouse of sibling, heir or next of kin or owns an interest
of 10% or greater in each corporation, firm, partnership, entity or
unincorporated association.
B.
When such person or his estate, successors or assigns, or any person
or entity included in Subsections A and B herein, may be materially or
substantively affected by the relief sought or by any determination in
any proceeding sought before any board, body, commission or agency
of the Town of Ramapo, whether or not such person is a party to such
application or proceeding and whether or not such person appears on
the record of such proceeding.
C.
§ 376-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 376-5
1:387
PARKING AREA — A lot or part thereof used for the storage or parking of
motor vehicles, with or without the payment of rent or charges in money
and/or other consideration.
PARKING LOT — Lot or part thereof used for the storage of motor vehicles,
which contains space rented to the general public by the hour, day, week,
month or year.
PERSON — See § 376-4C.
PLANNED BUILDING DEVELOPMENT — An area developed according
to plan as a single entity and containing one or more structures to
accommodate nonresidential uses and appurtenant parking areas and other
uses incidental to the predominant uses.
PRINCIPAL USE — The primary or predominant use for which a lot or
building is used.
R DISTRICT or RESIDENCE DISTRICT — An RR-160, RR-80, RR-50, R-40,
R-40A, R-35, R-25, R-15, R-15A, R-15C, R-15MR, MR-16, MR-12, MR-8 or
RSH District in the Town of Ramapo, or a corresponding district in an
adjoining municipality.
RESIDENCE — A building or part thereof designated, used or occupied for
one or more dwelling units, but not including hotel, motel, or trailer.
RESIDENCE, MULTIFAMILY — A building which is designed, used or
occupied for residential purposes for three or more dwelling units.
RESIDENCE, ONE-FAMILY — A building designed, used or occupied for
residential purposes for one dwelling unit only.
RESIDENCE, ONE-FAMILY DETACHED — A one-family residence which is
separated from other buildings by open space.
RESIDENCE, ONE-FAMILY SEMIATTACHED — A building or structure
which comprises one dwelling unit for one family and which is attached or
connected to another dwelling unit for one family at their common property
line by means of a party wall, the length of which represents at least 50%
of the total sidewall length of which the party wall is a part, and which is
separated from any other building or structure by open space on the side
lot line opposite the party wall and by open space on the front and rear lot
lines. Each dwelling unit must be on its own lot. No certificate of occupancy
shall be issued for a "one-family semiattached residence" until such time
as the Building Inspector finds the other dwelling unit to be substantially
complete.
RESIDENCE, THREE-FAMILY DETACHED — A building which is
designated, used or occupied for residential purposes for three dwelling
units.[Added 6-14-2006 by L.L. No. 4-2006]
RESIDENCE, THREE-FAMILY SEMIATTACHED — A building or structure
which comprises three dwelling units for three families and which is
attached or connected to another dwelling unit for three families at their
common property line by means of a party wall, the length of which
represents at least 50% of the total side wall length of which the party
§ 376-5 RAMAPO CODE § 376-5
1:388
wall is a part, and which is separated from any other building or structure
by open space on the side lot line opposite the party wall and by open
space on the front and rear lot lines. Each three-family dwelling must be
on its own lot. No certificate of occupancy shall be issued for a three-family
semiattached residence until such time as the Building Inspector finds the
other dwelling units to be substantially complete.[Added 6-14-2006 by
L.L. No. 4-2006]
RESIDENCE, TWO-FAMILY DETACHED — A building which is designed,
used or occupied for residential purposes for two dwelling units.
RESIDENCE, TWO-FAMILY SEMIATTACHED — A building or structure
which comprises two dwelling units for two families and which is attached
or connected to another dwelling unit for two families at their common
property line by means of a party wall, the length of which represents at
least 50% of the total side wall length of which the party wall is a part, and
which is separated from any other building or structure by open space on
the side lot line opposite the party wall and by open space on the front and
rear lot lines. Each two-family dwelling must be on its own lot. No certificate
of occupancy shall be issued for a two-family semiattached residence until
such time as the Building Inspector finds the other dwelling units to be
substantially complete.[Added 6-14-2006 by L.L. No. 4-2006]
RESTAURANT — Any establishment, however designated, at which food
and beverages are sold for consumption on the premises, whether in a
building or elsewhere on the property.
RESTAURANT, DRIVE-IN — Any restaurant, refreshment stand, snack bar,
daily bar, hamburger stand or hot dog stand where food is served primarily
for consumption at counters, stools, tables or bars outside the building
or primarily for consumption in an automobile parked on the premises,
whether such food is brought to said automobile by the customer or by
employees of the restaurant, regardless of whether or not additional seats
or other accommodations are provided for customers inside the building.
Any drive-through restaurant shall be considered a "drive-in restaurant."
RESTAURANT, NEIGHBORHOOD — See "neighborhood restaurant."
ROAD, COLLECTOR — Any street which serves to carry traffic from local
residential streets to secondary streets.
ROAD, INDUSTRIAL SERVICE — A public street or right-of-way providing
access to a planned office and/or industrial building development of at least
10 acres in a PI or LO District, subject to the requirements of § 376-52E.
ROAD, LOCAL — Any street which serves primarily as an access to abutting
residential properties.
ROAD, MAJOR — Any street which is used primarily as a route for traffic
between communities or large areas.
ROAD, SECONDARY — Any street which serves to carry traffic from
collector streets to a system of major streets.
SANITARY LANDFILL — A site for the disposal of solid waste.
§ 376-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 376-5
1:389
SCHOOL OF GENERAL INSTRUCTION — Any public or private elementary
or middle school, junior high school, high school, college, university or
postgraduate school offering courses in general instruction at least five days
per week and seven months per year.
SCHOOL OF RELIGIOUS INSTRUCTION — Any public or private
elementary, middle school, junior high school, high school or college
offering courses in religious instruction at least five days per week and
seven months per year.
SCHOOL OF SPECIAL INSTRUCTION — Any nonpublic school conducting
a regularly scheduled curriculum of specialized or vocational study.
SCREEN or SCREENING —
SECONDARY DWELLING UNIT — A dwelling unit previously approved as
an accessory apartment or a new dwelling unit that meets the requirements
for an accessory apartment in an R-15A or R-15C Zoning District which is
eligible for issuance of a separate certificate of occupancy upon compliance
with the requirements of § 376-68.[Added 1-25-2012 by L.L. No. 1-2012]
SETBACK — The minimum distance between a principal building, structure
or use and a property line of the lot or, where a buffer is required, between
the principal building, structure or use and any part of the buffer. (See
Sketches B and C found at the end of this chapter.)
SETBACK, FRONT — The distance from the building or use to the front lot
line.
SETBACK, REAR — The distance from the building or use to the rear lot
line.
SETBACK, SIDE — The distance from the building or use to any lot line
other than to the front or rear lot lines.
A strip at least 10 feet wide, densely planted (or having equivalent
natural growth) with shrubs or trees at least four feet high, at the time
of planting, of a type that will form a year-round dense screen at least
six feet high within three years;
A.
An opaque wall or barrier or uniformly painted fence at least six feet
high; or
B.
Any other islands, barriers, emplacements, walls, fences, trees,
plantings, shrubbery or other artificial or natural dividing strip or
marker of any kind, wherever located on the site, conditioned or
required in any building permit, certificate of occupancy, site
development plan, subdivision approval, special permit, variance, zone
change or other requirement of any board, agency, commission or
official of the Town of Ramapo pursuant to this chapter.30
C.
30.Editor's Note: The definition of "senior citizen housing development" which immediately
followed this definition was repealed 6-14-2006 by L.L. No. 4-2006.
§ 376-5 RAMAPO CODE § 376-5
1:390
SHOPPING CENTER — A structure or structures and customary parking
and loading areas providing for a variety of retail commercial
establishments managed as a unit and having the following characteristics:
SIGN — Any surface or device containing a sign display, the purpose of
which is to bring the subject thereof to the attention of the public through
the communication of a visual message.
SIGN, ADVERTISING — Any exterior sign which contains a sign display
that attempts to solicit business through the inclusion of information which
is not pertinent to the identification of a particular establishment and its
location. Such information includes, but is not limited to, hours of operation,
detailed description of merchandise offered for sale, lease or rent; sales and
marketing policies, including prices; and promotional slogans.
SIGN, ANNOUNCEMENT — Any sign used to announce the use of the
lot or direction or location of buildings and structures on the lot for an
office, home occupation, religious, charitable or other institutional use. An
announcement sign may be indirectly illuminated.
SIGN AREA — The area within the shortest line that can be drawn around
the outside perimeter of the face of a sign display, including all decoration
but excluding supports, if any, unless the same are illuminated as
illumination is defined under "sign, illuminated." In computing total sign
area, the area of the faces of all sign displays shall be counted, and any neon
tube, string of incandescent lights or similar device shall be considered as
having a minimum dimension of three inches.
SIGN, BUSINESS IDENTIFICATION — A sign containing the name of the
establishment and information on the business conducted therewith, but
specifically excluding phrases directing an action (i.e., stop, buy, eat).
SIGN, DIRECTORY — A sign or number of signs containing the name and
type of a business, constructed of compatible materials and design.
SIGN DISPLAY — A display or legend, including but not limited to letters,
words, logos and insignia which are used as or presented as an
announcement or identification.
A unified architectural treatment and identifiable theme relating each
of the commercial establishments within.
A.
A common interrelated parking and site circulation system with
consolidated access to public roads.
B.
Individual establishments oriented to pedestrian traffic by access signs
and display, which are not generally visible or only incidentally visible
to the parking areas.
C.
Common amenities provided to patrons apart from the commercial
establishments, such as benches, site decoration and landscaping, rest
rooms and the like.
D.
Common spaces which are available for public assemblage, special
events and local notices.
E.
§ 376-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 376-5
1:391
SIGN, FLASHING — Any illuminated signs on which the artificial light is not
maintained stationary and constant in intensity and color at all times when
in use.
SIGN, IDENTIFICATION — A sign used to identify the name of a permitted
institution or establishment which is the principal use upon the lot.
SIGN, ILLUMINATED — A sign on which artificial light is directed or which
is constructed of translucent materials through which light is directed. A
sign on which the illuminating source is visible to the public way or any
property line, except for signs constructed from neon-type tube, is not a
permitted sign in any district.
SIGN PLAN — A plan depicting the size, location, materials and content of
a sign, which plan shall be the sole permitted display for any sign subject to
the site development plan rules and regulations.
SIGN, SHOPPING CENTER IDENTIFICATION — For a permitted shopping
center, a sign containing the name of the shopping center and the names of
tenants, each of which comprises more than 1/3 of the total floor space of
the center but no other business, and for which no other business signs are
visible on the same frontage.
SIGN, WALL AREA — The area of a building wall (not exceeding 20 feet
above ground level in NS Districts and 30 feet in all other districts)
measured in the plane of the street frontage, including windows and doors.
STABLE or RIDING ACADEMY — Any establishment where horses are
kept for riding, driving or stabling for compensation or incidental to the
operation of any club, association, ranch or similar establishment.
STORY — That part of any building, exclusive of cellars but inclusive of
basements, comprised between the level of one finished floor and the level
of the next higher finished floor or, if there is no higher finished floor, then
that part of the building comprised between the level of the highest finished
floor and the top of the roof beams. Each 10 feet or fraction thereof of
height shall be deemed a story in absence of finished floors.
STREET — A street, which is one of the following: an existing town, village,
county or state highway or road; a public road shown on a filed subdivision
plat; or a street shown on the Official Map of the Town.
STREET CENTER LINE — A line, equidistant from each street line of a
street or, if no street line is established, the center line of the existing
pavement or, if the street is unpaved, the center line of the existing traveled
way.
STREET FRONTAGE — See "frontage."
STREET LINE — The right-of-way line of a street.
STREET LINE, DESIGNATED — The line established by the Official Map as
the street right-of-way, whether or not in public ownership.
STRUCTURE — A combination of materials constructed, assembled or
erected on, above or below the ground or attached to something having
§ 376-5 RAMAPO CODE § 376-5
1:392
location on, above or below the ground, including but not limited to
buildings, fences, tanks, towers and swimming pools.
SWIMMING CLUB — A recreational club with swimming facilities operated
for members and their guests, whether or not operated for profit.
SWIMMING POOL, PRIVATE —
TOWNHOUSE — A dwelling unit sharing a common side or rear wall or
walls with another dwelling unit, but occupying the entire volume within its
portion of the building from the lowest level to the roof and having its own
separate entrance or entrances to the outside.
TRAILER — A vehicle, including but not limited to a mobile home, which can
be used as habitation for one or more persons or for business, commercial
or office purposes. The term "trailer" shall include such vehicles mounted
on temporary or permanent foundations with the wheels removed.
UNDERWATER — Land is underwater where it is so shown on the United
States Geological Survey (USGS) Map of the Town or where it is within
the channel lines of a classified stream as shown on the Rockland County
Drainage Agency Official Map. In addition, soils classified as "muck soils"
by the United States Soil Conservation Service based on field investigations
shall be deemed land "underwater."
USE — The specific purpose for which land or a building is used or occupied
or maintained.
USE, ACCESSORY — A use customarily incidental and subordinate to the
primary use on a lot, whether such accessory use is conducted in a principal
or accessory building or on the lot.
USE, NONCONFORMING — See "nonconforming use."
VEHICLE — A motorized means of transporting or carrying something.
VETERINARY CLINIC/HOSPITAL — See "animal hospital."
WIRELESS COMMUNICATION SERVICES — The provision of wireless
communication services, including those more commonly referred to as
"cellular telephones," which services are regulated by the Federal
Communications Commission (FCC) in accordance with and as the term
"personal wireless service" is defined in the Communications Act of 1934,
IN-GROUND POOL — An artificial pool or structure intended for
wading, bathing or swimming purposes made of concrete, masonry,
metal or other impervious material and which is an accessory use to a
residence and for the exclusive use of the occupants of the residence
and their guests.
A.
ABOVEGROUND POOL — An artificial pool or structure which is so
constructed as to be above grade and which has a ladder or steps in
order to obtain access to the pool and which is an accessory use to a
residence for the exclusive use of the occupants of the residence and
their guests.
B.
§ 376-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 376-5
1:393
as amended by the Telecommunications Act of 1996, 47 U.S.C. § 332(c)(7)(c)
or as hereafter amended.[Added 6-14-2006 by L.L. No. 4-2006]
WIRELESS COMMUNICATION SERVICES FACILITY — Any equipment
used in connection with the commercial operation of wireless
communication services, as defined herein and as the term "personal
wireless services facility" is defined in the Communications Act of 1934, as
amended by the Telecommunications Act of 1996, 47 U.S.C. § 332(c)(7)(c)
or as hereafter amended, to transmit and/or receive frequencies, including
but not limited to antennas, monopoles, equipment, appurtenances and
structures.[Added 6-14-2006 by L.L. No. 4-2006]
YARD, REQUIRED — Open and unobstructed ground area of the plot,
extending inward from a lot line the distance specified in the requirements
for the district in which the lot is located. Where a buffer is required,
the buffer shall be deemed to commence at the lot line and the yard
requirement shall be deemed to commence from the interior line of the
buffer. (See Sketches B and C.31)
YARD, REQUIRED FRONT — A required yard extending along the full length
of the front lot line between the side lot lines.
YARD, REQUIRED REAR — A required yard situated along the rear lot line
and extending the full width of the lot to the side lines of the lot.
YARD, REQUIRED SIDE — A required yard extending along a side lot line
from the required front yard (or from the front lot line if there is no required
front yard) to the required rear yard (or to the rear lot line if there is no
required rear yard).
31.Editor's Note: Said sketches are included at the end of this chapter.
§ 376-5 RAMAPO CODE § 376-5
1:394
ARTICLE II
Zoning Districts and Zoning Map
§ 376-20. Districts established. [Amended 6-14-2006 by L.L. No.
4-2006]
The zoning districts listed below are hereby established, and the Town of
Ramapo is divided into the districts listed:
Symbol Title/Description
RR-160 Residential District (160,000 square feet per lot)
RR-80 Residential District (80,000 square feet per lot)
RR-50 Residential District (50,000 square feet per lot)
R-40 Residential District (40,000 square feet per lot)
R-40A Same as R-40 but mixed lot sizes
R-35 Residential District (35,000 square feet per lot)
R-25 Residential District (25,000 square feet per lot)
R-15 Residential District (15,000 square feet per lot)
R-15A Same as R-15 but accessory apartments permitted by right
R-15MR Mixed residential (mixed lot sizes)
R-15C Density Residential Conversion District
MR-16 Multifamily (maximum 16 units per acre)
MR-12 Multifamily (maximum 12 units per acre)
MR-8 Multifamily (maximum eight units per acre)
RSH Specialized Housing Residential District
NS Neighborhood Shopping District
CS Community Shopping District
PO Professional Office District
LO Laboratory-Office District
PI Planned Industry District
MU-1 Mixed Use (at least 60% commercial and some residential)
MU-2 Mixed Use (residential and up to 50% commercial)
§ 376-21. Zoning Map. [Amended 6-14-2006 by L.L. No. 4-2006]
The boundaries of said districts are hereby established as shown on the
Zoning Map and which, with all explanatory matter thereon, is hereby
adopted and made a part of this chapter. A copy of said map, indicating
the latest amendments, shall be kept up-to-date in the offices of the Town
Clerk and the Department of Building, Planning and Zoning for the use and
benefit of the public.
§ 376-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 376-22
1:395
§ 376-22. Interpretation of district boundaries.
In determining the boundaries of districts shown on the Zoning Map, the
following rules shall apply:
§ 376-23. General district regulations.
Following the effective date of this chapter:
A. Where a district boundary is shown following a street, highway, road,
right-of-way, the New York State Thruway, any parkway, a public utility
right-of-way, a railroad or a stream or watercourse, the boundary is
respectively the center line of such street, highway, road, right-of-way,
thruway, parkway, public utility right-of-way, main channel of a stream
or watercourse or railroad.
B. Where a district boundary is shown as following a Town boundary line,
a property line, a lot line or a projection of any one of the same, such
boundary shall be such landmarked or monumented line or projection
thereof. If such boundary is shown as separated from but approximately
parallel to any such landmarked or monumented line or projection
thereof, such boundary shall be deemed to be parallel to any
landmarked or monumented line or projection thereof, as the case may
be, at such distance therefrom as shown on the Zoning Map. If such
boundary is shown as separated from but approximately parallel to any
such landmarked or monumented line, such district boundary shall be
deemed to be parallel to the aforesaid center line at such distance
therefrom as shown on the Zoning Map.
C. In the absence of a specified distance being indicated on the Zoning
Map, the distance shall be determined by using the map scale.
A. No building shall be erected, moved, structurally altered, reconstructed
or enlarged, nor shall any land or building be used, designed or
arranged to be used for any purpose in any manner except in
compliance with this chapter and all other applicable laws, together
with all rules, requirements and restrictions appurtenant thereto.
B. No yard, setback or open space required in connection with any
building or use shall be considered as providing a required yard,
setback or open space for any other building or use on the same or any
other lot.
C. No lot shall be formed from part of a lot already occupied by a building
or use unless such building or use, all yards, setbacks and open spaces
connected therewith and the remaining lot comply with all
requirements prescribed by this chapter for the district in which said
lot is located.
D. Any use not permitted by this chapter shall be deemed to be prohibited.
The list of prohibited uses contained in § 376-33 of this chapter shall not
be deemed to be an exhaustive list but has been included for the
§ 376-22 RAMAPO CODE § 376-23
1:396
purposes of clarity and emphasis and to illustrate, by example, some
of the uses frequently proposed that are deemed undesirable and
incompatible and are thus prohibited. Uses identified as special permit
uses shall be deemed prohibited unless a valid special permit shall be
issued by the Town Board or Planning Board.
E. Preexisting uses identified as special permit uses in this chapter, for
which there exists, on the effective date of this chapter or amendment
thereof, a valid certificate of occupancy, shall not be deemed
nonconforming unless such uses are noncomplying as to the bulk or
supplemental regulations of this chapter.
F. No building permit or certificate of occupancy or certificate of use shall
be granted for any use unless the Building Inspector shall find that the
use shall conform to the standards set forth in this chapter.
G. No land or buildings shall be used in any manner so as to create any
hazard to the public health, peace or comfort or to hinder the most
appropriate use of land in the vicinity.
§ 376-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 376-23
1:397

ARTICLE III
Use Regulations
§ 376-30. General requirements.
The general requirements affecting the use of buildings, structures and land
for each of the districts established by Article II are hereby established and
set forth in this article.
§ 376-31. Use Table.
The accompanying table entitled "Table of General Use Requirements" shall
be deemed part of this chapter and is referred to herein as the "Use
Table."32
§ 376-32. Utilization of Use Table.
A. The Use Table is divided into columns, with each column headed by a
capital letter for reference. Horizontal lines divide the requirements for
one district from those of another.
B. In the Use Table, the words "same as," followed by the symbol of the
district or districts, shall be construed to include all of the matter set
forth in the same column for the district or districts thus referred to,
thereby incorporating such matter by reference.
C. In the Use Table, all uses listed in Column B are permitted by right and
subject to the bulk and supplemental requirements as applicable. All
uses listed in Column C are permitted only upon approval of the
Planning Board and a special permit therefor pursuant to § 274-a of
Town Law. All uses listed in Column D are special permit uses permitted
on approval of the Town Board in accordance with Article XVI. All
special permit uses also require site development plan approval by the
Planning Board in accordance with Article IX. [Amended 6-14-2006
by L.L. No. 4-2006]
D. The uses identified in Columns B, C and D are followed by a letter
designating a use group for reference to the Table of Bulk
Requirements. Certain uses do not have respective bulk, requirements
and the requirements pertaining to the principal use shall apply.
E. Uses carried through from one district to another are cited "same as. . .
" followed by district from which carried through and a number or
numbers referring to the particular use as identified in the district.
Additionally, as an aid to cross-reference, a brief description or
identification of the referenced use is enclosed in parenthesis following
the numerical reference; however, such reference shall be deemed to
incorporate all matter pertaining to the subject use. Where a use group
32.Editor's Note: Said table is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 376-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 376-32
1:399
§ 376-33. Prohibited uses.
The uses which are listed in this section are prohibited in the Town, subject
to the qualifications set forth in § 376-23D.
is not identified in the Use Table, the use group for the same use in the
previously cited district or districts shall apply.
F. Any use not identified in the Use Table shall be deemed prohibited. Any
use indicated as a special permit use shall be deemed prohibited unless
approved in a manner specified by this chapter. Where special permit
uses are identified by generic word or description, the approving Board
shall determine whether a specific use shall be construed to be part of
such generic class. In making such determination, the approving Board
shall consider to what extent the proposed use is alike, in land use
impacts, the class of use indicated in the Use Table.
A. Manufacturing uses involving primary production of the following
products from raw materials:
(1) Asphalt, cement, charcoal and fuel briquettes.
(2) Chemicals: analine dyes, ammonia, carbide, caustic soda, cellulose,
chlorine, carbon black and bone black, creosote, hydrogen and
oxygen, industrial alcohol, nitrates (manufactured and natural) of
an explosive nature, potash, plastic materials and synthetic resins,
pyroxilin, rayon yarn and hydrochloric, nitric, phosphoric, picric
and sulfuric acids.
(3) Coal, coke and tar products, including gas manufacturing;
explosives; fertilizers; gelatin, glue and size.
(4) Linoleum and oilcloth; matches; paints, varnishes and turpentine.
(5) Rubber (natural or synthetic); soaps, including fat-rendering;
starch.
B. The following processes: nitrating of cotton or other materials; milling
or processing of flour, feed or grain; magnesium foundry; reduction,
refining, smelting and alloying of metal or metal ores; refining
secondary aluminum; refining petroleum products, such as gasoline,
kerosene, naphtha, lubricating oil; distillation of wood or bones; and
reduction and processing of wood pulp and fiber, including paper mill
operations.
C. Operations involving stockyards and slaughterhouses, grain elevators,
slag piles and keeping, breeding and raising of pigs for commercial
purposes.
D. Storage of explosives, except under license from the State of New York
and in a manner and place conforming to the laws of the State of New
York and the American Table of Distances and provided that no more
than 5,000 pounds is stored in any one magazine.
§ 376-32 RAMAPO CODE § 376-33
1:400
E. Bulk or wholesale storage of gasoline above ground.
F. Dumps, sanitary landfills, junkyards and transfer stations except those
operated by the Town or Rockland County Solid Waste Management
Authority. [Amended 6-14-2006 by L.L. No. 4-2006]
G. Quarries, stone crushers, screening plants and storage of quarry
screenings.
H. Incineration of waste materials except in a plant owned and operated
by the Town.
I. Disposal of septic or sewage wastes.
J. Any other use, whether specified above or not, that is of such a nature
as to be detrimental to neighboring properties by reason of emission of
odor, dust, refuse matter, garbage, smoke, vibration, gas, radiation,
noise or any other factor that is dangerous to the comfort, peace,
enjoyment, health or safety of the area or the community.
K. Freestanding water towers and freestanding water tanks located below,
on or above ground are not permitted, except that such a tower or tank,
owned and operated by a public utility, may be allowed as a special
permit use of the Planning Board on plots of three acres or more.
[Amended 6-14-2006 by L.L. No. 4-2006]
§ 376-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 376-33
1:401

ARTICLE IV
Bulk Regulations
§ 376-40. General requirements.
The general requirements relating to the arrangement of buildings,
structures and uses occupying a lot for the zoning districts established by
Article II are hereby established.
§ 376-41. Bulk Table.
The accompanying table entitled "Table of Bulk Requirements" shall be a
part of this chapter, is referred to herein as the "Bulk Table" and shall set
forth the minimum bulk requirements of this chapter.33
§ 376-42. Special bulk requirements.
A. The bulk table is divided into columns, each column headed by a
number for reference. The Bulk Table is divided by single horizontal
lines into groups, each group being identified by a letter corresponding
to the letter symbol appearing in the Use Table adjacent to each use or
combination of uses. Each of the uses within each group is regulated by
the bulk regulations for the indicated use group.
B. Other articles herein contain supplemental requirements applying to
bulk, setback and coverage of specified uses.
A. As part of any minimum lot area requirement of this chapter for all
uses, not more than 50% of any land underwater, subject to or within
the one-hundred-year-frequency floodplain, wetlands, within easements
or rights-of-way for overhead utilities, with slopes (unexcavated) of over
25% or within a designated street line of any road shall be counted
towards meeting the minimum lot area. In addition, at least 50% of the
minimum lot area requirement shall consist of land without the abovelisted
impediments. The application of this section to any particular lot
shall be the responsibility of the Town Planning Board at the time of
subdivision or site development plan approval. [Amended 6-14-2006
by L.L. No. 4-2006]
B. Street frontage for lots fronting on culs-de-sac or on a street with a
radius of curvature at the center line of 100 feet or less, or in other
appropriate circumstances, may be reduced by the Planning Board at
the time of subdivision plat approval to no less than 1/2 of the required
dimensions. No portion of the lot, along the access route from its
frontage into the lot, shall be narrower than the approved frontage.
C. In LO and PI Districts, no side setback, no side yard, no rear setback or
no rear yard shall be required where such setback abuts an overhead
utility transmission line right-of-way, railroad or a limited-access
33.Editor's Note: Said table is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 376-40 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 376-42
1:403
§ 376-43. Clustering.
highway. In such cases, the total width of both side setbacks shall be 75
feet in an LO District and 50 feet in a PI District.
D. The Planning Board, at the time of subdivision approval, may modify
and reduce the required lot width for any lot, but the same may not be
reduced to less than 1/2 of the required lot width.
A. Purpose, intent and applicability.
(1) The purpose of this section is to encourage flexibility of design and
development of land by an alternative method for the layout,
configuration and design of lots, buildings and structures, roads,
utility lines and other infrastructure, parks and landscaping to
preserve the natural and scenic qualities of open land. Cluster
development may provide incidental benefits such as the
facilitation of adequate and economical provision of streets and
utilities.
(2) The standards and procedures hereinafter set forth are adopted
pursuant to Town Law § 278. These standards and procedures are
hereby declared to be the sole manner in which the Town Board or
Planning Board may authorize development in a manner other than
as required by the strict application of this section and other
articles of this chapter.
(3) This section shall apply to all residential districts, except the R-15C
Districts. In multifamily districts, the Planning Board or Town
Board is authorized to approve coherent development of individual
or multiple sites to allow row houses (such as townhouses and patio
houses) and to allow apartments which may be rented or sold and
may be cooperatives or condominiums.
(4) This section may be applied provided that the undeveloped land
resulting from such provision is reserved as open space, and
provided that the entire development (including location and
architectural treatment of buildings and appurtenant facilities and
provisions for recreational areas, parking, egress and ingress, and
for landscaping) be built according to a site development plan
approved by the Planning Board with prior consent of the Town
Board, as required in this section.
(5) The dwelling units constructed pursuant to the standards and
procedures set forth herein may, at the discretion of the Planning
Board and subject to any conditions set forth by the Town Board, be
in detached, semiattached, attached or multistory structures.
(6) The provisions of this section shall not be deemed to authorize a
change in the permissible use of lands as provided for in this
chapter.
§ 376-42 RAMAPO CODE § 376-43
1:404
(7) The application of this section shall result in a permitted number of
building plots or dwelling units which shall in no case exceed the
number which, in the Planning Board's judgment, would be
permitted in a conventional preliminary subdivision plat meeting
requirements for lots conforming to the minimum lot size and
density requirements of this chapter applicable to the district or
districts in which such land is situated, and of the Town Law, as it is
now or may be amended, including Town Law § 276.
(8) The provisions of this section are not intended and shall not be
deemed to give the Planning Board the authority or the power to
apply or remove any other zoning designation or classification to
any area, district, zone, lot or parcel of land within the Town of
Ramapo.
B. Findings; objectives.
(1) The Town Board hereby finds that a substantial proportion of the
remaining undeveloped land in the Town is environmentally
sensitive and topographically difficult, and contains substantial
valuable natural assets deserving of protection. The Town Board
further finds that cluster development is a planning technique that
will significantly cut disturbance or loss of Ramapo's natural assets
by residential development. Clustering can provide for new
housing needs without increasing overall area unit density or
abbreviating landowner rights. Cluster development promotes
conservation of open space protecting its attributes and beauty.
(2) In keeping with the Town's primary goal for cluster development,
the Planning Board is directed to use cluster development to
protect:
(a) Steep slopes, rock outcrop, escarpments and ridgelines.
(b) Unique or distinctive natural or geological formations.
(c) Wetlands.
(d) Flood-prone areas.
(e) Watercourses and water bodies, including rivers, streams,
intermittent streams, lakes and ponds.
(f) Major stands of trees.
(g) Areas of rare, endangered and threatened vegetation.
(h) Wildlife habitat, especially that of rare, endangered or
threatened species.
(i) Historic structures, places or trails.
(j) Significant scenic views, particularly of water bodies, ridge
lines, hillsides, valleys and mountains, especially when visible
§ 376-43 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 376-43
1:405
from highways, roads, streets, parkland and other public
places.
(k) Buffers along roadways and other property boundaries that
will protect community or area character.
(l) Extensions of a public park or other protected open space or
connections between two or more parks or protected open
spaces or a combination of them.
(3) To the extent that they remain incidental to and consistent with the
primary purpose, the Planning Board may also consider providing
for such subordinate benefits as:
(a) Efficient and economical street, water supply, drainage and
sanitary sewer layouts.
(b) Innovation, flexibility and variety in the type, design and layout
of buildings so as to permit greater variety and range in the
choice of housing types, living environment, occupancy tenure
and housing cost.
(c) Flexibility in lot layout to achieve the best possible relationship
between development and existing topography.
C. Authorization to approve plans; application procedure.
(1) The Planning Board is hereby granted authority to modify
provisions of this chapter applicable to cluster development
simultaneously with its approval of a plat or plats, subject to
conditions stated in this section and such other reasonable
conditions as the Town Board in its discretion may add.
(2) An applicant desiring to use the standards set forth in this section
shall file, with the Planning Board, the application and plans
required for subdivision review and approval as set forth in
applicable provisions of this chapter and zoning regulations. Such
application and plans shall have clearly marked upon their face
that said plan is for development in accordance with these
standards. The applicant shall also submit a written, detailed
statement setting forth the nature of modifications, changes or
supplementations of existing zoning provisions and the reasons for
the same. Said statement shall include the manner in which such
modifications, changes or supplementations of existing zoning
provisions will benefit the Town and will further the purpose and
objectives set forth in this section. The applicant may be required,
at various stages of the planning process, to further justify his
request to use the standards and procedures set forth herein.
(3) If an applicant has not requested to use the standards set forth in
this section and seek approval of a cluster development, the
Planning Board may nevertheless require an applicant to submit an
§ 376-43 RAMAPO CODE § 376-43
1:406
application for cluster development subject to the criteria
contained in this section. Prior to the Planning Board determining
whether and to what extent a cluster development is to be
proposed where an applicant has not requested such a
development, the Planning Board shall determine that such a
proposal would benefit the Town by satisfying the purposes set
forth in this section, and that such a development plan is necessary
to satisfactorily achieve one or more of the specific objectives
stated in Subsection B(2) of this section.
(4) The applicant shall file the following maps and data, in a form as
the Planning Board shall require, so that a determination may be
made of the number of dwelling units which may be permitted by
the use of this section:
(a) A conventional sketch plat pursuant to this chapter and the
Town Subdivision Regulations.
(b) Any other data, plans and maps required by the Planning
Board.
(5) The Planning Board shall review the above documents to determine
compliance with the criteria set forth in this section and shall make
a determination of the number of lots or dwelling units which may
be permitted. If, in the Planning Board's judgment, the proposed
development is appropriate for processing pursuant to this section,
said Board shall transmit such application and other relevant
documents to the Town Board with a request for authority to act in
accordance with the standards set forth herein.
(6) After receipt of such request from the Planning Board, the Town
Board shall schedule an informational hearing relative to the
proposed use of the standards set forth herein. The applicant shall
comply with applicable requirements relating to notice to
interested parties. The applicant shall provide the Town Board with
such data, maps and plans as are required by the Town Board.
(7) The Town Board shall review the recommendation of the Planning
Board and determine whether or not to authorize the Planning
Board to process the proposed development pursuant to this
section. Said authorization, if granted, shall specify the lands to
which this procedure shall be applicable and may contain such
other reasonable conditions as the Town Board, in its discretion,
may add thereto.
(8) In the event that such authorization is granted, the Planning Board
shall process the application pursuant to subdivision laws, rules
and regulations, including review at public hearings held pursuant
to Town Law §§ 276 and 277.
§ 376-43 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 376-43
1:407
(9) Town Board authorization for use of the standards set forth in this
section shall expire and become void if any of the following events
do not occur within the time limits as set forth:
(a) The adoption of a resolution, by the Planning Board,
preliminarily approving a plat within nine months of the
aforesaid Town Board authorization. This preliminary approval
may be subject to conditions.
(b) The adoption of a resolution of final approval, by the Planning
Board within 24 months of the aforesaid Town Board
authorization. This final approval may be subject to conditions.
(c) Commencement of construction within 18 months from the
filing of the plat in the Rockland County Clerk's office. A note to
this effect shall be placed on the plat. If construction is not so
commenced, the plat shall be void.
(10) The Town Board may, upon request of the Planning Board, extend
any of the time periods set forth above.
D. Density calculations. The permitted density shall be determined on the
basis of a review of a conventional subdivision plat that, consistent with
applicable zoning regulations and practical considerations, could be
approved by the Planning Board.
E. Site standards.
(1) A "site" means the entire area of land proposed for development.
(2) The site, when developed, shall be served by an approved public
water supply system and an approved public sanitary sewer
system.
(3) The site shall have a minimum of 50 feet of frontage on an existing
public street or highway which is owned or maintained by the Town
of Ramapo, the County of Rockland or the State of New York
("public street").
(4) If the site is to contain attached dwelling units, no more than eight
such units shall be attached in any one cluster.
F. Lot standards.
(1) A "lot" means an area of land upon which detached dwelling is to be
built.
(2) The minimum lot size, regardless of zoning district, shall be not less
than: [Amended 6-14-2006 by L.L. No. 4-2006]
(a) Townhouse: 2,500 square feet.
(b) Semiattached: 5,000 square feet.
§ 376-43 RAMAPO CODE § 376-43
1:408
(c) Detached: 10,000 square feet.
(3) The minimum setbacks for each dwelling (or group of dwellings, in
the event that they are attached) shall be determined by the
Planning Board only after receipt of a recommendation from CDRC.
G. Open space preservation.
(1) In the event that the application of this procedure results in a plat
showing undeveloped lands available for park, recreation, open
space or other purposes, the Planning Board, as a condition of plat
approval, shall establish such conditions on the ownership, use and
maintenance of such lands as it deems necessary to assure the
preservation of such lands for their intended purposes.
(2) Any of such open spaces shall be shown on the plat with a notation
on the face thereof that such open spaces shall not be further
subdivided or used for future building lots.
(3) If any or all of the common open space is not dedicated to and
accepted by the Town, the formation and incorporation of a
neighborhood association, homeowners' association or other entity
approved by the Planning Board shall be required. At the discretion
of the Planning Board, documents indicating said formation shall
be presented, either prior to the signing of the plat, prior to the
granting of building permits or prior to the issuance of the first
certificate of occupancy for a dwelling within the plat. If required
by law, the approval of the Attorney General shall be obtained prior
to the formation of the association.
(4) Covenants for mandatory membership in the association shall be
approved by the Planning Board, filed in the Rockland County
Clerk's office and included, in whole or by reference, in the deed to
each lot.
(5) The association formed shall, in addition to any other rights or
responsibilities, be responsible for maintaining the common open
space(s) and operation and maintenance of any facilities within
such open space(s).
(6) The association shall be empowered to levy and shall levy, when
necessary, annual charges against all owners of lots to defray all
expenses in connection with the maintenance, ownership and
operation of open spaces and facilities placed thereon. The
documents forming such association and the covenant filed in the
Rockland County Clerk's office shall state that such charges, if
unpaid, shall become a lien against the property which is in default.
(7) The documents forming such association and the covenant filed in
the Rockland County Clerk's office shall additionally state that the
Town of Ramapo shall have the right, but not the obligation, by
§ 376-43 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 376-43
1:409
legal action or otherwise, to enforce the property owner's
obligation to pay any charges to the association.
(8) The developer or subdivider shall maintain control of such open
space(s) and be responsible for its maintenance until development
sufficient to support the association has taken place. Such
determination shall be made by the Building Inspector upon
request of the neighborhood association or developer or subdivider,
or the Planning Board may set forth conditions concerning the
transfer of the open space to the association, in its approving
resolution and/or by requiring an appropriate note to be placed
upon the plat.
(9) Prior to the signing of the plat, the subdivider or developer (except
where condominiums are to be constructed) shall execute an
agreement with the Town of Ramapo which the homeowners'
association shall be subject to, provided that, in the event that the
homeowners' association or any successor organization shall, at
any time after approval of the development, fail to maintain the
common land or any improvements thereon in reasonable order or
condition in accordance with the approved plan, the Town of
Ramapo may serve written notice upon such legal entity or
successor organization or upon the property owners within the
development, setting forth the manner in which the association has
failed to maintain the common land or any improvements thereon,
which said notice shall include a demand that such deficiencies be
corrected within a designated time frame. If the deficiencies are
not corrected within the designated time frame, the Town of
Ramapo, in order to preserve the taxable values of the property
within the development and to prevent the common land and
improvements thereon from becoming a public nuisance, may, but
shall not be obligated to, enter upon and take possession of said
common land and improvements and maintain the same until such
time as the Town Board shall determine that the homeowners'
association is ready and able to maintain the common land and
improvements in proper condition. Said entry and maintenance
shall not vest in the public any rights to use the common land or
improvements except when the same is voluntarily dedicated to the
public by the homeowners' association and the offer of dedication is
accepted by the Town Board. The decision of the Town of Ramapo
with respect to the action described in this subsection shall
constitute a final administrative decision subject to review in
accordance with the provisions of Article 78 of the Civil Practice
Law and Rules. The cost to the Town of Ramapo of any such
maintenance shall be assessed against the properties within the
subdivision, and, in the even of the failure or refusal of any such
property owner to pay any such charges when due, the unpaid
amount thereof shall become a lien against that person's property
and together with interest from the due date thereof, shall be
included in the annual tax levy of the Town of Ramapo upon such
§ 376-43 RAMAPO CODE § 376-43
1:410
property for each such fiscal year, and the amount so levied shall
be collected in the same manner as other Town taxes.
§ 376-43 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 376-43
1:411

ARTICLE V
Yard and Setback Regulations
§ 376-50. General requirements.
No principal structure shall be located any closer to any street or property
line than the required minimum setback as found in § 376-41, Bulk Table.
Accessory structures and uses, including parking, are permitted within the
required side or rear setback, but not within any yard and not within the
required front setback, except as may be specifically authorized in this
article.
§ 376-51. Front yard/setback exceptions. [Amended 6-14-2006 by
L.L. No. 4-2006]
§ 376-52. Side and rear yard exceptions.
A. The Planning Board may permit the following accessory structures in
the LO and PI Districts within a required front yard:
(1) Gatehouse.
(2) Reception office.
(3) Watchman's post.
B. The Planning Board may permit a garage accessory to a residence to be
located within the front yard or setback where, due to topographic
conditions, there would be practical difficulties in constructing a safe
and convenient drive from the street; provided, however, that such
garage shall not adversely affect the future use and development of
adjacent properties.
C. No shrubbery, hedge or other natural growth, fence or wall over three
feet higher than the apex at the center line of the street shall be located
within the areas shown shaded in Sketch A at the intersection of two
streets, nor shall the limbs or foliage of any tree obstruct vision or be
permitted to grow nearer to the ground than eight feet where such
limbs or foliage overhang or are over or upon land within the areas
shown in Sketch A, which can be found just before the Use Tables at the
end of this chapter.
D. In the R-15, R-15A, R-15C and R-15MR Districts, off-street parking
spaces are permitted in the required front yard and front setback.
E. An unroofed stoop, landing, platform or exterior stairs limited to three
risers (24 inches above grade) and eight feet in width outside of the
building are permitted within the required front yard/setback.
A. An unroofed patio which is not more than one foot above ground level
or an arbor, open trellis or flagpole is permitted in a required setback.
An open fire escape, deck or unroofed porch or terrace which is more
§ 376-50 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 376-52
1:413
than one foot above ground may project not more than 10 feet into a
required rear setback. [Amended 6-14-2006 by L.L. No. 4-2006]
B. An awning or movable canopy may project not more than 10 feet into a
required setback; cornices or eaves or bay or bow windows may project
not more than 18 inches into a required setback.
C. A fence or wall not more than four feet in height is permitted along any
lot line and no more than six feet in height along that part of any lot line
behind the required front yard. A fence or wall over the six-foot height
is permitted, provided that it is set back from the lot line a distance
equal to 2/3 its height. All fences shall be constructed with the outer
face thereof located a minimum of one foot from the property line,
except that a common fence may be constructed on the property line
with the written consent of both abutting owners. All fences shall be
constructed with the outer or better appearing face facing towards the
abutting property or street.
D. Accessory buildings constructed on adjacent lots with the written
consent of all abutting owners may be located along the common side
lot line or rear lot line, provided that the accessory building has a floor
area of less than 144 square feet and an exterior wall height of no more
than eight feet.
E. The Planning Board may modify all side and rear yard and/or setback
requirements for nonresidential uses in the PO, PI, and LO Districts,
except where abutting a residential district. All such uses shall conform
to the buffer requirements of this chapter. In the case of a planned
building development in a PI or LO District, which development is
intended or designed to be served by means of an industrial service
road, the Planning Board may also modify the lot area, lot width, front
yard, street frontage and all setback requirements but to an extent no
greater than 50% of the minimum requirements. In such instances, the
following requirements shall apply:
(1) The front yard and setback depth shall be established from a street
line designated as such on an approved site development plan or
subdivision plat.
(2) Buildings shall be so located and arranged that all have adequate
access for emergency vehicles.
(3) Restrictive covenants may be imposed on the site based on the
approved site development plan or subdivision plat enforceable by
all tenants, owners or lessees of such development.
F. In the R-15C District, the off-street parking spaces required for a threefamily
semiattached residence are permitted in the required side yard
and side setback. [Added 4-25-2007 by L.L. No. 1-2007]
§ 376-52 RAMAPO CODE § 376-53
1:414
§ 376-53. Measurement of front yards and setbacks.
All required front yard and front setback depths shall be measured from the
designated street line, front lot line or existing street line, whichever is a
greater distance from the center line of the public street abutting the lot
in question. Where lots are subdivided on other than a public street, the
designated street line, for purposes of front yard and setback measurement,
shall be parallel to and 25 feet distant from the center line of any access
easement or right-of-way.
§ 376-54. Corner lots.
A front yard and front setback shall be required on a corner lot from
each street line. There shall be designated on the plot plan which of the
remaining yards or setbacks shall be the side and rear yard or setback,
respectively.
§ 376-53 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 376-54
1:415

ARTICLE VI
Supplementary Regulations
§ 376-60. Permitted height exceptions.
The height limitations of this chapter shall not apply to:
§ 376-61. Courts.
§ 376-62. Spacing.
A. Rooftop bulkheads, elevator penthouses, water towers, fire towers,
hose towers, cooling towers, air-cooled or evaporative condensers, aircooled
or evaporative-cooled closed circuit coolers, exhaust fans or
other air-conditioning or heating equipment, flagpoles, radio or
television aerial, provided that such features and equipment are set
back from the edge of the roof at least one foot for each one foot by
which such features and equipment exceed the maximum height
otherwise specified for the district in which they are located. Such
features and equipment in the aggregate shall not occupy more than
10% of the area of the roof of a building, shall be consolidated into no
more than two locations on the roof and shall be visually screened with
a material compatible with the color and texture of the building walls or
otherwise camouflaged.
B. Parapet walls or cornices which do not exceed the maximum height
requirement for the district in which they are located by more than four
feet.
C. Solar energy systems, provided that such systems shall be erected only
to the height necessary to accomplish the purposes they are intended to
serve.
A. An outer court shall be at least 20 feet wide, as wide as its depth or as
wide as the height of the highest wall adjoining said court, whichever is
the greatest.
B. An inner court shall be at least 50 feet in the least horizontal dimension.
Two open and unobstructed passageways, each at least 14 feet high and
12 feet wide, to permit access by fire-fighting equipment, shall be
provided at ground level to any inner court.
A. The distance between two principal buildings on the same lot shall be
no less than the height of the taller building, except where a specific
minimum distance is established elsewhere in the Zoning Law for a
specific use. [Amended 8-21-2014 by L.L. No. 7-2014]
B. The distance between a principal building and an accessory building
shall be no less than the height of the accessory building but in no event
less than 15 feet.
§ 376-60 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 376-63
1:417
§ 376-63. Yards abutting railroad right-of-way, certain highways or
utility line.
No side yard or rear yard shall be required where such yard abuts the rightof-
way of a railroad, limited access highway or utility transmission line at
least 50 feet in width.
§ 376-64. Swimming pools.
No person shall maintain a swimming pool unless the safeguards set forth
herein are observed:
§ 376-65. Accessory apartments.
Accessory apartments in the R-15A and R-15C Zoning Districts are subject
to the following requirements:
A. All in-ground swimming pools shall be encompassed within a
permanent protective fence so that the entire perimeter of the
swimming pool shall be surrounded thereby. The fence must be
structurally sound, durable and maintained in such condition, not less
than 48 inches in height, with spaces not exceeding three inches
between the planks or linkage. The entrance gate or gates shall have a
self-latching device located at the top of the fence and, except for
ingress to and egress from the swimming pool area, must be kept closed
at all times.
B. Aboveground pools need not be fenced, provided that the pool itself is
so constructed that when not attended by a person of suitable age that
the steps or ladder to the pool shall be removed or raised in such
fashion so that access cannot be gained.
C. All fences and other safeguards referred to herein must be approved in
writing by the Building Inspector of the Town of Ramapo.
A. The owner of the dwelling units need not reside in either of the dwelling
units. [Amended 1-25-2012 by L.L. No. 1-2012]
B. Entrance(s) for the accessory apartment must be on the side or rear of
the principal dwelling. However, if more than one accessory apartment
is permitted in a three-family dwelling, then an additional front
entrance may be permitted if the Community Design Review
Committee, acting as the Architectural Review Board, pursuant to
Article X of this chapter, determines that the appearance of the building
will not materially differ from that of a three-family residence without
accessory apartments by use of common entrances or design features.
[Amended 4-25-2007 by L.L. No. 1-2007]
C. An accessory apartment can be up to 1,500 square feet and cannot
exceed 50% of the principal dwelling. [Amended 4-25-2007 by L.L.
No. 1-2007; 1-25-2012 by L.L. No. 1-2012; 2-13-2019 by L.L. No.
4-2019]
§ 376-63 RAMAPO CODE § 376-65
1:418
§ 376-66. Mixed use development.
D. The location of the accessory apartment may not extend beyond the
footprint of the principal dwelling.
E. Any exterior building alteration is subject to architectural review
pursuant to Article X.
F. (Reserved)34
G. Three-family residences. [Added 4-25-2007 by L.L. No. 1-2007]
(1) In the R-15C District, three-family detached residences constructed
in which each dwelling unit extends from foundation to roof
(townhouse style) are permitted to have one accessory apartment
per each dwelling unit.
(2) In the R-15C District, three-family semiattached residences
constructed in which each dwelling unit extends from foundation to
roof (townhouse style) and which are located on lots with a
minimum width of 75 feet are permitted to have one accessory
apartment per each dwelling unit.
(3) Three-family residences, either detached or semiattached, not
constructed as set forth above are permitted to contain only one
accessory apartment for the entire three-family residence.
H. In the R-15C District, three-family residences, either detached or
semiattached, shall contain parking spaces with a minimum width of
eight feet. [Added 4-25-2007 by L.L. No. 1-2007]
A. MU-1 development: A development that must consist of at least 60%
commercial and/or office uses and may contain up to 40% residential
uses.
(1) The maximum density for residential uses shall be eight residential
units per acre less the area designated for commercial and/or office
use. [Amended 6-14-2006 by L.L. No. 4-2006]
(2) All residential uses must be located above the first floor of the
mixed use building(s).
(3) All residential uses must have an entrance separate from the
commercial use.
(4) The maximum number of stories shall be three.
(5) The development must contain a centralized refuse collection area.
The collection area shall be properly designed and screened.
34.Editor's Note: Former Subsection F, added 4-25-2007 by L.L. No. 1-2007, was repealed
1-25-2012 by L.L. No. 1-2012.
§ 376-65 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 376-66
1:419
(6) Sidewalks are permitted to be located in the required front yard/
front setback.
(7) All buildings are subject to site development plan approval and
architectural review pursuant to this chapter.
(8) All buildings will be fully alarmed and sprinklered.
(9) All developments shall be suitably landscaped and designed to
accommodate pedestrian access.
(10) The minimum distance between buildings shall be 30 feet. [Added
6-14-2006 by L.L. No. 4-2006]
(11)No structure shall be closer than 25 feet to the pavement edge on
interior roadways. The Planning Board may modify where local
conditions warrant. [Added 6-14-2006 by L.L. No. 4-2006]
(12)No more than eight units may be linked together into a single
building or 16 units in a back-to-back configuration. [Added
6-14-2006 by L.L. No. 4-2006]
B. MU-2 development: A development that must consist of at least 50%
residential uses and must contain commercial and/or office uses of at
least 5% but not to exceed 50%.
(1) The maximum density for residential uses shall be 12 residential
units per acre less the area designated for commercial and/or office
use.
(2) The permissible type of residential uses can include garden
apartments, townhouses and multifamily dwellings or a
combination thereof.
(3) The maximum number of stories shall be four.
(4) Separate refuse collection areas must be provided for the
residential and commercial and/or office uses.
(5) The residential portion of the development shall comply with the
standards contained in § 376-163F, G, H, I, J, K and L.
(6) The minimum distance between buildings shall be 30 feet. [Added
6-14-2006 by L.L. No. 4-2006]
(7) No structure shall be close than 25 feet to the pavement edge on
interior roadways. [Added 6-14-2006 by L.L. No. 4-2006]
(8) No more than eight units may be linked together into a single
building unless modified by the Planning Board at the time of site
plan approval. [Added 6-14-2006 by L.L. No. 4-2006]
§ 376-66 RAMAPO CODE § 376-66
1:420
§ 376-67. (Reserved)35
§ 376-68. Secondary dwelling units. [Added 1-25-2012 by L.L. No.
1-2012]
(9) The Planning Board, at the time of site plan, shall establish the
minimum lot size, but at no time will the lot area be less than
follows: [Added 6-14-2006 by L.L. No. 4-2006]
(a) Townhouse: 2,500 square feet.
(b) Semiattached: 5,000 square feet.
(c) Detached: 10,000 square feet.
(10) All buildings will be fully alarmed and sprinklered. [Added
6-14-2006 by L.L. No. 4-2006]
A. A secondary dwelling unit may receive a separate certificate of
occupancy and be separately conveyed subject to the following:
[Amended 12-12-2018 by L.L. No. 7-2018]
(1) Application to the Director of Building, Planning and Zoning upon
forms prescribed by the Town Board and shall contain the
information required by the application and the required fee in
accordance with the Standard Schedule of Fees of the Town of
Ramapo.
(2) Dwelling unit was previously approved by the Town as an accessory
apartment.
(3) Application to the Assessor upon forms prescribed by the Town
Board and shall contain the information required by the application
and the required fee in accordance with the Standard Schedule of
Fees of the Town of Ramapo for issuance of an individual tax lot
number.
(4) Dwelling unit cannot be further subdivided.
(5) Submission of an affordability resale covenant recorded in the
Rockland County Clerk's office in a form approved by the Town
Attorney's office.
(6) Initial sale price. The "initial sale price" of a secondary dwelling
unit, whether converted from an accessory apartment or a newly
constructed dwelling unit that meets the requirements for an
accessory apartment, shall not exceed a sale price calculated as
follows: $160 per square foot of gross floor area of the secondary
dwelling unit multiplied by 110%. The Town Board may, by local
law, amend the initial sale price calculation of secondary dwelling
35.Editor’s Note: Former § 376-67, Temporary modular units; use for school, added 1-25-2012
by L.L. No. 1-2012, was repealed 12-6-2017 by L.L. No. 4-2017.
§ 376-66 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 376-68
1:421
units. However, it is intended that the initial sale price generally
reflect the average cost of construction of similar residences
regionally as determined by the Marshall & Swift Residential Cost
Handbook and/or other generally recognized sources of
construction costs which the Town Board in its discretion may rely
upon multiplied by a rate not to exceed 110%.
(7) Resale price. The resale price of a secondary dwelling unit shall not
exceed the initial selling price (or prior resale price) plus an
increase based upon the Consumer Price Index for All Urban
Consumers (CPI-U) in the New York - Northern New Jersey - Long
Island area calculated using the CPI for the month of December
following the prior sale, to the month of December preceding the
resale. Capital improvements to a unit shall not increase the
calculation of the maximum permitted resale price.
(8) Price certification. To ensure compliance with the affordability
provisions of this section, the seller of the secondary dwelling unit
must apply prior to the sale or resale of a unit to the Assessor of the
Town of Ramapo for a certification of the permitted initial sale price
or resale price. The application shall be on a prescribed form and
shall be accompanied by a fee in accordance with the Standard
Schedule of Fees for the Town of Ramapo. The certification shall be
issued by the Assessor within three business days after receipt of
the application, and a copy shall be filed with the Director of
Building, Planning and Zoning.
B. The sale and resale price restrictions shall expire 20 years after the
effective date of this section (§ 376-68 of the Zoning Law) unless
extended by local law.
§ 376-68 RAMAPO CODE § 376-68
1:422
ARTICLE VII
Parking and Loading
§ 376-70. Conformity with Use Table; exceptions.
The minimum number of accessory off-street parking spaces shall conform
to the requirements of § 376-31, Column F, except that:
§ 376-71. Location and site of parking spaces.
§ 376-72. General requirements.
A. The Planning Board, in conjunction with site development plan
approval, may permit a reduction in the number of developed parking
spaces where adequate accessible reserve areas are available and
designated on the plan as areas for overflow parking.
B. The Planning Board may reduce the required number of parking spaces
upon demonstration by the applicant that that number exceeds the
design hour requirement and a demonstration that such reduction
would not induce parking on public ways or result in hazardous
conditions for vehicles and pedestrians within or proximate to the site.
This reduction by the Planning Board may not exceed 25% of the
normally required amount.
A. Location. Areas which may be considered as open or enclosed off-street
parking spaces include any private garage, carport or other area
available for parking, other than a street, entrance and exit lanes or a
driveway, except that no vehicle shall be parked or stored in any
required yard or fire lane except as permitted by § 376-51D. A driveway
behind the front house line may be utilized as parking spaces for onefamily,
two-family, and three-family residences. All driveways shall
include an adequate turnaround area to preclude the need for backing
onto a public road. [Amended 6-14-2006 by L.L. No. 4-2006]
B. Size of spaces. Minimum parking stall width shall be nine feet.
A. Access. Unobstructed access to and from a street shall be provided for
nonresidential uses. Such access shall consist of at least one twelve-foot
lane for parking areas with 20 or fewer spaces and at least two twelvefoot
lanes for parking areas with over 20 spaces. Access to roads shall
include adequate turnaround area to preclude the need for backing out
onto the road right-of-way.
B. Drainage and surfacing. All open parking areas shall be properly
drained, and all such areas shall be provided with a dustless surface,
except that grassed areas may be used at the discretion of the Planning
Board.
C. Joint facilities. Required parking spaces, open or enclosed, may be
provided in spaces designated to serve jointly two or more uses or
owners, whether or not located on the same lot, provided that the
§ 376-70 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 376-72
1:423
§ 376-73. Parking spaces adjacent to lots in residence districts.
Wherever a parking area of over five spaces abuts or is within 15 feet of a
lot in any residence district, it shall be screened from such residential lot
by a substantial wall, fence and/or landscaping, approved by the Planning
Board.
§ 376-74. Driveways.
No driveway shall provide access to a lot located in a nonresidential district
across land in a residential district.
§ 376-75. Commercial vehicles.
number of required spaces in such joint facilities shall not be less than
the total required for all such uses.
D. Combined uses. When any lot contains two or more uses having
different parking requirements, the parking requirements for each use
shall apply to the extent of that use. Where one or more such uses will
be generating a demand for parking spaces primarily during periods
when the other use or uses is not or are not in operation, the Planning
Board may reduce the total parking spaces required by 50% of the
parking spaces required for that use with the least requirement.
E. Location and ownership. Required accessory parking spaces shall be
provided upon the same lot as the use to which they are accessory or on
a nearby lot, provided that all spaces on the second lot are located
within 400 feet walking distance of the original lot along the existing
road network. Parking spaces shall conform to all the requirements of
the district in which the parking spaces are located. In no event shall
such parking spaces be located in any residence district unless the use
to which the spaces are accessory is permitted in such residence
district. Such spaces shall be in the same ownership as the use to which
they are accessory and shall be subject to deed restriction in a form
approved by the Town Attorney, binding the owner and his heirs and
assigns to maintain the required number of spaces available, either
throughout the existence of the use to which they are accessory or until
such spaces are provided elsewhere.
F. On lots divided by district boundaries. When a parking lot is located
partly in one district and partly in another district, the regulations for
the district requiring the greatest number of parking spaces shall apply
to the entire lot. Parking spaces on such lot may be located without
regard to district lines, provided that such parking spaces shall not be
located in any residence district unless the use to which they are
accessory is permitted in such district.
A. Not more than one commercial vehicle, of 25 feet or less in length, may
be parked on a developed lot in any residence district, but not within
§ 376-72 RAMAPO CODE § 376-75
1:424
§ 376-76. Storage of house trailers and boats.
One house trailer, recreational vehicle or boat, and boat trailer may be
parked or stored in an unenclosed space on any developed residential
lot behind the front setback line or any required yard. All other parking,
storage or use of such vehicles is prohibited. The use of such a vehicle for
dwelling purposes is prohibited.
§ 376-77. Off-street loading berths.
the required yards of such lot and in no case between the street line
and the principal building.
B. Not more than one commercial vehicle of 25 feet or less in length may
be parked within a private garage in any residence district.
C. Commercial vehicles are permitted as accessory to a commercial farm
use in any residence district but shall not be stored or parked within
any required yard.
D. No commercial vehicle shall be parked or stored on any unimproved lot.
A. Off-street loading berths are required for all nonresidential structures
or uses. Nonresidential uses permitted in residential districts or mixed
use districts shall have one loading berth with minimum dimensions of
10 feet by 40 feet and a clear height of 15 feet for the first 20,000
square feet of gross floor area and one additional berth for each
additional 40,000 square feet of gross floor area or major portion
thereof. In NS and CS Districts, there shall be one loading berth with
minimum dimensions of 10 feet by 50 feet with a clear height of 15 feet
for the first 10,000 square feet of gross floor area and one additional
berth for each 20,000 square feet of gross floor area or major portion
thereof. In LO, PO and PI Districts, there shall be one loading berth with
minimum dimensions of 10 feet by 50 feet with a clear height of 15 feet
for the first 20,000 square feet of gross floor area and one additional
berth for each 40,000 square feet of gross floor area or major portion
thereof. The Planning Board may modify the minimum requirements
where necessary to ensure proper circulation and traffic safety or
where such change would not create future difficulties in the event that
the structures or uses are changed to any other use permitted by right
in the district.
B. Location and access. Unobstructed access, at least 12 feet wide, to and
from a street shall be provided to off-street loading berths. Such access
may be combined with access to parking areas. No off-street loading
berth shall be located between the street line and principal building. A
loading berth shall not be located in any required yard and shall be
screened where visible from any residential district boundary.
C. Joint facilities. Loading berths may be provided in spaces designed to
serve jointly two or more adjacent establishments, provided that the
§ 376-75 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 376-77
1:425
§ 376-78. Additional requirements.
number of required berths in such joint facilities shall not be less than
the aggregate of all such requirements.
D. On lots divided by district boundaries. When a lot is located partly in
one district and partly in another district, the regulations for the district
requiring the greater number of loading berths shall apply to the entire
lot. Loading berths on such lot may not be located in any residence
district unless the use to which they are accessory is permitted in such
district.
A. Access near street intersections. No entrance or exit for any accessory
off-street parking area with more than four parking spaces, nor for any
loading berth, shall be located closer than 75 feet to the intersection of
any two designated street lines as determined by the Official Map. This
distance shall be 100 feet for any signalized intersection or an
intersection providing for a designated left-turn lane on the same
intersection leg as the proposed access drive.
B. Screening. Parking areas with more than four spaces in a residential
district shall be screened from all property lines, including any roads
bordering the property. All parking areas and loading berths shall be
screened from any residential district boundary where visible. Such
screening shall not obstruct sight distance. The Planning Board may
require landscaping between nonresidential use parking areas to
prevent massing of such areas and to protect the character and
compatibility of adjacent uses.
C. Requirements for lighting. The Planning Board is empowered, subject
to § 376-190 and pursuant to § 274-a of the Town Law, to adopt rules
and regulations pertaining to lighting systems.
D. Regulations for parking spaces. The Planning Board is empowered,
subject to § 376-190, to adopt rules and regulations providing for
standard design of parking areas, including striping of stalls; provision
of vehicle stops; control of traffic movements; and specifications for
surfacing of required parking spaces.
§ 376-77 RAMAPO CODE § 376-78
1:426
ARTICLE VIII
Signs
§ 376-80. General requirements.
Pursuant to § 274-a of the Town Law, the Planning Board is authorized to
adopt, subject to § 376-190, site development plan rules and regulations
which shall include standards for signs and lighting. Signs heretofore
validly erected are permitted subject to the provisions of § 376-132.
§ 376-81. Permit required.
No sign shall hereafter be erected, re-erected, constructed, enlarged or
altered without a sign permit. No sign permit shall be issued except as
shown on an approved site development plan or sign plan. Where only the
sign display portion of a validly erected sign is being changed, no sign
permit is required. Signs conforming to the New York State Department of
Transportation Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices, and other traffic
regulatory signs shown on an approved site development plan or required
pursuant to the order of municipal traffic control agencies, shall be exempt
from the requirement for sign permits. Political and temporary signs as
provided for in Chapter 223, Signs, Article I, Temporary Signs, of the Code
of the Town of Ramapo shall comply with the provisions of said chapter.
§ 376-82. Prohibited signs.
Any signs not expressly permitted by this chapter are prohibited. Additional
types of signs that are prohibited include:
A. Flashing signs, including any sign or device on which the artificial light
is not maintained stationary and constant in intensity and color at all
times when in use.
B. Exterior advertising signs and billboards.
C. Signs representing or depicting to any degree official traffic signs or
signals.
D. Signs which emit noise, sounds or smoke.
E. Animated signs, whether by mechanical or electrical processes,
including signs with banners, streamers, spinners or other
paraphernalia attached to or associated with such signs.
F. Signs of a prurient nature or advertising businesses, commodities or
services of a prurient nature or any unlawful business or undertaking.
G. Illuminated signs outlining any part of a building, such as a gable, roof,
sidewall or corner.
H. Signs made of cardboard, paper or similar impermanent material,
except as may be permitted pursuant to Chapter 223, Signs, Article I,
Temporary Signs, of the Code of the Town of Ramapo.
§ 376-80 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 376-82
1:427
§ 376-83. Application procedure.
§ 376-84. Criteria for granting sign approval.
The Planning Board, in promulgating site development plan rules and
regulations, shall provide for a limitation on the size of signs, type and
characteristics of illumination, number and location, taking into
consideration the uses on the site and the reasonable requirement for
communicating information to the vehicular or pedestrian public. The
Planning Board and/or the Community Design Review Committee shall
consider the following supplemental use criteria in granting any approvals
for signs:
I. Signs mounted on parked vehicles or trailers or other similar mobile
advertising media.
J. Signs which project over a street.
K. Signs obstructing traffic visibility. No freestanding sign shall be erected
or maintained in the shaded area shown in Sketch A referred to in
§ 376-51C,36 as such shaded area relates to the intersection of two
streets or to the intersection of a driveway with a street.
A. No sign permit will be issued except in accordance with a sign plan
approval or a site development plan approval. After such approval, an
application for a sign permit shall be made to the Director of Building,
Planning and Zoning on forms prescribed by the Director of Building,
Planning and Zoning and shall contain the information specified in the
site development plan rules and regulations. All applications shall be
accompanied by the required fee in accordance with the Standard
Schedule of Fees of the Town of Ramapo.
B. The Building Inspector, upon receipt of an application for a sign permit,
shall review the same. If the sign requested has been approved on a site
development plan or a sign plan, the Building Inspector shall issue a
sign permit.
C. If there is no sign plan approval or site plan approval, the applicant
must submit an application to the Director of Building, Planning and
Zoning for either site development plan approval or sign plan approval,
whichever is applicable. In the case of a sign which is not submitted as
part of a site development plan, a sign plan for such sign shall be
subject to review and approval by the Community Design Review
Committee. Upon the granting of a site development plan or a sign plan
approval, a copy of the approved plan shall be transmitted to the
Building Inspector.
36.Editor's Note: Said sketch is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 376-82 RAMAPO CODE § 376-84
1:428
§ 376-85. Enforcement.
A. Signs must be clearly accessory to the use or uses upon the same lot,
and such signs and lighting must be shown to be essential to the
conduct of the principal use upon the lot.
B. The size and content of the sign shall be the minimum essential for
legibility and for the provision of information to patrons seeking the
particular use described on such sign.
C. The sign content shall not hawk or peddle and must clearly provide only
the information necessary to identify the use upon the lot.
D. The sign shall not be confused with any traffic signal or other safety
device nor be composed of elements depicting in exaggerated size or
grotesque style the use upon the lot.
E. All signs, together with their supportings, braces, guys, anchors, etc.,
shall be kept in repair and in a proper state of preservation. The display
surfaces of all signs shall be kept neatly painted or maintained at all
times.
A. Applicability. Any sign not in conformity with such an approved sign
permit shall be deemed a violation of this chapter. No sign permit shall
hereafter be approved or issued except in conformity with the
requirements of this chapter and the site development plan rules and
regulations. No permit shall be issued for any sign except in conformity
with an approved sign plan or site development plan.
B. Removal of certain signs. Any sign now or hereafter existing which no
longer identifies a use on the subject premises, or is not being
maintained, shall be taken down and removed by the owner, agent or
person having the beneficial use of the building or structure upon which
such sign may be found within 10 days after written notification from
the Building Inspector, and, upon failure to comply with such notice
within the time specified in such order, the Building Inspector is hereby
authorized to cause removal of such obsolete or dangerous sign.
C. Dangerous signs. Should a sign be or become insecure or in danger of
falling or otherwise unsafe in the opinion of the Building Inspector, the
owner thereof or person maintaining the same shall, upon receipt of
written notice from the Building Inspector and in any case within five
days thereafter, secure the same in a manner to be approved by the
Building Inspector. If such order is not complied with, the Building
Inspector is hereby authorized to cause removal of such dangerous
sign, and any expense incident thereto shall be paid by the owner of the
building, structure or premises on which such sign is located. The cost
of removal shall constitute a lien on the real property on which it is
levied until paid or otherwise cancelled pursuant to law and shall be
collected in the manner fixed by law for the collection of Town taxes.
When any sign is in such dangerous condition as to be immediately
§ 376-84 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 376-85
1:429
§ 376-86. Nonconforming signs.
Any sign which was in existence prior to the effective date of this chapter,
and which conformed to the applicable provisions of the 1969 Zoning
Ordinance and the Sign Code (Local Law No. 2 of 1968) but which does
not conform to the applicable provisions of this chapter, shall be deemed
nonconforming, and the display of such sign shall be permitted to continue.
All other signs which have been erected but fail to comply with the
requirements of the 1969 Zoning Ordinance or Sign Code shall have six
months after the effective date of this chapter to be brought into compliance
or removed.
dangerous to the safety of the public, the Building Inspector is hereby
authorized to take such action as in his opinion shall be necessary to
protect the public or property.
§ 376-85 RAMAPO CODE § 376-86
1:430
ARTICLE IX
Site Development Plan Review
§ 376-90. Approval required; exceptions.
No site development plan approval shall be required for one- or two- or
three family residential uses or for additions, alterations or structures
accessory thereto, except as provided for conversions of single-family
residences in the R-15C District in § 376-98. No site development plan
approval shall be required for caretaker's cottages, servants quarters, guest
houses and separate living quarters having a separate kitchen within a
one-family residence in the RR-160 and RR-80 Districts. All other principal
uses shall require a site development plan approval prior to the issuance
of a building permit, certificate of occupancy or certificate of use. No lot
or parcel of land shall be used except in conformity with an approved site
development plan, when required.
§ 376-91. Objectives.
In considering and acting upon site development plans, the Planning Board
shall take into consideration the public health, safety and welfare, the
comfort and convenience of the public in general and of the prospective
occupants of the proposed development and of the immediate neighborhood
in particular and may prescribe such appropriate conditions and safeguards
as may be required in order to further the expressed intent of this chapter
and accomplish the following objectives in particular:
A. Traffic access. All proposed traffic access will be adequate but not
excessive in number; adequate in width, grade, alignment and visibility;
not located too near street corners or other major access points; and
other similar safety considerations.
B. Circulation and parking. Adequate off-street parking and loading
spaces will be provided to prevent parking of vehicles on public streets.
The interior circulation system will be adequate to provide safe
accessibility to all required off-street parking.
C. Landscaping and screening. All recreation areas, parking and service
areas will be reasonably screened from the view of adjacent residential
lots and streets at all seasons of the year.
D. Compatibility. Signs and lights will be compatible and in scale with
building elements and will not predominate the overall visual impact of
the project. Textures of buildings and paved areas will be sufficiently
varied to prevent a massive or monolithic appearance, particularly
areas of asphaltic paving for parking.
E. Environment. The design, layout and operational characteristics of the
proposed use will not represent significant impact on the environment
or result in a waste of the land and other natural resources of the Town.
To the greatest possible extent, development will be in harmony with
§ 376-90 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 376-91
1:431
§ 376-92. Procedures.
§ 376-93. Informal submission review.
the natural environment and adequate compensatory devices will be
prescribed to offset potential significant deterioration resulting from
the project.
F. Development. The site development plan elements, including buildings,
parking, drainage, circulation, signs and lighting, will not adversely
affect the potential of adjacent properties or the property under review
from its highest and best use.
A. Prior to application for a building permit, certificate of occupancy or
certificate of use, where required, site development plan approval shall
be secured from the Planning Board. The applicant has the option of
choosing between a formal application for approval and an informal
submission for review. The site development plan rules and regulations
provide detailed specifications as to application materials. For purposes
of an informal submission, the applicant should provide as much
information as he can, keeping in mind the specific criteria specified in
the site development plan rules and regulations. The preapplication
review by the Planning Board shall not constitute a formal application,
and no approval can be granted based on it. At this time the applicant
should outline any modifications he is requesting from the
requirements specified in the site development plan rules and
regulations.
B. Submissions for site development plan review shall be made on forms
prescribed by the Planning Board and accompanied by a fee in
accordance with the Standard Schedule of Fees of the Town of Ramapo.
Such submission shall be submitted to the Director of Building,
Planning and Zoning, or his agent, at least three weeks prior to the
Planning Board meeting at which review is sought. The Director of
Building, Planning and Zoning, or his agent, shall determine if the
submission is in proper form and if so shall cause it to be referred to
such Town department, agencies and consultants as are necessary to
evaluate the proposal and shall cause a consolidated report to be
prepared by the Community Design Review Committee for the next
available Planning Board agenda. Applications not in proper form shall
be rejected, in writing, within 10 days after submission. A copy of such
rejection shall be sent to the Planning Board.
A. An applicant, at his discretion, may submit, prior to a formal application
for final site development plan approval, an application for informal
review. The applicant shall submit all application materials provided for
in the site development plan rules and regulations in as much detail as
he feels is warranted to enable the Planning Board to come to an
informal conclusion as to the merits of the proposal. Should variances
from the requirements of this chapter be contemplated, their nature
§ 376-91 RAMAPO CODE § 376-93
1:432
§ 376-94. Final review and approvals.
and degree should be specified. The application for informal review
shall be made and processed in the manner specified in § 376-92B.
B. The Planning Board will review the proposed plan and may grant
informal concept approval with such conditions as are necessary to
ensure conformity of said plans with the general and specific criteria
set forth in this chapter and other applicable rules and regulations of
the Town of Ramapo. In reviewing a site development plan application
which has been granted a special permit by the Town Board, the
Planning Board shall ensure conformity with any special permit
requirements.
A. An application for final site development plan approval shall be made in
the same manner as prescribed for preliminary approval as specified in
the site development plan rules and regulations.
B. The final site development plan and all supporting materials shall be
subject to review and consultation in the same manner as the
preliminary site development plan, and a consolidated report shall be
prepared and submitted to the Planning Board by the Community
Design Review Committee. The Board shall make a determination on
the application within 62 days of the close of the public hearing. In the
event no determination is made within 62 days and the applicant has
not waived the time requirements, the application shall be deemed
approved. The Board shall include such conditions of approval as were
required and in addition:
(1) The Planning Board shall require that on- or off-site improvements
be installed, including but not limited to on- or off-site drainage
systems, to ensure that all drainage, storm runoff and subsurface
waters are carried into approved watercourses and drainage
systems shown on the Official Map. The Planning Board shall
further require that all such off-site improvements and/or drainage
systems be installed on property granted to the Town by fee,
easement or otherwise, as determined by the Planning Board.
(2) No certificate of occupancy or use shall be issued for the site until
all the improvements shown on the site development plan,
including off-site requirements, required by the site development
plan have been duly installed and all easements and property
interests granted or dedicated to the Town.
(3) A partial certificate of occupancy or use for periods of 90 days, but
not more than one year in the aggregate, for a building, structure
or part thereof may be issued before all the on-site improvements
are complete; provided, nonetheless, that such portion or portions
of the site improvements as are necessary to permit the site to be
occupied safely without endangering life or the public welfare have
been completed. The Building Inspector shall require a cash
§ 376-93 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 376-94
1:433
§ 376-95. Signing and filing.
Upon submission of the final site development plan with modifications
required by the Planning Board in its final approval, and upon satisfaction of
any conditions imposed by such approval, the Director of Building, Planning
and Zoning, and the Chairman of the Planning Board shall sign the
approved site plan and file one copy with the Building Inspector, who may
thereafter issue a building permit, certificate of occupancy and certificate of
use in reliance thereon in accordance with Article XIV. A site plan approval
shall be valid for a period of 18 months unless a building permit has been
issued.
§ 376-96. Amendments to approved plans.
An application for an amendment of any approved site development plan for
a site which has received prior final site development plan approval shall
be processed in accordance with the preceding provisions. However, only
those site development plan elements proposed to be modified or changed
need be presented, except where such modifications or changes have a
material and substantial impact on the balance of the site development plan
and functioning of the site. The applicant's licensed design professional
shall submit a letter, and a drawing when necessary, indicating the scope
of the proposed change no later than 20 days before a Planning Board
meeting for a determination by the Planning Board as to whether the
proposed amendment shall require a public hearing. Fees for an amended
site development plan approval shall be in accordance with the Standard
Schedule of Fees of the Town of Ramapo.
§ 376-97. Site maintenance.
It shall be the duty of every property owner to maintain his property in
conformity with the approved site development plan. Failure to do so shall
constitute a violation of this chapter.
deposit or letter of credit or such other security as may be
approved by the Town Attorney to ensure and guarantee the
completion of the on-site improvements. The Building Inspector
shall determine the sum of such cash deposit or letter of credit or
other security.
(4) The site shall be developed in strict conformity with the approved
site development plan except as provided for below. When the
approval of a field change (see definition of "field change") is
requested of the Building Inspector or other appropriate Town
inspection agency, such request shall be submitted to the
appropriate inspecting agency in writing. No field change shall be
valid unless a copy of the requested change is filed with the
Planning Board, with the approval of the appropriate agency noted
thereon or appended thereto, within five days of such approval.
§ 376-94 RAMAPO CODE § 376-98
1:434
§ 376-98. Plot plan review for residential conversions in R-15C
District.
The applicant must submit an application to the Director of Building,
Planning and Zoning for plot plan approval. Such plot plan, together with
the application, shall be subject to review by the Community Design Review
Committee, whose review shall be based upon the criteria listed in § 376-99.
Upon reviewing the plot plan, a consolidated report shall be prepared and
submitted to the Building Inspector. The Building Inspector may require
the applicant to submit whatever information is necessary to make this
determination. The Building Inspector shall make a determination on the
application based on the criteria listed in § 376-99 and the report prepared
by the Community Design Review Committee. However, the Building
Inspector may at any time refer the application to the Planning Board for its
review and recommendations.
§ 376-99. Development plan approval criteria for residential
conversion uses in R-15C District.
A. Plot plan application materials. The application submitted by the
applicant shall comply with the provisions of the site development plan
rules and regulations for R-15C conversions.
B. All dwelling units shall comply with the applicable requirements of the
New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code, as
amended, and Chapter 144, Fire Prevention, of the Code of the Town of
Ramapo. [Amended 6-14-2006 by L.L. No. 4-2006]
C. The residence must have at least one off-street parking space for each
dwelling unit on the same lot as the residence, which shall conform to
the requirements of this chapter. The location of the parking spaces
shall be shown on the plot plan submitted with the application.
D. The minimum floor area for a dwelling unit shall be 450 square feet
unless a lesser amount of floor area is warranted by the particular
circumstances of the particular dwelling unit.
E. The entrances to each residence and its design after conversion shall be
such that, to the degree reasonably feasible, the appearance of the
residence will remain in its original state.
F. No dwelling unit shall be located in an attic or in a detached accessory
structure.
G. Each dwelling unit shall be equipped with smoke detectors and carbon
monoxide detectors installed at the top of stairways or in bedroom
entrances.
H. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, roomers and
boarders are not permitted as part of residential conversion uses in the
R-15C District.
§ 376-98 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 376-99
1:435

ARTICLE X
Architectural Review
§ 376-100. Purpose.
To ensure high standards for the visual environment of the Town of Ramapo,
architectural review is to be conducted by the Town's Community Design
Review Committee (CDRC) as an integral part of the building, planning and
zoning process. Such an architectural review will promote and protect the
health, safety, economic and general welfare of the community. Effective
action by the CDRC in inhibiting development deleterious to the visual
environment will prevent loss of tax revenue to the Town of Ramapo and
will prevent destruction of the proper balance between the taxable value of
real property and the cost of Town services provided therefor. It is the intent
of the Town Board to prevent excessive uniformity of exterior building
design in commercial and residential structures where such uniformity shall
be deemed inappropriate and detrimental to the visual environment. It is
also the intent of the Town Board to prevent excessive dissimilarity of
exterior building design in commercial and residential structures where
such dissimilarity shall be deemed inappropriate and detrimental to the
visual environment. It is the intent of the Town Board to preserve the
aesthetic value of natural and man-made features and structures and to
prevent the harmful effects of potentially unattractive or inappropriate
projects and the use of potentially unattractive or inappropriate building
materials insofar as they may affect the visual environment. The Town
Board finds that it benefits the interest of public welfare to ensure high
standards of quality of design for commercial, industrial and residential
structures, exterior landscaping and development planning and, by this
article, seeks to achieve these stated purposes.
§ 376-101. Community Design Review Committee.
In addition to its other functions, the CDRC shall act as an architectural
board of review. When meeting in its architectural review capacity, a
majority of its members shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of
business. A vote of the majority of the Committee is required for the
Committee to act. A record of its proceedings shall be maintained. The
CDRC shall operate under such rules and regulations as it may adopt insofar
as they do not supersede any requirements of this article and insofar as they
guarantee due process to any applicant. The CDRC shall schedule meetings
at regular intervals and in accordance with all provisions of the New York
State Open Meetings Law.37 The Committee members shall designate a
Chairperson from among its members.
§ 376-102. Jurisdiction.
A. The CDRC shall conduct an architectural review and advise on all plans
in the following categories:
37.Editor's Note: See Public Officers Law § 100 et seq.
§ 376-100 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 376-102
1:437
§ 376-103. Review procedures.
(1) Plans for all nonresidential structures requiring a certificate of
occupancy or use.
(2) Plans for all residential structures, except single-family detached
residences and accessory structures to single-family detached or
single-family semiattached residences, except as provided in
Subsection A(3) below.
(3) Plans for new residential structures in proposed subdivisions filed
with the Planning Board. These structures shall include singlefamily
detached residences and accessory structures to singlefamily
detached or single-family semiattached residences.
[Amended 8-15-2013 by L.L. No. 5-2013]
(4) Plans for new residential structures in approved subdivisions
where building permits have not been obtained by the effective
date of this chapter, except single-family detached residences and
accessory structures to single-family detached or single-family
semiattached residences.
(5) Plans not bearing the seal of an architect registered in the State of
New York.
(6) Plans for exterior alterations or exterior additions to residential or
commercial structures for which the Building Inspector estimates
the cost to be in excess of $15,000.
(7) All site development plans submitted to the Planning Board.
[Amended 8-15-2013 by L.L. No. 5-2013]
(8) Petitions for special permit uses when CDRC advice on such a
petition is requested by the Town Board.
(9) Plans or proposals which in the opinion of the Building Inspector
violate the spirit and intent of this chapter.
(10) Plans in which approval of design and specifications have been
legally and specifically delegated to the Town Board and/or the
Planning Board may be exempt from mandated CDRC review with
the exception of site plan approvals as designated in Subsection
A(6) above. The Town Board and/or Planning Board may, in its
discretion, request CDRC review in the case of such plans.
B. Where architectural review and approval is required, no building
permit may be issued by the Building Inspector until such approval is
obtained.
A. Where architectural review is required, an applicant should apply as
soon as practicable to enable a prompt review by CDRC and to enable
coordination of review and decisions by the CDRC and other approving
§ 376-102 RAMAPO CODE § 376-103
1:438
bodies or officials, as may be appropriate. [Amended 8-15-2013 by
L.L. No. 5-2013]
B. The CDRC shall render its decision on the basis of its adopted rules and
regulations with full regard to all requirements of due process and the
following guidelines. The Director of Building, Planning and Zoning
shall assist the applicant and shall collate essential plans and
information already filed with the Planning Board or Building
Department for the purpose of presenting cases to the CDRC. Such
essential plans and information shall include, but not necessarily be
limited to: [Amended 8-15-2013 by L.L. No. 5-2013]
(1) Planning Board file.
(2) Building Department file, including files on all previously approved
buildings in the subdivision.
(3) Scale materials and elevations showing the nature of construction
and the use of materials to be incorporated in the exterior of the
project.
(4) Site plan, at a scale deemed appropriate by the Building Inspector,
showing contours at two-foot intervals and the project location,
including all setbacks, yards, driveways, parking areas and
adjacent homes.
(5) Area map showing surrounding streets and lots, at a scale deemed
appropriate by the Building Inspector.
(6) Three-dimensional sketch or rendering illustrating significant
aspects of construction and exterior design, when deemed
necessary or useful and requested by the CDRC and at a scale
deemed appropriate by the CDRC.
C. The Building Inspector shall encourage submission by applicants of
preliminary designs for CDRC review and comment prior to final design
submission to avoid the financial burden of completing drawings or
designs that may be questionable.
D. An application fee in accordance with the Standard Schedule of Fees of
the Town of Ramapo shall be submitted to the Building Department by
owner.
E. The CDRC shall make every effort to avoid undue financial hardship on
any applicant in support of the intent of this chapter. However, the
factor of increased construction cost will not automatically be
considered indicative of undue hardship or excessive standards. It is
not the responsibility of the CDRC to provide design services to
applicants. Design guidelines as may be adopted by the Town shall be
made available to all applicants.
F. Any plan disapproved by the CDRC and accompanied by the report
surrounding that disapproval shall be returned to the applicant by the
§ 376-103 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 376-103
1:439
§ 376-104. Decision process; actions following decisions.
Building Inspector. It is the intent of this chapter that such a plan be
resubmitted to the CDRC for reconsideration and approval when it has
been appropriately modified to meet stated objections.
G. Failure of the CDRC to report to the referring agency and/or the Town
Clerk within 45 days of its first regular meeting following receipt of an
application and all necessary plans and information required for
approval shall be construed as indication that the CDRC has no
objection to the proposal and intends to issue its approval.
H. Any substantial change in siting or in the exterior appearance of an
approved project may be subject to review and reconsideration by the
CDRC at the discretion of the Building Inspector.
A. The CDRC shall report its decision on each case referred to it, in
writing, within 45 days of its first regular meeting following receipt of
application for approval. Copies of such reports are to be distributed to
any agency of the Town of Ramapo concerned with the project under
consideration. A copy of each such report shall be placed in the Building
Department file.
B. The CDRC may make the following findings:
(1) "Approved." This finding shall be indicative that the plan will not be
detrimental to the visual environment, meets the standards
required by the Town of Ramapo and may proceed through
prescribed channels with the approval of the CDRC.
(2) "Approved with conditions." This finding shall be indicative that the
plan will meet the standards of the "approved" category with minor
adjustments. Projects in this category may be issued a building
permit with the requirement that those adjustments be made and
documented to the satisfaction of the Building Inspector. Further
review and approval by the CDRC shall not be required.
(3) "Action reserved." This finding shall be indicative that insufficient
information is available to the CDRC for a final decision. In such a
case, the CDRC shall indicate what additional information is
required. Upon receipt by the Building Inspector of the additional
data from the applicant, the matter shall be placed on the CDRC
agenda for further consideration at the earliest possible time.
(4) "Disapproved." This finding shall be indicative that the plan is
found to be detrimental to the visual environment and beneath the
standards of design required by the Town of Ramapo. The
disapproved plan is to be returned to the applicant and to the
referring agency, accompanied by a written explanation of the
reasons for the disapproval.
§ 376-103 RAMAPO CODE § 376-104
1:440
§ 376-105. Authority.
The CDRC shall have no powers of enforcement other than its mandate to
approve or disapprove plans presented to it. Unless repudiated by appeal,
as outlined in § 376-106 of this chapter, decisions of the CDRC represent
the official position of the Town of Ramapo and its elected Town Board in
the effort to maintain high standards for the visual environment as noted in
§ 376-100 of this chapter.
§ 376-106. Appeals.
Any person aggrieved by an action of the CDRC may take an appeal
therefrom to the Zoning Board of Appeals of the Town of Ramapo in the
same manner as is provided for in the case of appeals regarding zoning
C. The CDRC may make a determination of excessive similarity or
excessive dissimilarity under one or more of the following conditions:
(1) Excessive similarity to any other structure existing or for which a
building permit has been issued or to any other structure included
in the same permit application, facing upon the same or
intersecting street and within 1,000 feet of the proposed site as
measured along the center lines of streets in residential districts
and within 500 feet of the proposed site in any district other than
residential, in respect to one or more of the following features of
exterior design or appearance: apparently identical front, side or
other elevation visible from a street; substantially identical size and
arrangement of either doors, windows, porticos or other openings
or breaks in the elevation facing the street, including reverse
arrangement; other significant identical features of design,
including but not limited to material, roofline, height or other
design elements, provided that a finding of excessive similarity
shall not only state that such similarity exists but that it is of such a
nature as to be reasonably expected to cause one or more of the
harmful effects as described in § 376-100 of this chapter.
(2) Excessive dissimilarity or inappropriateness in relation to any other
structures existing or for which a building permit has been issued
or to any other structure included in the same permit application,
facing upon the same or intersecting street within 1,000 feet of the
proposed site as measured along the center lines of streets in a
residential district and within 500 feet of a proposed site in any
district other than residential, in respect to one or more of the
following features: cubical contents, gross floor area, height and
other significant design features, included but not limited to
materials or quality of architectural design, provided that a finding
of excessive dissimilarity shall not only state that such dissimilarity
exists but that it is of such a nature as to be reasonably expected to
cause one or more of the harmful effects as described in § 376-100
of this chapter.
§ 376-104 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 376-106
1:441
requirements. The Zoning Board of Appeals, after proceeding in the same
manner as is provided for other appeals before it and with the same power
and authority now vested in it under the provisions of law, may affirm,
modify or reverse an appeal action of the CDRC.
§ 376-106 RAMAPO CODE § 376-106
1:442
ARTICLE XI
Planning Board Special Permits
§ 376-110. Approval by Planning Board required; conditions.
The uses listed in § 376-31, Use Table, Column C, are special permits
permitted only upon approval by the Planning Board in accordance with the
procedures and standards herein. After approval, such uses shall be deemed
permitted uses in the districts wherein located, subject to any conditions
attached thereto.
§ 376-111. Applications.
Application for special permits pursuant to this chapter shall be on forms
prescribed by the Planning Board. Such application shall accompany the
application for final site development plan approval. The final site
development plan and special permit application may be processed
concurrently in accordance with § 376-92 et seq. Fees for special permit
applications shall be in accordance with the Standard Schedule of Fees of
the Town of Ramapo. Notwithstanding the above, no application for site
development plan approval will be required with special permit applications
for caretaker's cottages, servants quarters, guest houses, or separate living
quarters having a second kitchen within a one-family residence in the RR-80
and RR-160 Districts.
§ 376-112. Timetable and public hearing.
Within 90 days of receipt of the application in proper form, together with
the final site development plan, the Planning Board shall approve
establishment of such uses upon determining compliance with conditions
required by this chapter and, where appropriate, modify the nature or
extent of the proposed use and development of the project to be consistent
with this chapter or, on negative findings, fully set forth in the record,
shall deny such use. The Planning Board shall provide for public notice
and hearing on any application for special permit. Such hearing shall be
scheduled within 62 days of the receipt of all required materials in proper
form and the Board shall decide the matter within 62 days after the close of
the hearing. The time periods herein may be extended by mutual consent of
the Board and applicant.
§ 376-113. Application procedures.
An applicant for a special permit shall, simultaneously with the filing of such
application, file an application for site development plan approval with the
Director of Building, Planning and Zoning together with appropriate plans,
drawings and fee for site development plan review. Thereafter and before
any consideration or review of the application for such special permit the
Director of Building, Planning and Zoning shall refer said application to the
Community Design Review Committee which shall review the application
for purposes of preliminary site development plan review and in light of
§ 376-110 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 376-113
1:443
the general considerations and specific standards herein. Thereafter, the
Community Design Review Committee shall transmit its recommendations
to the Planning Board within a reasonable time after completion by the
Community Design Review Committee of its review. Following the granting
of such special permit, the application shall be considered by the Planning
Board for final site development plan approval.
§ 376-114. Decisions.
The Planning Board shall cause to be filed with the Director of Building,
Planning and Zoning, the Town Clerk and Building Inspector the decision
of the Planning Board and a copy thereof to be mailed to the applicant.
Special permit approval shall be deemed to be indefinite authorization
unless otherwise specified in the approval thereof but, in any case, shall
expire within 18 months of the date of approval unless a building permit
has been issued for the special permit. Such period may be extended on
separate application to the Planning Board.
§ 376-115. Appeals.
Any person aggrieved by any decision of the Planning Board may apply to
the Supreme Court of the State of New York for review by a proceeding
under Article 78 of the Civil Practice Law and Rules, within 30 days after
the filing of a decision in the office of the Town Clerk.
§ 376-113 RAMAPO CODE § 376-115
1:444
ARTICLE XII
Special Permit Standards - Planning Board
§ 376-120. General conditions.
Prior to approving any special permit, the Planning Board shall determine
the conformity of such use and the proposed development therefor with
conditions and standards as set forth in this chapter, including the
conditions and standards as set forth for site development plans. The
Planning Board may adopt additional rules and regulations pursuant to
§ 376-190 of this chapter. Conditions prerequisite to approval of such uses
are of a general and specific nature. In various provisions of this chapter,
specific standards are enumerated for certain uses, which standards shall
be the minimum conditions for such use. The general conditions and
standards for special permit approval are as follows:
A. The proposed use shall be of such location, size and character that it
will be in harmony with the appropriate and orderly development of the
district in which it is proposed to be situated and not be detrimental to
the site or adjacent properties in accordance with the zoning
classification of such properties.
B. The location and size of such use, the nature and intensity of operations
involved in or conducted in connection therewith, its site layout and its
relation to access streets shall be such that both pedestrian and
vehicular traffic to and from the use and the assembly of persons in
connection therewith will not be hazardous.
C. The location and height of buildings, the location, nature and height of
walls and fences and the nature and extent of landscaping on the site
shall be such that the use will not hinder or discourage the development
and use of adjacent land and buildings.
D. The proposed use will not require such additional public facilities or
services, or create such fiscal burdens upon the Town greater than
those which characterize uses permitted by right.
E. As a condition of all special permits, right of entry for inspection with
reasonable notice shall be provided for to determine compliance with
the conditions of said permit.
F. As a condition of all special permits, a time limitation may be imposed.
G. In addition to the general standards for special permits as set forth
above, the approving board may, as a condition of approval of any such
use, establish any other additional standards, conditions and
requirements, including a limitation on hours of operation, as it may
deem necessary or appropriate to promote the public health, safety and
welfare and to otherwise implement the intent of this chapter.
§ 376-120 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 376-121
1:445
§ 376-121. Dormitories.
Dormitories are permitted only as accessory uses to schools of general or
religious instruction, subject to the following supplemental requirements:
A. Institutional use dormitory. [Amended 6-14-2006 by L.L. No.
4-2006]
(1) A dormitory is permitted as a freestanding building on a lot which
also contains a building utilized as a school or a portion of a
building used for a school. The number of student residents may
not exceed the occupancy permitted in the school.
(2) The minimum distance between any dormitory and any interior
driveway shall be 25 feet.
(3) The maximum height of any dormitory shall be three stories and 40
feet.
(4) No dormitory or dwelling unit shall be permitted in any
nonhabitable space.
(5) All dormitories shall be equipped with sprinkler, fire alarm and
carbon monoxide systems in accordance with Chapter 144, Fire
Prevention.
(6) A minimum buffer of 25 feet shall be provided, except for the R-15A
and R-15C Zoning Districts, where a minimum buffer of 15 feet
shall be provided.
(7) As a condition of the special permit, the Planning Board may
require adequate screening and landscaping between the
dormitory and any abutting residential use.
(8) The minimum distance between a dormitory and any other building
on the lot shall be equal to the height of the highest adjoining wall.
(9) Use Groups.
(a) In the RR-160, RR-80 and R-50 Zoning Districts, Use Group "c"
shall apply.
(b) In the R-40, R-40A, R-35, R-25 and R-15 Zoning Districts, Use
Group "e-1" shall apply.
(c) In the R-15A, R-15C and R-15MR Zoning Districts, Use Group
"s-1" shall apply.
B. Single use dormitory.
(1) Such dormitory is permitted as the sole use on a lot, provided that
it is accessory to a school of general or religious instruction located
within 1,000 feet. The number of student residents may not exceed
§ 376-121 RAMAPO CODE § 376-121
1:446
§ 376-122. Hotels. [Amended 9-8-2014 by L.L. No. 8-2014]
the occupancy permitted in the school. [Amended 6-14-2006 by
L.L. No. 4-2006]
(2) The maximum height of any dormitory shall be 35 feet.
(3) No dormitory room or dwelling unit shall be permitted in any
nonhabitable space.
(4) All dormitories shall be equipped with sprinkler and fire alarm
systems in accordance with Chapter 144, Fire Prevention, of the
Code of the Town of Ramapo.
(5) As a condition of the special permit, the Planning Board may
require adequate screening and landscaping between the
dormitory and any abutting residential use.
(6) The minimum distance between a dormitory and any other building
on the lot shall be equal to the height of the highest adjoining wall.
(7) Said dormitory is permitted only in the R-15A and R-15C Zoning
Districts, and Use Group "x-1" shall apply, except that the FAR shall
not exceed 0.75. [Amended 6-14-2006 by L.L. No. 4-2006]
A. Hotel units shall not be used as apartments for nontransient tenants.
B. Each hotel room shall have an area of at least 300 square feet. Each
hotel unit shall have a bath facility with shower or bath, one toilet
facility and sink.
C. Each hotel shall have, within the building, a lobby for receiving guests
of the hotel, and an office for hotel management.
D. The following accessory uses shall be permitted:
(1) One apartment with or without kitchen facilities for the use of the
hotel manager or caretaker and his family within the hotel building.
(2) One coffee shop for hotels with no more than 100 rooms. For hotels
of over 100 rooms, a restaurant and a coffee shop are permitted.
Such facilities shall be located within the hotel building.
(3) Amusements and sports facilities for the exclusive use of hotel
guests, including:
(a) Swimming pool.
(b) Children's playground.
(c) Tennis and other game courts.
(d) Game or recreation rooms.
(4) Meeting and/or conference rooms.
§ 376-121 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 376-122
1:447
§ 376-123. Animal kennels.
The harboring, boarding or training of animals, except as otherwise
provided in § 376-31, Use Table, whether enclosed in a structure or on open
land and whether or not accessory to other principal uses of the land, shall
be conducted in accordance with the following general standards:
§ 376-124. Stables and riding academies.
(5) A multilevel parking garage. If a multilevel parking garage is
proposed, minimum required setbacks and yards shall be reduced
by 50%.
(6) For any downtown hotel, any retail uses allowed in the CS District
may be located on the street level as accessory uses. No additional
off-street parking shall be required for such accessory uses.
E. All hotels shall be equipped with sprinkler and fire alarm systems in
accordance with Chapter 144, Fire Prevention, of the Code of the Town
of Ramapo.
A. In issuing the special permit approval for animal kennels, the Planning
Board shall stipulate the maximum number and type of animals to be
boarded, harbored or trained. That number shall not exceed the
quotient of 10,000 square feet of net lot area per 100 pounds of animal
body weight characteristic of the species so harbored. The square
footage of the net lot area is that area of the lot excluding the area of
any required setbacks.
B. In considering the application for a special permit for the animal kennel
use, the Planning Board shall consider the number, size, breed and
temperament of animals to be sheltered and impose reasonable
conditions to protect proximate uses, aesthetic impact and safety of the
animals sheltered in order to ensure the health, safety and general
welfare of the community.
A. One stable stall shall be provided for each horse housed on the site, and
there shall be no stabling of animals or storage or use of manure or
other dust-producing substances within a distance of 200 feet of any lot
line. If outdoor lighting is provided for riding areas, the applicable
setbacks shall be doubled. All lighting shall be located so as not to be
visible at the source from any adjoining property. Screening shall be
required between such use and any other nonagricultural use.
B. Public events, demonstrations, horse shows, rodeos and competitive
events held in connection with riding academies or stables shall be
considered principal uses for purposes of lot area and setback and shall
conform to § 376-41, Bulk Table.
§ 376-122 RAMAPO CODE § 376-125
1:448
§ 376-125. Gasoline service stations.
Gasoline service stations are conditional uses in NS and CS Districts and
subject to the restrictions as set forth in § 376-31, Use Table, as well as the
following standards:
A. Such establishments shall not be located closer than 200 feet from any
residential district boundary line, school, hospital, nursing home or
other similar institutional use.
B. Access points shall be located a minimum of 100 feet from the
intersection of the designated street lines. All accesses shall be defined
by the use of concrete curbing and shall be designed to provide safe and
convenient travel without the potential for backing vehicles into the
public street.
C. Pumps, pump islands and canopies are structures and shall not be
located in any required yards or setbacks, except that the Planning
Board may allow canopies to extend into the setback but not into any
yard. No outdoor display of products not associated with the gasoline
service station use shall be permitted.
D. Screening. A ten-foot-wide landscaped area shall be provided along all
gasoline service station property lines, excluding the front line,
property lines adjacent to existing commercial uses and access points.
The landscaped area shall be densely planted with a mixture of shrubs,
trees and a fence, not less than six feet high, which will create an
opaque screen. All landscaped areas along property lines which are
crossed by access drives shall be planted with low shrubs no greater
than three feet high and trees with a branching habit which begins at
least eight feet above ground level. Furthermore, planting shall not
interfere with the normal line of sight (350 feet in either direction)
needed for safe entering and exiting maneuvers by motor vehicles.
E. Maintenance and operation. Due to the extent of land use impacts from
such stations which are a product of exterior operations, the following
requirements shall be made and noted on the site plan:
(1) All vehicles at gasoline service facilities, except for one tow truck,
shall be stored within a building when the facilities are not open for
business. However, licensed vehicles parked for minor repairs may
be left outside for a period not to exceed 72 hours. At no time shall
any unlicensed or dismantled automobiles, trucks, tractors, trailers
or accessories thereof be outside of a building. No car, truck or
trailer rentals shall be permitted.
(2) There shall not be any outside storage or display of accessories or
portable signs when gasoline service facilities are not open for
business.
(3) Rubbish, oil cans, tires, discarded motor vehicle parts and
components and any other waste materials may be temporarily
§ 376-125 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 376-125
1:449
§ 376-126. Car washes.
Automobile washing facilities maybe permitted by the Planning Board as
provided in § 376-31, Use Table, subject to the following requirements:
stored in a completely fenced-in opaque enclosure adjacent to the
gasoline service station building. The area of such enclosure shall
not exceed 200 square feet. There shall be no storage of any of the
above-mentioned items out side of such enclosure.
(4) No repair work may be performed out of doors. This does not
preclude, however, adding oil to motor vehicles, changing
windshield wipers or other similar simple repairs normally
performed in conjunction with the sale of gasoline.
(5) During the hours that a gasoline service station is open, all cars of
employees and customers and tow trucks must be parked only in
areas designated on the site development plan.
(6) All landscaped areas designated on the gasoline service station site
development plan and/or landscaping plan shall be maintained in a
neat and healthy condition.
F. Vehicle sales. The sale of used passenger vehicles is permitted as an
accessory use. The sale of new vehicles and commercial vehicles is
prohibited. No more than six vehicles may be offered for sale at any
time. The display of the vehicles shall be determined by the Planning
Board at time of site plan approval.
G. Discontinuance of use. In the event a gasoline service station is
abandoned, as determined by the Building Inspector, the owner, lessee
and/or motor-fuel supplier of said gasoline service station shall
immediately remove the tanks, gasoline pumps, all identification signs
and lighting poles. In lieu of removing the tanks, said owner and/or
lessee shall remove the flammable liquids therefrom and fill all tanks
with water for a three-month period only and thereafter with a solid
material. The owner and/or lessee shall also provide adequate
protection against unlawful entry into the buildings and onto the
property and shall close all vehicular entrances to the property to
prevent the storage of abandoned vehicles thereon.
A. Such establishments shall not be located closer than 200 feet to any
residential district boundary line, school, hospital, nursing home or
other similar institutional use.
B. Each establishment shall provide parking/waiting areas equal in
number to six times the maximum capacity. Four times the maximum
capacity shall be provided for automobiles beyond the exit of the
equipment so situated as to be usable for the hand finishing of the
washing process and which shall be no closer than 50 feet to any street
right-of-way line. A maximum capacity shall be determined by dividing
the equipment line by 20 feet.
§ 376-125 RAMAPO CODE § 376-126
1:450
§ 376-127. Day camps and outdoor recreation facilities.
C. Disposal of wash water shall be subject to approval by the Planning
Board.
D. Where gasoline service stations are either a principal use or accessory
use with automobile washing facilities, the requirements of § 376-126
shall also be adhered to in granting approval of such uses.
A. The Planning Board may permit day camps and outdoor recreation
facilities upon terms and conditions limiting the periods of operation.
(1) Access to such facilities shall be limited to improved state, county
or town roads shown as major roads on the Official Map. Such
facilities shall be adequate to preclude the necessity of pedestrian
traffic outside the approved facility, except for travel within a state
or county park or parkway.
(2) Day camps may include such structures as tent stands, cottages,
and other accessory buildings, provided that no heating facilities
are installed that permit residential year-round occupancy.
Covenants precluding such occupancy shall be recorded in the
County Clerk's office.
B. Swimming pools shall be classified and located as follows:
Type of Pool
(class)
Maximum Area
(square feet)
Setback From Any
Property Line
(feet)
A Over 3,600 200
B Over 2,600 176
C Over 1,600 160
D 1,600 or less 100
C. All recreational facilities shall comply with the minimum setback
requirements of § 376-41, Bulk Table.
D. Lighting. If outdoor lighting is provided for any of the recreational
facilities, including swimming pools, which permits use of the facilities
after 10:00 p.m., the applicable setback requirements for such facility
shall be doubled. All lighting shall be located so as not to be visible at
the source from any adjoining property.
E. Noise. A public-address system or any other amplified noises are
prohibited, except for emergency uses.
F. Parking. All parking areas and spaces shall have dustless surfaces.
§ 376-126 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 376-128
1:451
§ 376-128. Automobile sales and service.
Automobile sales and service agencies for the sale and servicing of new
and used motor vehicles, accessories and customary accessory uses may be
permitted, provided that such agencies are franchised dealers or factoryowned
dealerships of new motor vehicles and that all operations are
conducted from the same site and subject to the following requirements:
§ 376-129. Contractors' storage yards.
Contractors' storage yards may be permitted in the PI and CS Districts,
subject to the following requirements:
A. No such facility shall be closer than 500 feet (measured along the
designated street line) to any residential district boundary, institutional
or nonprofit use or school of general instruction. Such use may be
permitted within 100 feet of a residential district along a rear lot.
B. The display area for vehicles shall not exceed 110 feet, extending
between the front yard line and principal, building, and not more than
10 vehicle display spaces shall constitute a display group, with each
group being separated by significant landscape elements.
C. The lighting level shall not exceed three footcandles within a display
area, and no banners, pennants and string flags are permitted. No
signs, including numbers, prices or other advertising message, shall be
displayed so as to be visible to the public right-of-way, except display
window area pursuant to the site development plan rules and
regulations.
D. All motor vehicle storage, other than the display area and customer
parking, shall be fully fenced and screened from the side and rear
property lines. All other accessory uses, including servicing, shall be
conducted within fully enclosed structures. Gasoline service, if
provided, shall be located to the rear of the principal building. Oil and
gasoline storage shall be solely in underground tanks.
E. Where the use involves display or sales of recreational vehicles, with
gross vehicle weight exceeding 5,000 pounds, or trucks and commercial
vehicles, such as buses or tractors, the Planning Board shall increase
the applicable yards by a factor computed, on the basis of the vehicle
height divided by five feet six inches.
A. The Planning Board may require that all building materials, equipment
and supplies be located within enclosed buildings or open sheds.
B. Outdoor storage areas, if any, shall be limited to those specific locations
and designated limits approved by the Planning Board. Such outdoor
storage areas shall be heavily screened and landscaped from all street
lines and lot lines, as may be required by the Planning Board.
§ 376-128 RAMAPO CODE § 376-129
1:452
§ 376-1210. Drive-in restaurants.
§ 376-1211. Sales and showroom facilities in PI District.
Sales and showroom facilities may be permitted in the PI District subject to
the following requirements:
C. The Planning Board may require conformance with any requirements
recommended by the Fire Department having jurisdiction. In no case
shall the storage of any flammable materials be permitted within 150
feet of any lot line.
D. The Planning Board may require conformance with any other necessary
requirements in order to prevent a nuisance to neighboring properties
by reason of dust, noise, odor or any other nuisance which the Planning
Board feels will be associated with the intended use.
A. Location. No drive-in restaurant shall be located within 300 feet of any
residential district, or of any lot line of a school or place of worship.
B. Traffic impact. The Planning Board shall, in each individual case,
consider the potential traffic impact of the proposed drive-in restaurant
on the adjoining road system and on the parking areas affected. Where
said Board determines that such traffic may have a significant, adverse
impact, it may deny the application or it may require such reduction in
scale or other modification of the size and nature of the proposed
facility as, in the opinion of said Board, will be adequate to reduce the
estimated impact to an acceptable level.
C. Waste material. All waste material shall be stored in rodent proof
containers which shall be kept in a screened or enclosed location and
shall be removed from the premises each day, with the exception of
Sundays and holidays.
A. Sales and showroom facilities shall be permitted for products
fabricated, processed, converted, altered or assembled on the premises
or locations on the site in question or for wholesale and retail sales in
connection with a wholesale or warehouse business.
B. In addition to the off-street parking space required for the other uses
allowed, off-street parking space shall be provided for the space
allocated to sales and showroom facilities on the basis of one parking
space for each 200 square feet devoted to such use. Such parking
spaces shall be provided in areas convenient to the entrances to the
sales and showroom facilities.
C. Special loading and parking areas shall be provided for the sales and
showroom facility space, which shall not coincide or conflict with offstreet
loading space required for the basic use of the premises.
§ 376-129 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 376-1212
1:453
§ 376-1212. Caretaker's cottage, servants quarters and guest
houses.
Caretaker's cottage, servants quarters, guest houses or separate living
quarters having a separate kitchen within a one-family residence may be
permitted in the RR-80 and RR-160 Districts subject to the following
requirements:
§ 376-1213. Residential development in R-40A District.
Mixed lot size development of single-family residences in the R-40A District
shall be permitted upon compliance with the following standards:
§ 376-1214. Wireless communication services facilities.
A. Said uses must be on lots of four acres or more.
B. Said uses must be accessory to a one-family residence.
C. Guest houses cannot be utilized for rental purposes.
D. Separate living quarters within a dwelling can only be located in a onefamily
residence having at least 3,000 square feet of living area.
A. Parcels to be subdivided must contain an area of at least 10 acres. If
parcels contain less than 10 acres, they can only be developed in
compliance with Use Group "m."
B. Gross density of up to two units per acre.
C. Lots ranging in area from 25,000 square feet to 34,999 square feet shall
comply with the bulk regulations contained in Use Group "t."
D. Lots ranging in an area from 35,000 square feet to 39,999 square feet
shall comply with the bulk regulations contained in Use Group "q."
E. Lots greater than 40,000 square feet shall comply with the bulk
regulations contained in Use Group "m."
F. The maximum lot size permitted shall not exceed 45,000 square feet.
G. A one-hundred-fifty-foot buffer is required within which the size of the
lots must be the same as the prevailing lot size of adjacent residential
properties.
H. A greenbelt of 40 feet is required where a proposed R-40A subdivision
is located on a state or county road.
A. These special regulations shall apply to all wireless communication
services facilities.
B. The purpose of these special regulations is to reasonably control the
location, construction and maintenance of wireless communication
services facilities in order to encourage the siting of wireless
§ 376-1212 RAMAPO CODE § 376-1214
1:454
communication services facilities in nonresidential areas and, to the
maximum extent practicable, to protect aesthetic impacts, the open
space character of the Town of Ramapo, the property values of the
community, the health and safety of citizen's ability to receive
communication signals without interference from other communication
providers, while not unreasonably limiting reception of receive-only
antennas.
C. Except as provided hereinafter, no wireless communication services
facility shall be located, constructed or maintained on any lot, building,
structure or land area in the Town of Ramapo, except in conformity with
the requirements of this section and all other applicable regulations.
D. A wireless communication services facility shall be located on a site
with existing facilities. If, because of unreasonable technological,
financial or structural limitations or unless otherwise waived, modified
or required by the Planning Board for aesthetic, safety or other reasons,
location on a site with existing facilities is not possible, such facility
shall be located on a site with existing commercial or nonresidential
uses before being located on any site that is used exclusively for
residential purposes. Wherever possible, such facility shall be attached
to an existing building or structure. To the maximum extent practicable,
existing roadways shall be used to provide access to the site of a
wireless communication services facility.
E. The shared use of existing public utility facilities and wireless
communication services facilities shall be strongly encouraged. The
Town Building Department and the Director of Building, Planning and
Zoning shall maintain an inventory of existing wireless communication
services facilities (the "Existing Facilities Inventory") and a list of
utilities that are obligated under the Federal Telecommunications Act of
1996 to provide wireless communication service carriers with
nondiscriminatory access to their facilities.
(1) Collocation shall be required unless it has been demonstrated to
the satisfaction of the Planning Board that:
(a) Adequate and reliable wireless communication service cannot
be provided from any alternative sites identified on the
Existing Facilities Inventory or other existing sites within the
service area in a reasonably financially and technologically
feasible manner consistent with the wireless communications
service provider's system requirements;
(b) None of the alternative sites identified on the Existing
Facilities Inventory or other existing sites within the service
area can accommodate the proposed wireless communication
services facility with respect to structural or other engineering
limitations, including frequency incompatibilities; or
§ 376-1214 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 376-1214
1:455
(c) The owner of the alternative sites identified on the Existing
Facilities Inventory or other existing sites within the service
area lawfully refuse to permit the applicant use of the site.
(2) All new communication services facilities and premises shall be of
proper size, location and design to accommodate collocation of
other service providers' facilities, unless otherwise permitted by
the Planning Board.
F. The wireless communication services facility shall be located not less
than twice the otherwise applicable setback requirements for principal
structures for the district in which the property is located or the height
of the facility, whichever shall be greater.
G. No freestanding wireless communication services facility shall be
permitted except for a monopole.
H. Height limitations:
(1) Notwithstanding the following height limitations, in no case shall a
wireless communication services facility exceed the minimum
height reasonably necessary to accomplish the purpose it is
proposed to serve.
(2) The height of any antennas, or other associated equipment,
structurally mounted as part of a wireless communication services
facility shall not exceed by more than 15 feet the highest point of
the existing structure on which such antennas or equipment is
affixed, except that where necessary to accommodate collocation,
such height may be increased to a maximum of 40 feet.
(3) The height of any freestanding wireless communication services
facility shall not exceed 100 feet in height measured from the
highest point of such facility to the existing finished grade elevation
of the ground immediately adjacent to the structure.
I. The applicant/provider shall prepare a visual impact assessment of the
proposed wireless communication services facility based upon
appropriate modeling, photography and other pertinent analytical
techniques. Landscaping and/or other screening, including but not
limited to architectural treatment, use of neutral or compatible coloring
and materials or alternative technologies, shall be required to minimize
the visual impact of such facility from pubic thoroughfares, important
viewsheds and vantage points and surrounding properties to the extent
practicable. No signs, other than signs not to exceed six square feet
listing the owner's or operator's name and emergency telephone
number, shall be erected on any wireless communication services
facility.
J. The wireless communication services facility shall not be artificially
lighted unless otherwise required by the Federal Aviation
Administration or other federal, state or local authority.
§ 376-1214 RAMAPO CODE § 376-1214
1:456
K. Unless otherwise superseded by the Federal Communications
Commission (FCC), the design and use of the proposed wireless
communication services facility shall be certified to conform to the
maximum NIER exposure standards promulgated by the FCC, as
amended, including that the estimated or measured NIER from a
proposed wireless communication services facility, when added to
existing radio frequency electromagnetic radiation from existing
sources, will not exceed the guidelines set forth in the applicable
federal and state standards. Said certification shall include a report by
a licensed professional engineer with expertise in radio communication
facilities and/or health physicist acceptable to the Planning Board. The
Planning Board shall require annual certification of conformance with
the applicable emissions standards. Any violation of the emissions
standards shall require immediate discontinuation and correction of the
use responsible for the violation. Any such violation of these
requirements of this chapter or the conditions of the special use-permit
or site plan approval shall be deemed to be an offense punishable by
fine and/or imprisonment in accordance with Article XIV of this chapter.
[Amended 6-14-2006 by L.L. No. 4-2006]
L. Noise-producing equipment shall be sited and/or insulated to prevent
any measurable increase in noise as measured at the property line.
M. Any interference or disruption of signal or reception of radio, television
or other wireless communications service resulting from the
construction or operation of a wireless communication services facility
shall be remedied by and at the expense of the responsible wireless
communication services provider to the satisfaction of the Planning
Board.
N. Electrical and land-based telephone lines extended to serve the
wireless communication services facility sites shall be installed
underground where feasible.
O. A wireless communication services facility shall be designed and
erected so that, in the event of structural failure, it will fall within the
required setback area and, to the maximum extent possible, away from
adjacent development.
P. A security program shall be formulated and implemented for the site of
a wireless communication services facility. Such program may include
physical features such as fencing, anticlimbing devices or elevated
ladders on monopoles and/or monitoring either by staff or electronic
devices to prevent unauthorized access and vandalism. In no event shall
there be a vertical separation of less than 30 feet from the base
elevation of a monopole to the first climbing rung or elevating ladder
(when elevated) thereon.
Q. A monopole over 50 feet in height shall be inspected annually by a
licensed professional engineer, or at any other time upon a
determination by the Building Inspector that the monopole may have
§ 376-1214 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 376-1214
1:457
sustained structural damage, and a copy of the inspection report shall
be submitted to the Director of Building, Planning and Zoning.
R. In the case of an application for approval of a wireless communication
services facility to be located on lands owned by a party other than the
applicant or the Town, a copy of the lease agreement with the property
owner, together with any subsequent modifications thereof, shall be
provided to the Planning Board, and a copy shall be filed with the
Director of Building, Planning and Zoning.
S. A wireless communication services facility shall be dismantled and
removed from the property on which it is located when it has been
inoperative or abandoned for a period of one year from the date on
which it ceased operation. In the event that such facility is not
completely removed from such property within such time, the Town
shall be authorized to effect such removal in accordance with the
following procedure:
(1) The Director of Building, Planning and Zoning shall give written
notice that such wireless communication services facility must be
completely removed from such property within a time to be
specified in such notice, which time shall be not less than 10 nor
more than 30 days after service of such notice. Such notice shall
contain a statement that in the event such facility is not completely
removed within the time specified therein, the Town will cause such
removal to occur, and thereupon the property upon which the
facility is situated will be assessed for all costs and expenses
incurred by the Town for the purpose of effecting such removal,
said costs and expenses to be collected in the same manner and
time as Town taxes.
(a) Such notice shall be served by the Director of Building,
Planning and Zoning either personally or by certified mail upon
the following person:
[1] The owner of the property on which such facility is located,
as such owner is shown on the last completed tax
assessment roll of the Town;
[2] The owner of such facility, as disclosed to the Town
pursuant to Subsection T(7) of this section; and
[3] The individual agent for such owner, as provided to the
Town pursuant to Subsection T(7) of this section.
(b) If such notice is served by certified mail, it shall be mailed to
the owner of the property at the address shown on the last
completed tax assessment roll of the Town and to the owner of
such facility and the individual agent for such owner at the
respective addresses provided to the Town pursuant to
Subsection T(7) of this section.
§ 376-1214 RAMAPO CODE § 376-1214
1:458
(2) In the event that such wireless communication services facility is
not completely removed as directed in the notice of the Building
Inspector within the time specified therein, the Town may at any
time thereafter, enter upon the property and cause such facility to
be removed; provided, however, that no demolition shall take place
without the express approval of the Town Board. All costs and
expenses incurred by the Town in connection with such removal,
including all administrative expenses, if any, shall be assessed
against such property by the Town Board in the manner provided in
Subsection S(3) of this section.
(3) The Town Board shall serve personally or by certified mail upon the
owner of record of such property at the address shown on the last
completed tax assessment roll of the Town a written notice, stating
that at a time and place specified therein, it will assess the expense
of such removal against such property. Such notice shall be served
at least eight days previous to the time specified therein. If directed
against a corporation, it may be served upon the corporation at its
principal place of business, upon an agent of the corporation within
the Town or upon the Secretary of State. Notice served upon the
Secretary of State shall be served at least 12 days previous to the
time specified therein. At the time and place so specified, the Town
Board shall hear the parties interested and shall thereupon finally
determine the assessment, stating therein the name of each owner
and the amount so assessed. The amount so assessed shall
constitute a lien on the real property on which it is levied until paid
or otherwise cancelled pursuant to law and shall be collected in the
manner fixed by law for the collection of Town taxes.
T. Application procedure.
(1) An application for approval of a wireless communication services
facility shall be submitted on the relevant forms for special use
permit and site plan approval. Site development plan approval by
the Planning Board in accordance with Article IX of this chapter
shall be required. [Amended 6-14-2006 by L.L. No. 4-2006]
(2) The operator of the wireless communication service shall submit a
copy of a license issued by the Federal Communications
Commission and shall demonstrate to the satisfaction of the
Planning Board that there is a compelling public need for such
facility at the proposed location. Such demonstration shall include
the preparation of existing and master effective service area plans
which:
(a) Minimize the number of such facilities within the service
area(s);
(b) Maximize collocation and shared use of existing facilities;
§ 376-1214 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 376-1214
1:459
(c) Identify all existing and proposed wireless communication
facilities, including the location, height and operations
characteristics of said existing and proposed wireless
communication facilities, which impact upon the service area
covering the Town of Ramapo and shall identify all proposed
and other functionally acceptable locations for such facilities;
(d) Include a two-to-five-year plan for the provision of additional
facilities in and adjacent to the Town, indicating whether each
proposed facility is for initial coverage or capacity building
purposes, showing proposed general locations or areas in
which additional facilities are expected to be needed; and
(e) Analyze feasible alternatives to reasonably minimize the visual
impacts and exposure levels.
(3) Any application for a wireless communication services facility shall
include a statement that the Town's Existing Facilities Inventory
has been reviewed and, to the extent relevant to provide wireless
communication service in the area which is the subject of such
application, that all reasonable efforts have been made to collocate
such facility on all sites identified in such Existing Facilities
Inventory and all other existing sites within the service area.
(4) As a condition of special use permit approval, the applicant shall be
required to provide a written agreement, in recordable form
suitable for filing and prepared to the satisfaction of the Town
Attorney, acknowledging that it shall be required to allow the
collocation of other future wireless communication service
facilities unless otherwise unreasonably limited by technological,
structural or other engineering considerations. [Amended
6-14-2006 by L.L. No. 4-2006]
(5) As a condition of special use permit approval, the applicant shall be
required to provide a written agreement by the owner of the
property on which the wireless communication services facility is to
be located, in recordable form suitable for filling and prepared to
the satisfaction of the Town Attorney, authorizing the Town and any
contractors selected by it to enter upon such property pursuant to
Subsection S(2) of this section without liability for trespass or other
damages. [Amended 6-14-2006 by L.L. No. 4-2006]
(6) Where collocation of a wireless communication services facility is
proposed for any such alternative site identified on the Existing
Facilities Inventory or other existing site within the service areas,
the added wireless communication services facility shall be
permitted, as an amendment to the existing special use permit for
such alternative site, by submission of an application for a building
permit and without the need for an application for an amended
special permit or site plan approval, provided that such facility
meets all of the otherwise applicable requirements of this section
§ 376-1214 RAMAPO CODE § 376-1214
1:460
§ 376-1215. Adult student housing.
The standards for adult student housing shall be as follows:
and of any special permit and site plan approval previously granted
for such alternative site. An amended written narrative and
certification report indicating conformance with all of the special
permit standards and conditions of site plan approval shall be
provided in addition to all required information in support of the
required building permit. An as-built drawing of the modified
facilities shall be filed with the Director of Building, Planning and
Zoning. [Amended 6-14-2006 by L.L. No. 4-2006]
(7) The applicant and all future owners of the premises and the
wireless communication services facility shall at all times keep on
file in the office of the Clerk of the Planning Board the name,
address and telephone number of the owner and operator of such
facility and of at least one individual who shall have authority to
arrange for the maintenance of the premises and facility and who
shall be authorized to accept service of notices and legal process on
behalf of the owner and operator(s) of the premises and facility and
to bind the owner to any settlement, fine, judgment or other
disposition (other than incarceration) which may result from any
civil or criminal action or proceeding instituted by the Town against
such owner and/or operator(s).
A. The housing must be accessory to and on the same site as an approved
postsecondary educational institution.
B. Married students and faculty must be full time and the duration of
residency shall be limited to the period of full-time study or teaching. If
a person ceases to be eligible for occupancy, said person and family
must vacate his/her dwelling unit within 30 days.
C. The gross density shall not exceed 16 units per acre.
D. The minimum lot size shall be four acres and the maximum lot size shall
not exceed 12 acres.
E. The project must be located on an already existing lot which meets the
lot size requirements or on a lot created by subdivision from a larger
existing lot and may not be the result of the combination of existing lots
which separately fail to meet the lot size requirements. Upon creation
of a lot for an adult student housing project, no further subdivision shall
be permitted of any lot to create another site for adult student housing.
[Amended 6-14-2006 by L.L. No. 4-2006]
F. The duration of a student's residency shall not exceed six years unless
extended by the Planning Board for good cause upon written request.
Good cause shall include, but not be limited to, a longer period of fulltime
study consistent with recognized religious practice or belief.
§ 376-1214 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 376-1215
1:461
G. Fifty percent of the dwelling units shall be either one- or two-bedroom
units. The remaining 50% of the dwelling units may be three- or fourbedroom
units. No more than 10% of the dwelling units may be
occupied by faculty.
H. The educational institution must occupy at least 10% of the project site.
I. The size of the dwelling units shall be as follows:
(1) One- or two-bedroom units shall be no greater than 1,000 square
feet.
(2) Three- or four-bedroom units shall be no greater than 2,000 square
feet.
J. It shall be the duty of the owner and occupant (student or faculty) to
jointly file a certification with the Building Inspector indicating
compliance with this section's requirements relating to the status of all
occupants of each dwelling unit. Such certification shall be filed no later
than January 31 of each year. Failure to file such certification shall be
reported to the Planning Board which may revoke the approval after a
public hearing.
K. The project must comply with Chapter 144, Fire Prevention, of the Code
of the Town of Ramapo. All buildings must be fully alarmed and
sprinklered.
L. The units shall not be occupied by anyone other than adult married
students, faculty members, spouses and minor children of married
students and faculty.
M. If the postsecondary educational institution is discontinued, the
approval for adult student housing shall automatically cease. The
dwelling units must be vacated within six months of the discontinuance.
N. All applications shall be required to identify all similar adult student
housing projects within a one-half-mile radius measured from the edges
of the property. If within this area the total acreage of similar facilities
together with the proposed project exceeds 3% of the surrounding area,
the Planning Board shall decline to issue an approval if it determines
that the application shall detrimentally impact the character of the
area. In making such determination, the Board shall consider whether
the proposed use will be of a location, size and character that it will be
in harmony with the appropriate and orderly development of the area
and not be detrimental to the site or nearby properties in accordance
with the zoning classification of such properties.
O. The minimum distance between buildings shall be 20 feet.
P. The maximum building height is 35 feet.
Q. Central refuse collection areas shall be located for the convenience of
all dwelling units. They shall be supplied with an adequate number and
§ 376-1215 RAMAPO CODE § 376-1215
1:462
§ 376-1216. Schools of general and religious instruction.
Schools of general and religious instruction are subject to the following
requirements:
type of covered receptacles and shall be provided with proper
screening and maintenance. Such areas shall not be located in the
required front yard.
R. There shall be provided on site a minimum of 100 square feet per
dwelling unit of usable outdoor recreation area. Such recreation area(s)
shall include playground equipment and/or other recreational facilities
as determined by the Planning Board and shall be located in a safe and
convenient location on the site.
S. The project shall be suitably landscaped with perimeter, foundation,
parking lot and building plantings as required by the Planning Board.
T. The project shall provide a separate and divided bus stop located on site
along the street access which may be within the required front yard.
The bus stop must be designed to ensure safe pickup and dropoff of
children and to minimize impact on traffic flow. This requirement is
subject to approval of the respective highway and school jurisdictions.
[Amended 6-14-2006 by L.L. No. 4-2006]
U. The project must undergo architectural review by the Community
Design Review Committee.
V. No outside catering for nonresidents shall be permitted in the
postsecondary educational institution. The postsecondary educational
institution shall not contain commercial kitchen facilities.
W. All projects shall provide proper access for fire-fighting and emergency
equipment and vehicles and shall provide hydrants in such number and
location and with such water pressure as may be approved by the
Planning Board based upon the recommendation of the Building
Inspector and Fire Department.
X. All projects shall be connected to public water and sewer systems.
Y. No structure shall be located within 500 feet of abutting land within a
village which is residentially zoned at a density of one dwelling unit per
acre or less dense zoning districts. However, this requirement shall not
apply to any land within the unincorporated area of the Town which was
previously within a village, but which was removed from the village as
the result of court order or intermunicipal agreement.
Z. A certificate of occupancy for the educational institution must be issued
prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy for any residential
buildings.
A. General requirements.
§ 376-1215 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 376-1216
1:463
§ 376-1217. R-15MR developments.
In the R-15MR District, the following requirements apply:
(1) There shall be provided on the site a recreation area of 30 square
feet per student which shall include such recreational facilities as
determined by the Planning Board and shall be located in a safe
and convenient location on the site;
(2) Bus access shall be provided on site and must be designed to
ensure the safe pickup and dropoff of children and to minimize
impact on traffic flow;
(3) The project shall be suitably landscaped with perimeter, parking lot
and building plantings as required by the Planning Board;
(4) All projects shall provide proper access for fire-fighting and
emergency equipment and vehicles;
(5) The school must comply with Chapter 144, Fire Prevention, of the
Code of the Town of Ramapo.
B. Student size.
(1) In the R-15, R-15A, R-15C and R-15MR Zoning Districts, schools
with a student population of 150 students or less are subject to the
bulk requirements of Use Group "s-1";
(2) In the R-15, R-15A, R-15C and R-15MR Zoning Districts, schools
with a student population in excess of 150 students, are subject to
the bulk requirements of Use Group "s-1" except the minimum lot
area is doubled;
(3) In the R-25, R-35, and R-40 Districts, all schools regardless of
student size are subject to the requirements of Use Group "e-1." In
the RR-50, RR-80 and RR-160 Districts, all schools regardless of
student size are subject to the requirements of Use Group "e."
(4) For all schools subject to Use Group "s-1," required parking spaces
shall be as follows:
(a) 1 1/2 spaces per employee. The Planning Board may modify the
above requirement upon good cause shown.
(b) Additional spaces may be required at the discretion of the
Planning Board.
A. Townhouses and garden apartments: [Amended 6-14-2006 by L.L.
No. 4-2006]
(1) The minimum size for the development shall be 15 acres.
(2) The maximum density shall be 11 units per acre.
§ 376-1216 RAMAPO CODE § 376-1217
1:464
§ 376-1218. Country inns. [Added 11-25-2013 by L.L. No. 7-2013]
Country inn facilities may be permitted in accordance with the following
conditions:
(3) The development may consist of townhouses or garden apartments.
(4) At least 5% of the land area must be dedicated for common open
space.
(5) All common areas must be maintained by a homeowners'
association. The requirements pursuant to § 376-43G are
incorporated herein.
(6) The minimum distance between buildings shall be 25 feet.
(7) No structure shall be closer than 20 to from the pavement edge on
interior roadways.
(8) No more than 14 units may be linked together.
(9) All bulk requirements shall be applied to the entire townhouse and
garden apartment development being proposed and as a whole and
not individual lots.
(10) All interior roadways are to be maintained by the homeowners'
association.
B. Two-family conversions:
(1) Applicant cannot receive a permit unless lot is located as a part of a
previously approved subdivision which has been developed as a
townhouse or garden apartment development.
(2) Applicant, as a condition of approval, must comply with the New
York State Uniform Fire Protection and Building Code. [Amended
1-25-2012 by L.L. No. 1-2012]
(3) Applicant, as a condition of approval, shall submit a landscaping
plan. [Added 1-25-2012 by L.L. No. 1-2012]
A. The number of residential units in the inn should be limited to six per
acre.
B. The inn and related facilities shall comply with the New York State Fire
Prevention and Building Code.
C. Restaurants serving guests of the inn, the general public or groups
attending a catered, social function at the inn, provided that no music
or other sound shall create an unreasonable noise as defined in the
Noise Pollution Control Law of the Town of Ramapo38 after 10:00 p.m.
38.Editor's Note: See Ch. 188, Noise.
§ 376-1217 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 376-1218
1:465
D. An inn office and lobby is permitted.
E. Parking as set forth in § 376-31, Column F, No. 23.
F. Permits are to be granted by the Planning Board subject to inspections
of the Building Inspector.
G. Buildings. As it is the expressed purpose of this section to encourage
the appropriate use and maintenance of existing building(s) of
architectural or historical significance to the Town, the principal uses
permitted in this section shall, to the maximum extent practicable, be
located within the existing building(s) on the site. The Planning Board
may permit the expansion of the existing building or construction of
new buildings. The building coverage for all principal and accessory
buildings shall not exceed that permitted in the zoning district in which
the site is located.
H. Visual quality. The architectural style and siting of any additions to the
existing building(s) as well as new construction shall be of the type and
scale that complements the existing architectural style. Appropriate
landscaping and other screening shall be provided to prevent lighting
on the site from lampposts, headlights or other light sources from
shining directly on adjacent residential properties. Existing building
and grounds features should be preserved to the maximum extent
feasible.
I. All vehicles, trucks, tractors, machinery and equipment for the
operation and maintenance of the country inn, and related facilities,
should be stored indoors or in a designated area buffered from other
activities.
J. Parking may consist of a combination of dedicated parking spaces and
special event parking, as well as a minimum of two spaces for parking
of tour buses.
§ 376-1218 RAMAPO CODE § 376-1218
1:466
ARTICLE XIII
Nonconforming Uses, Buildings or Lots
§ 376-130. Applicability of article.
This article applies to lots, buildings, structures and nonbuilding uses in
existence on the effective date of this chapter. The lawful use of any such
premises or uses existing on the effective date of this chapter may be
continued although neither such use conforms nor the bulk of the same
complies with the requirements, except as hereinafter follows.
§ 376-131. Nonconforming buildings, structures or lots.
A. Residential buildings or structures. Any existing one- or two- or threefamily
residential building or structure, or building accessory thereto,
made noncomplying as to bulk by this chapter or any amendment
thereof shall be permitted to comply with the yard and setback
requirements as specified for the highest residential district having the
same or less lot width. In no event, however, shall the yard and setback
requirements of any lot be less than the requirements for the R-15
District. No front setback may in any event be closer to the designated
street line than the existing established setback. For any existing
building or structure on a lot having less than a one-hundred-foot lot
width, the minimum standards will be the same as those specified in
Subsection D(1) of this section.
B. Nonresidential buildings or structures. Normal maintenance and repair,
alteration in, or reconstruction or enlargement of, a building or
structure with noncomplying bulk is permitted if the same does not
increase the degree of or create any new noncomplying bulk in such
building or structure.
C. Two or more adjoining noncomplying subdivision lots, regardless of
ownership, in a subdivision approved by the Planning Board shall have
three years from the date of filing with the office of the County Clerk to
obtain a building permit. Two or more adjoining noncomplying lots in a
subdivision approved by the Planning Board and filed with the office of
the County Clerk more than three years prior to the effective date of
this chapter and in the same ownership shall not be eligible to receive a
building permit. Said subdivision or part thereof shall be resubmitted to
the Planning Board for approval in accordance with the applicable
provisions of this chapter. Any lot in a subdivision approved by the
Planning Board after the effective date of this chapter, but which is
made noncomplying as to bulk by any future amendments of this
chapter, shall have three years from the date of filing to obtain a
building permit.
D. Noncomplying lots.
(1) A residential lot, separated from any other land in the same
ownership and noncomplying as to bulk, whether or not located in
§ 376-130 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 376-131
1:467
and part of a subdivision plat approved by the Planning Board and
filed in the office of the County Clerk, and which has a minimum
lot width of 100 feet, may be used for a one-, two- or three-family
detached residence, provided that such use shall comply with the
bulk requirements as specified in the highest residential district
having the same or less lot width. For all residential lots having less
than 100 feet of lot width, the following minimum requirements
shall apply:
(a) The minimum width of one required side setback shall be 20
feet for lots in the RR-160, RR-80, RR-50, R-40 and R-35
Districts; 15 feet for lots in the R-25 District; and 10 feet for
lots in the R-15, R-15A and R-15C District.
(b) The total width of both required side setbacks may be reduced
nine inches for each foot that the lot width is less than that
specified in the Bulk Table.39
(c) The minimum front and rear setbacks shall be 30 feet and front
yard shall be 30 feet. [Amended 6-14-2006 by L.L. No.
4-2006]
(d) The minimum lot width and lot frontage shall be 75 feet.
(e) The maximum building height shall be 35 feet.
(f) In the R-15C District, the minimum lot area shall be 7,500
square feet. [Added 6-14-2006 by L.L. No. 4-2006]
(2) For all nonresidential lots having less than 100 feet of lot width, the
following minimum requirements shall apply:
(a) The minimum width of each required side setback shall be 20
feet in the LO and PI Districts and 10 feet in the PO, NS and CS
Districts, except that where any setback abuts a residential
district, the normal requirements for setbacks, yards and
buffers shall apply.
(b) The total width of both required side setbacks may be reduced
nine inches for each foot that the lot width is less than that
specified for the Table of Bulk Requirements.40
(c) The minimum front and rear setbacks shall be 30 feet for lots in
the PO, NS and CS Districts and 50 feet for lots in LO and PI
Districts.
(d) The minimum lot width and lot frontage shall be 75 feet.
(e) The maximum building height shall be 35 feet.
39.Editor's Note: Said table, as authorized by § 376-41, is included at the end of this chapter.
40.Editor's Note: Said table, as authorized by § 376-41, is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 376-131 RAMAPO CODE § 376-131
1:468
§ 376-132. Additional considerations.
E. A lot shall not be considered noncomplying with respect to the front
setback or front yard requirements of this chapter if said condition is
the result of a street right-of-way widening, reservation or dedication,
whether in fee or easement, required by the Planning Board at the time
of subdivision or site development plan approval.
A. Repair and alterations. Normal maintenance and repair of a building or
structure is permitted if it does not extend the nonconforming use. No
extension, alteration or enlargement shall be made in a building or
structure occupied by a nonconforming use, nor in a nonconforming
nonbuilding use except:
(1) When required pursuant to an order of a court of competent
jurisdiction.
(2) To adapt the building or structure to a conforming use
(3) In a building or structure occupied by a nonconforming use or in a
nonconforming nonbuilding use permitted to extend under
Subsection D of this section.
B. Change of use. Any nonconforming use may be changed to any
conforming use or, on application to and with the approval the Board of
Appeals, to any use which the Board of Appeals deems to be more
similar in character with the uses permitted in the district in which said
change of use is proposed. Any nonconforming building, structure or
nonbuilding use may be changed to a con forming use, regardless of
whether the newly created conforming use is noncomplying as to bulk,
subject to approval by the Board of Appeals, subject to the same
general considerations applicable to the granting of special permits and
subject to site development plan approval.
C. Cessation of use. If active and continuous operations are not carried on
in a nonconforming use during a continuous period of one year, the
building or land where such nonconforming use previously existed shall
thereafter be occupied and used only for a conforming use. Intent to
resume active operations shall not affect the foregoing. The time period
set forth herein shall be tolled for any cessation of use pursuant to a
court order.
D. "Permitted extension or enlargement" shall mean:
(1) In the case of a nonconforming use in a building: the enlargement
or extension of such use so as to create additional floor area within
any existing building to any portion of the floor area therein not
formerly used for such nonconforming use, except where such
additional floor area was manifestly designed for such use at the
time such use became nonconforming.
§ 376-131 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 376-132
1:469
(2) In the case of a nonconforming nonbuilding use: the use of any
additional land on which no substantial operations were previously
conducted, provided that any such extension or enlargement is on
the same lot occupied by the nonconforming use on the effective
date of this chapter and subject to site development plan approval.
E. Damage and destruction. A building or structure occupied by a
nonconforming use or noncomplying as to bulk, damaged by fire or
other causes to the extent of 75% of last full value as shown in the
records located in the Town Assessor's office, excluding the assessed
valuation of the land thereof, shall not be repaired or rebuilt except in
conformity with the requirements of this chapter. Any building,
structure or any part thereof occupied by a nonconforming use or
noncomplying as to bulk, which is damaged to an extent less than 75%
of last full value as shown in the records located in the Town Assessor's
office, excluding the assessed valuation of the land, may be repaired,
provided that a building permit is obtained within one year after such
damage; otherwise such building, structure or part thereof shall
thereafter be occupied only by a conforming use and shall comply with
the bulk requirements of this chapter.
F. Modification by Board of Appeals. If an application is made at least six
months before the expiration of the period prescribed for termination of
a nonconforming use or noncomplying bulk, and the Board of Appeals
shall find that the period prescribed is unreasonable or inadequate for
the amortization of the special value of the property resulting from such
nonconforming use or noncomplying bulk, then the Board of Appeals
may grant such an extension of the period prescribed as it shall deem to
be reasonable and adequate for such amortization, provided that no
such period of extension shall exceed 100% of the period prescribed
and that such extension may be granted only once for any use.
G. Continued use after termination date is a violation. The continuation of
a nonconforming use or noncomplying bulk after the termination date
fixed for the same shall constitute a violation of this chapter.
§ 376-132 RAMAPO CODE § 376-132
1:470
ARTICLE XIV
Administration and Code Enforcement
§ 376-140. Enforcement officials; powers and duties of Building
Inspector.
This chapter shall be enforced by a Building Inspector and Assistant
Building Inspectors, Code Enforcement Officers or Fire Inspectors, as the
Town Board may appoint and deem necessary, hereinafter collectively
referred to throughout this chapter and otherwise in the Code of the Town
of Ramapo as the "Building Inspector." It shall be the duty of the Building
Inspector and he is hereby empowered to:
A. Inspect any building, structure or land to determine whether any
violation of this chapter, the New York State Uniform Fire Prevention
and Building Code, Chapter 144, Fire Prevention, of the Code of the
Town of Ramapo, or such other laws, rules and regulations as he shall
be chargeable with inspection or enforcement of, has been committed
or exist, whether or not such building, structure or land is occupied,
whether such occupancy is in conformity with all of the applicable laws,
rules and regulations, whether or not a certificate of occupancy or use
has been issued, whether or not occupancy is in conformity with the
aforesaid certificates or such other certificates as the Building
Inspector shall issue; and otherwise generally inspect and enforce all of
the laws, rules and regulations relating or affecting lots, buildings or
structures and their use and occupancy and have all of the powers
provided for under § 138 of the Town Law of the State of New York.
B. Issue such permits and certificates in conformity with the laws, rules
and regulations of the State of New York and of this chapter and refuse
to issue the same in the event of noncompliance, which reason
therefore shall be endorsed on the application and notice thereof given
to the applicant, as is provided in this chapter.
C. Keep the Town Board advised of all matters, as the Town Board shall
determine, relating to the enforcement of this chapter and the
appropriate laws, rules and regulations, make and keep all records
necessary and appropriate to the office, including the issuance and
denial of building permits, certificates of occupancy and/or uses, of
formal complaints of violation and the action taken on the same; and
keep a record of all permits, certificates of occupancy and use issued
that shall be available for public inspection.
D. Issue and post notices of violations, stop orders, orders directing the
remedying of any condition or omission that is or creates a violation of
this chapter or other applicable laws, rules and regulations and revoke
building permits, certificates of occupancy and certificates of use.
E. Make such inspections and reports as shall be required by the Town
Board for the enforcement, amendment or addition to this chapter or of
§ 376-140 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 376-140
1:471
any section of the Code of the Town of Ramapo or rules and regulations
thereunder.
F. Apply to the Town Board for authorization to perform such other actions
or duties as may be necessary or required to enforce any authority or to
invoke any penalty for the violation of this chapter and the Code of the
Town of Ramapo and its rules and regulations.
G. Have the power, right and authority to issue an appearance ticket, as
the same is defined in Article 150 of the Criminal Procedure Law of the
State of New York for the violation of any section of this chapter or for
any order of the Building Inspector.
H. Order to remedy. [Added 11-10-2016 by L.L. No. 4-2016]
(1) The Building Inspector is authorized to order in writing the
remedying of any condition or activity found to exist in, on or about
any building, structure or premises in violation of the New York
State Uniform Fire Prevention Code, the State Energy
Conservation Construction Code and the Town of Ramapo Zoning
Law. The time within which a person or entity served with an order
to remedy is required to comply with such order to remedy is fixed
at 30 days following the date of such order to remedy. An order to
remedy shall include a statement substantially similar to the
following: "The person or entity served with this order to remedy
must completely remedy each violation described in this order to
remedy by __________ (specify date), which is 30 days after the date
of this order to remedy." The order to remedy shall be served
personally or by certified or registered mail within five days of the
date of the order.
(2) Service. An order to remedy shall be served personally or by
certified or registered mail within five days of the date of the order.
For purposes of this section:
(a) If an order to remedy is served personally by any authorized
means that requires more than one action by the person
effecting service [such as service by "delivery and mail,"
similar to that authorized by CPLR 308(2)], the order to
remedy shall be deemed to be served on the date on which the
last required action is taken; and
(b) An order to remedy served by certified or registered mail shall
be deemed to be served on the date it is mailed.
(3) Requiring immediate commencement of corrective action. Nothing
in this section shall be construed as prohibiting such order to
remedy from including provisions ordering the person or entity
served with such order to remedy:
(a) To begin to remedy the violations described in the order to
remedy immediately, or within some other specified period of
§ 376-140 RAMAPO CODE § 376-140
1:472
time which may be less than 30 days; to continue diligently
to remedy such violations until each such violation is fully
remedied; and, in any event, to complete the remedying of all
such violations within 30 days of the date of such order to
remedy; and/or
(b) To take such other protective actions (such as vacating the
building or barricading the area where the violations exist)
which are authorized by the code enforcement program of the
Town or by any other applicable statute, regulation, rule, local
law, or ordinance, and which the Town may deem appropriate,
during the period while such violations are being remedied.
I. Complaints. The Building Inspector shall, within a reasonable time,
review and investigate complaints which allege or assert the existence
of conditions or activities that fail to comply with the New York State
Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code, the Energy Conservation
Construction Code, the Zoning Law, or any other local law or regulation
adopted for administration and enforcement of the New York State
Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code or the State Energy
Conservation Construction Code. The process for responding to a
complaint shall include such of the following steps as the Building
Inspector may deem to be appropriate: [Added 11-10-2016 by L.L.
No. 4-2016]
(1) Performing an inspection of the conditions and/or activities alleged
to be in violation, and documenting the results of such inspection;
(2) If a violation is found to exist, providing the owner of the affected
property and any other person who may be responsible for the
violation with notice of the violation and opportunity to abate,
correct or cure the violation;
(3) If appropriate, issuing a stop-work order;
(4) If a violation which was found to exist is abated or corrected,
performing an inspection to ensure that the violation has been
abated or corrected, preparing a final written report reflecting
such abatement or correction, and filing such report with the
complaint.
J. Recordkeeping. [Added 11-10-2016 by L.L. No. 4-2016]
(1) The Building Inspector shall keep permanent official records of all
transactions and activities conducted by all Code Enforcement
personnel, including records of:
(a) All applications received, reviewed and approved or denied;
(b) All plans, specifications and construction documents approved;
§ 376-140 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 376-140
1:473
§ 376-141. Adoption of New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and
Building Code and State Energy Conservation Construction Code.
[Amended 11-10-2016 by L.L. No. 4-2016]
The New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code and the
State Energy Conservation Construction Code are hereby adopted and
recognized as the official Building Construction Codes of the Town for
purposes set forth therein and as it may be amended from time to time.
§ 376-142. Granting of building permits and certificates of
occupancy and/or use. [Amended 11-10-2016 by L.L. No. 4-2016]
No building permit, certificate of occupancy or certificate of use shall be
issued unless the proposed construction or use is in conformance with all
provisions of this chapter, the New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and
Building Code, the State Energy Conservation Construction Code and other
applicable laws.
§ 376-143. Noncompliance with orders.
Any person who shall violate any order of the Building Inspector, issued
under this chapter, shall be deemed to have violated this chapter.
§ 376-144. Building permit required.
A building permit is required for:
(c) All building permits, certificates of occupancy, certificates of
compliance, temporary certificates, stop-work orders, and
operating permits issued.
(d) All inspections and tests performed;
(e) All statements and reports issued;
(f) All complaints received;
(g) All investigations conducted;
(h) All other features and activities specified in or contemplated by
this chapter; and
(i) All fees charged and collected,
(2) All such records shall be public records open for public inspection
during normal business hours. All plans and records pertaining to
buildings or structures, or appurtenances thereto, shall be retained
for at least the minimum time period as required by state law and
regulation.
A. The construction, reconstruction, moving, demolition, structural
alteration or change in the use of a building or a structure.
§ 376-140 RAMAPO CODE § 376-144
1:474
§ 376-145. Application procedure.
B. Any change in the bulk of a building, structure, or nonbuilding use, but
not including ordinary repairs, provided that such repairs do not
involve: [Amended 11-10-2016 by L.L. No. 4-2016]
(1) The removal or cutting away of a load-bearing wall, partition, or
portion thereof, or of any structural beam or load-bearing
component;
(2) The removal or change of any required means of egress, or the
rearrangement of parts of a structure in a manner which affects
egress;
(3) The enlargement, alteration, replacement or relocation of any
building system;
(4) The removal from service of all or part of a fire protection system
for any period of time.
A. Application for a building permit shall be made to the Building
Inspector, on forms provided by him, and shall contain the following
information and shall be accompanied with the following documents
and material as maybe required by the Building Inspector:
(1) Each application shall contain the following information:
(a) Description agreeing with the Tax Map of the Town of Ramapo
of the land on which the proposed work is to be done.
(b) A statement of the use or occupancy of all parts of the land and
of the building or structure.
(c) The valuation of the proposed work.
(d) The full name and address of the owner and of the applicant,
including the names and addresses of each officer and director
of any corporation as is deemed necessary.
(e) A brief description of the nature of the proposed work.
(2) Each application for a building permit shall be accompanied by
plans and specifications which must comply with the New York
State Uniform Fire and Building Code and the State Energy
Conservation Construction Code, including plot plans and site
plans, as required, drawn to scale, showing the location and size of
all proposed new construction and all existing structures on the
site, the nature and character of the work to be performed and the
materials to be incorporated, distance between structures,
distance from lot lines, widths and grades of adjoining streets,
walks and alleys, and, where required by the Building Inspector,
details of structural, mechanical and electrical work, including
computations, stress diagrams and other technical data, and the
§ 376-144 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 376-145
1:475
location of any existing or proposed well or septic system. Plans
and specifications shall bear the signature and seal of architect
or engineer and his/her New York State license number, unless
otherwise exempted by the Education Law. [Amended
11-10-2016 by L.L. No. 4-2016]
(3) Application shall be made by the owner or lessee, or agent of either,
or by the architect, engineer or builder employed in connection
with the proposed work. Where such application is made by a
person other than the owner, it shall be accompanied by an affidavit
of the owner or applicant that the proposed work is authorized by
the owner and that the applicant is authorized to make such
application.
(4) Any amendment to the application or to the plans and
specifications accompanying the same must be filed and approved
by the Building Inspector prior to the completion of the work, and
such amendments shall comply with the provisions of this chapter.
The refusal of such an amendment by the Building Inspector shall
be in writing.
(5) Every application for a building permit pursuant to this chapter
shall be accompanied by payment of a fee in accordance with the
Standard Schedule of Fees.
B. The Building Inspector shall examine or cause to be examined all
applications for permits and the plans, specifications and documents
filed therewith. He shall approve or disapprove of the application within
one month from the receipt of the completed application accompanied
by all appropriate documents and fees.
(1) Upon approval of the application, the Building Inspector shall issue
a permit upon the form prescribed by him and shall affix his
signature or cause his signature to be affixed thereto and endorse
the plans and specifications to show approval.
(2) If the application is disapproved by the Building Inspector, he shall
return the plans and specifications to the applicant and otherwise
comply with § 376-140 and file each disapproval in the office of the
Building Inspector.
C. One set of such approved plans and specifications shall be retained in
the files of the Building Inspector for such time as shall be mandated by
state law, but not less than two years. The applicant shall, at all times,
keep one set of the approved plans and specifications, together with the
building permit, at the building site and open to inspection by the
Building Inspector at all reasonable times.
D. Town will: [Added 11-10-2016 by L.L. No. 4-2016]
(1) Perform all construction inspections required by 19 NYCRR
1203.3(b);
§ 376-145 RAMAPO CODE § 376-145
1:476
§ 376-146. Expiration of permits.
§ 376-147. Revocation of permits.
The Building Inspector may revoke a building permit issued in any one of
the following circumstances:
(2) Require that all work must remain accessible and exposed until
inspected and accepted by the Town;
(3) After each inspection, note the work as satisfactory as completed or
notify the permit holder as to where the work fails to comply with
the New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code
and/or State Energy Conservation Construction Code; and
(4) Require that any work not in compliance with the New York State
Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code and/or State Energy
Conservation Construction Code remain exposed until it has been
brought into compliance with said codes, has been reinspected by
the Town, and has been found by the Town to be satisfactory as
completed.
A. Every building permit shall expire at the end of two years from the date
of its issuance and shall be void and of no effect, subject to the
extension provision of Subsections B and C of this section.
B. If construction has been commenced within two years from the
issuance of the building permit but has not been completed, the holder
of the permit may apply to the Building Inspector for an extension not to
exceed one year. Upon the payment of 1/2 of the fee required for the
issuance of the original building permit, the Building Inspector may, in
his discretion and for due cause, extend the permit for a period not to
exceed one year from the date of its expiration. The Building Inspector
may, in his discretion, for due cause, grant a second one-year extension
upon application and payment of 1/4 of the fee required for the issuance
of the original building permit.
C. If construction has not been commenced, the holder of the permit may
apply to the Board of Appeals for an extension not to exceed one year
from the expiration of the permit, upon the payment of 1/2 of the
original building permit fee and such other fee or fees as may be
payable upon any application to the Board of Appeals.
D. Failure to complete the work within the time prescribed shall require
that a new building permit application be filed and a new permit issued
before any work may commence or continue.
A. There has been a false statement or misrepresentation as to a material
fact in the application, plans, specifications or other accompanying
documents upon which the building permit was based.
§ 376-145 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 376-147
1:477
§ 376-148. Stop-work orders.
Whenever the Building Inspector shall determine that work on any building
or structure is being or has been conducted in violation of any of the
provisions of the Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code, state, federal,
county or town laws, rules or regulations or has failed to meet or violates
any requirement of an approved site plan or subdivision plan, including
but not limited to the required drainage, grade or elevation plans, sewer
and septic plans, approved road profile plans and such other plans or
specifications upon which a building permit was issued, or that any work
is being conducted in a dangerous or unsafe manner, then the Building
Inspector shall notify the owner of the property, or the owner's agent, or the
person performing the work, to suspend and halt work. Such direction by
the Building Inspector (a stop-work order) shall be in writing and delivered
to the owner, or the owner's agent, or the person performing the work or
affixed to any part of said structure. Such stop-work order shall state the
reasons therefor and the conditions under which the work may be resumed.
Should work continue in violation of the stop-work order, the Building
Inspector may, without further notice, revoke the building permit and, if
there is a certificate of occupancy or use, revoke the same.
§ 376-149. Certificates of occupancy and/or use.
B. The building permit was issued in error and should not have been
issued in accordance with the applicable laws.
C. The holder or the applicant has failed to meet the requirements of an
approved site development plan or subdivision plat.
D. The work being performed under the permit is not in accordance with
the provision of the application, the permit, the plans or specifications.
E. The holder of the permit has failed or refused to comply with a stop
order issued by the Building Inspector under § 376-148.
F. When a building permit has been issued in error because of incorrect,
inaccurate, or incomplete information, or the work for which the permit
was issued violates the New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and
Building Code or the State Energy Conservation Construction Code,
such permit shall be revoked or suspended until such time as the permit
holder demonstrates that all work completed and all work proposed
shall be in compliance with the applicable provisions of the code.
[Added 11-10-2016 by L.L. No. 4-2016]
A. Except for buildings constructed prior to February 5, 1930, no building
shall be used or occupied in whole or in part unless or until a certificate
of use or a certificate of occupancy, as appropriate, shall have been
issued by the Building Inspector, and then only in conformity with said
certificate(s).
§ 376-147 RAMAPO CODE § 376-149
1:478
§ 376-1410. Issuance of certificates of occupancy and/or use.
B. A temporary certificate of occupancy may be issued for periods of up to
90 days, but not more than one year in the aggregate. A temporary
certificate of occupancy will be issued only if the building (or portion of
the building for which the temporary certificate is issued) may be
occupied safely, any fire- and smoke-detecting or fire protection
equipment which has been installed is operational, all required means
of egress from the structure have been provided, and such temporary
certificate of occupancy otherwise complies with all requirements of 19
NYCRR 1203.3(d)(3). During the period that a temporary certificate of
occupancy is in effect, the owner of the subject building is required to
bring the building into full compliance with the applicable provisions of
the New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code and the
State Energy Conservation Construction Code. The Building Inspector
shall require a cash deposit or an irrevocable letter of credit drawn on a
bank and in a form satisfactory to the Town attorney to ensure and
guarantee the completion of the structure and site improvements. The
Building Inspector shall determine the sum of said cash or letter of
credit. [Amended 11-10-2016 by L.L. No. 4-2016]
C. No change shall be made in the use or occupancy of a building or
structure unless a certificate of occupancy authorizing the change of
use shall have been issued. A change in use shall include, but not be
limited to, a change in or of the type, class, nature or scope of the
goods, services or operation.
A. A certificate of occupancy shall be deemed to authorize and is required
for both initial and continued occupancy and use of the building or land
to which it applies for the purposes therein stated.
B. Before issuing a certificate:
(1) The owner or his agent shall make application for a certificate of
occupancy. Accompanying this application and before the issuance
of a certificate of occupancy, there shall be filed with the Building
Inspector an affidavit of the registered architect or licensed
professional engineer who filed the original plans, or of the
registered architect or licensed professional engineer who
supervised the construction of the work. This affidavit shall state
that the deponent has examined the approved plans of the
structure for which a certificate of occupancy is sought, that the
structure has been erected in accordance with approved plans and
as erected complies with this chapter and these regulations and the
requirements of any approved subdivision, plat or site plan except
insofar as variations there from have been legally authorized. Such
variations shall be specified in the affidavit.
(2) The Building Inspector shall examine or cause to be examined all
buildings, structures, and sites for which the application has been
filed. Issuance of a certificate of occupancy or a certificate of
§ 376-149 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 376-1410
1:479
§ 376-1411. Revocation of certificates of occupancy and/or use.
If after the issuance of a certificate of occupancy or use, the Building
Inspector shall determine that there has been a violation of § 376-149C
or that there has been a violation or set of circumstances which would
authorize the revocation of a building permit pursuant to § 376-147 or
376-148, the Building Inspector may revoke the certificate of occupancy or
use that had been issued.
§ 376-1412. Right of entry.
The Building Inspector or his authorized agent, upon the showing of proper
credentials and in the discharge of his duties, may enter upon any land or
building or structure at any reasonable hour, subject to all applicable laws.
§ 376-1413. Penalties for offenses.
Any person, corporation, association or partnership who shall violate any
provision of this chapter or who shall build or alter any structure or use
any land in violation of any statement or plan submitted and approved
thereunder or who shall knowingly assist therein shall be liable to a fine
of not more than $5,000 or imprisonment not exceeding 15 days, or both
such fine and imprisonment. Each day's continued violation shall constitute
a separate and additional violation. In addition to the foregoing provisions,
the Town shall have such other remedies for any violation or threatened
violation of this chapter as is now or may hereafter be provided by law.
§ 376-1414. Prosecution under statutory provisions.
Nothing contained herein shall be deemed to limit or prevent prosecution
pursuant to the Multiple Residence Law or the Executive Law of the State
of New York.
compliance shall be preceded by an inspection of the building,
structure, or work. A certificate of occupancy shall not be issued
until all required construction inspections have been performed
and the project passes such inspections. Where applicable, a
written statement of structural observations and/or final report of
special inspections, prepared in accordance with the provisions of
the New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code,
must be received prior to the issuance of the certificate. Also,
where applicable, flood hazard certifications, prepared in
accordance with the provisions of the New York State Uniform
Fire Prevention and Building Code must be received prior to the
issuance of the certificate. [Amended 11-10-2016 by L.L. No.
4-2016]
C. If the Building Inspector shall determine that the improvement,
construction, etc., was made in conformity with the building permit and
the requirements of the Code of the Town of Ramapo, he shall issue a
certificate of occupancy or use as the case may be.
§ 376-1410 RAMAPO CODE § 376-1415
1:480
§ 376-1415. Appeals from decisions of Building Inspector.
Whenever the Building Inspector shall approve or disapprove, act or fail
to act or otherwise perform any of his duties and shall render a decision
thereon, such decision shall be reviewable by appeal to the Board of
Appeals from the Building Inspector's decision. Such appeal shall be taken
not more than 60 days after the filing of the decision of the Building
Inspector in the office of the Building Inspector.
§ 376-1416. Alternate Planning Board members. [Added 1-23-2008
by L.L. No. 3-2008]
A. The Town Board of the Town of Ramapo may appoint up to four
alternate members to the Planning Board to serve as provided herein.
Said alternate members shall attend all meetings of the Board, and the
Chairman of the Planning Board shall designate the alternate members
as acting members as necessary when absence of regular members of
the Board or a conflict of interest of regular members of the Board
would otherwise prevent seven members of the Board from considering
any pending matter. The alternate members shall be so designated on a
rotating basis so that each alternate member shall be afforded an equal
opportunity to serve as an acting member, except that the Chairman
shall designate the alternate member with the longer remaining term if
the particular matter is likely to continue beyond the current official
year. Once designated to serve on a particular matter before the Board,
the alternate member shall have the same powers and duties as regular
members of the Board until that matter is concluded. Any
determination by the Board consisting of alternate members shall have
weight and be entitled to the same authority as the act or deed of the
regular Planning Board, and all laws, statutes and regulations shall
apply and be applied with equal force and effect. Alternate members
appointed pursuant to this section shall be paid for their respective
services as fixed by resolution of the Town Board.
B. Alternate members shall serve two-year terms expiring at the end of the
official year, except that in the first year of the application of this
section, to stagger the terms, two alternate members shall be appointed
for one year and two for two years. Their successors shall be appointed
for a term of two years after the expiration of the terms of their
predecessors in office. If a vacancy shall occur otherwise than by
expiration of term, it shall be filled by the Town Board for the unexpired
term. The Town Board shall have the power to remove any alternate
member of the Planning Board for cause, after a public hearing if one is
requested.
C. Although all alternate members of the Planning Board shall attend all
meetings of the Planning Board, they shall have no power to participate
in any actions of the Planning Board except as provided herein.
§ 376-1415 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 376-1417
1:481
§ 376-1417. Operating permits. [Added 11-10-2016 by L.L. No.
4-2016]
A. Operating permits shall be required for conducting the activities or
using the categories of buildings listed below:
(1) Manufacturing, storing or handling hazardous materials in
quantities exceeding those listed in tables 2703.1.1(1), 2703.1.1(2),
2703.1.1(3), or 2703.1.1(4), of the Fire Code of New York State;
(2) Hazardous processes and activities, including but not limited to,
commercial and industrial operations which produce combustible
dust as a byproduct, fruit and crop ripening, and waste handling;
(3) Use of pyrotechnic devices in assembly occupancies;
(4) Buildings containing one or more areas of public assembly with an
occupant load of 100 persons or more; and
(5) Buildings whose use or occupancy classification may pose a
substantial potential hazard to public safety, as determined by the
government or agency charged with or accountable for
administration and enforcement of the New York State Uniform
Fire Prevention and Building Code.
B. Parties who propose to undertake the types of activities or operate the
types of buildings listed in Subsection A(1) shall be required to obtain
an operating permit prior to commencing such operation. An
application for an operating permit shall contain sufficient information
to permit a determination that quantities, materials, and activities
conform to the requirements of the New York State Uniform Fire
Prevention and Building Code. Tests or reports necessary to verify
conformance shall be required.
C. An inspection of the premises shall be conducted prior to the issuance
of an operating permit.
D. A single operating permit may apply to more than one hazardous
activity.
E. Operating permits may remain in effect until reissued, renewed or
revoked or may be issued for a specified period of time consistent with
local conditions.
F. Where activities do not comply with applicable provisions of the New
York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code, an operating
permit shall be revoked or suspended.
§ 376-1417 RAMAPO CODE § 376-1417
1:482
ARTICLE XV
Board of Appeals
§ 376-150. Creation, appointment and organization.
The existing Board of Appeals of seven members is hereby continued. Their
successors shall be appointed in accordance with the provisions of the
Town Law. The Town Board shall designate the Chairman from the Board of
Appeals' membership. The Town Board may also appoint up to two alternate
members who may substitute for members who are absent or unable to
participate.
§ 376-151. Powers and duties.
The Board of Appeals shall have all the powers and duties prescribed by
statute and by this chapter, which are more particularly specified as follows,
provided that none of the following provisions shall be deemed to limit any
power of the Board that is conferred by law.
A. Appeals. The Board of Appeals shall hear and decide appeals from and
review any order, requirement, decision or determination of the
Building Inspector or such other official charged with the enforcement
of this chapter or the Community Design Review Committee acting in
its capacity as an architectural review board. The Board of Appeals
shall not hear any appeal from nor review any order, determination,
requirement, decision or revocation of the Building Inspector where
such order, determination, requirement, decision or revocation has
been directed by the Town Board. In addition, the Board of Appeals may
not waive the requirement for site development plan application as
required in any part of this chapter.
B. Interpretation. On an appeal from any order, requirement, decision or
determination made by an administrative official or by the Building
Inspector to decide any of the following questions:
(1) Determination of the meaning of any portion of the text of this
chapter or of any condition or requirement specified or made under
the provisions of this chapter.
(2) Determination of the exact location of any district boundary shown
on the Zoning Map.
C. Variances. On appeal from an order, requirement, decision or
determination made by the Building Inspector, or on referral of an
applicant to the Board by an approving agency acting pursuant to this
chapter, the Board of Appeals is authorized to vary or modify the strict
letter of this chapter as set forth below, except that in no case may a
variance be granted from provisions of the New York State Uniform Fire
Prevention and Building Code and the State Energy Conservation
Construction Code: [Amended 11-10-2016 by L.L. No. 4-2016]
(1) Area variances.
§ 376-150 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 376-151
1:483
(a) The Zoning Board of Appeals shall have the power, upon an
appeal from a decision or determination of an administrative
official charged with the enforcement of this chapter, to grant
area variances from the area or dimensional requirements of
such ordinance or local law.
(b) In making its determination, the Zoning Board of Appeals shall
take into consideration the benefit to the applicant if the
variance is granted, as weighed against the detriment to the
health, safety and welfare of the neighborhood or community
by such grant. In making such determination, the Board shall
also consider:
[1] Whether an undesirable change will be produced in the
character of the neighborhood or a detriment to nearby
properties will be created by the granting of the area
variance;
[2] Whether the benefit sought by the applicant can be
achieved by some method, feasible for the applicant to
pursue, other than an area variance;
[3] Whether the requested area variance is substantial;
[4] Whether the proposed variance will have an adverse effect
or impact on the physical or environmental conditions in
the neighborhood or district; and
[5] Whether the alleged difficulty was self-created, which
consideration shall be relevant to the decision of the Board
of Appeals, but shall not necessarily preclude the granting
of the area variance.
(c) The Board of Appeals, in the granting of area variances, shall
grant the minimum variance that it shall deem necessary and
adequate and at the same time preserve and protect the
character of the neighborhood and the health, safety and
welfare of the community.
(2) Use variances.
(a) The Board of Appeals, on appeal from the decision or
determination of the administrative official charged with the
enforcement of such ordinance or local law, shall have the
power to grant use variances, authorizing a use of the land
which otherwise would not be allowed or would be prohibited
by the terms of this chapter.
(b) No such use variance shall be granted by a Board of Appeals
without a showing by the applicant that applicable zoning
regulations and restrictions have caused unnecessary hardship
the applicant shall demonstrate to the Board of Appeals that:
§ 376-151 RAMAPO CODE § 376-151
1:484
§ 376-152. Rules of procedure.
[1] Under applicable zoning regulations the applicant is
deprived of all economic use or benefit from the property
in question, which deprivation must be established by
competent financial evidence;
[2] That the alleged hardship relating to the property in
question is unique and does not apply to a substantial
portion of the district or neighborhood;
[3] That the requested use variance, if granted, will not alter
the essential character of the neighborhood; and
[4] That the alleged hardship has not been self-created.
(c) The Board of Appeals, in the granting of use variances, shall
grant the minimum variance that it shall deem necessary and
adequate to address the unnecessary hardship proven by the
applicant, and at the same time, preserve and protect the
character of the neighborhood and the health, safety and
welfare of the community.
D. Imposition of conditions. The Board of Appeals shall, in the granting of
both use variances and area variances, have the authority to impose
such reasonable conditions and restrictions as are directly related to
and incidental to the proposed use of the property, or the period of time
such variance shall be in effect. Such conditions shall be consistent with
the spirit and intent of this chapter and shall be imposed for the
purpose of minimizing any adverse impact such variance may have on
the neighborhood or community.
E. Extensions across district boundaries. In appropriate cases where a lot
lies within two districts, the Board of Appeals may permit the extension
of existing or proposed permitted accessory off-street parking space
across a district boundary, under such conditions as will safeguard the
character of the district into which such use is extended. However, no
such extension shall exceed 75 feet, measured at right angles to such
district boundary. The power under this subsection shall not permit the
moving of the zoning district line but only the extension of the
accessory off-street parking space.
F. The Board of Appeals, after a public hearing, shall have the power to
direct the Building Inspector to issue a building permit, certificate of
occupancy or certificate of use, as the case may be, subject to other
applicable laws, codes, rules and regulations.
A. The Board of Appeals may adopt rules and regulations with respect to
procedure before it and with respect to any subject matter over which it
has jurisdiction, subject to approval of the Town Board. Such
regulations shall include provisions for conduct of meetings,
notification of parties, form of applications and filing of decisions.
§ 376-151 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 376-152
1:485
§ 376-153. Appeals from Board of Appeals determinations.
Any person aggrieved by any decision of the Board of Appeals hereunder
may, within 30 days of the filing of the decision with the office of the Town
Clerk, appeal pursuant to Article 78 of the Civil Practice Laws and Rules.
B. Every decision of the Board of Appeals shall be recorded in accordance
with a standard format adopted by the Board, shall fully set forth the
circumstances of the case and shall contain a record of the findings on
which the decision is based. Every decision of said Board shall be by
resolution, and each such resolution shall be filed in the offices of the
Town Clerk and Building Inspector by case number.
C. All appeals and applications made to the Board of Appeals shall be in
writing and shall be accompanied by a fee as determined in the
Standard Schedule of Fees, as may be adopted from time to time by
resolution of the Town Board.
D. Affidavits. [Added 4-23-2008 by L.L. No. 4-2008]
(1) An application for a hearing before the Zoning Board of Appeals
shall be accompanied by a list containing the names and addresses
of each owner of property within a distance of 500 feet from the
property. An affidavit shall be submitted by the applicant declaring
that the names and addresses of the property owners are stated as
they appear on the latest tax assessment roll of the Town of
Ramapo. The applicant shall mail notification of the public hearing
via first-class mail to each owner of property within a distance of
500 feet from the property at least 10 days prior to the date of the
public hearing. Prior to mailing the requisite notification, the
applicant shall be responsible for generating a list setting forth the
name and address of each owner of property to be noticed pursuant
to this subsection. The applicant shall bring said list to a branch of
the United States Post Office together with the envelopes for
mailing. The list shall be reviewed by a representative of the United
States Post Office, who shall confirm that the names and addresses
on said list correspond to the names and addresses on the
envelopes for mailing. The representative of the United States Post
Office shall also stamp on the list the amount of postage expended
for mailing costs. The applicant shall submit an affidavit stating
conformance with the notice requirement. The original list setting
forth the postage shall be submitted together with the affidavit.
(2) The applicant shall also state in an additional affidavit that he has
completed and placed at least one poster for every 300 feet of road
frontage of the property in a visible location; said poster shall be
provided to him by the Building, Planning and Zoning Department.
(3) The affidavits of mailing and posting must be filed in the office of
the Building, Planning and Zoning Department at least one day
prior to the date of the hearing.
§ 376-152 RAMAPO CODE § 376-153
1:486
ARTICLE XVI
Town Board Special Permits and Standards
§ 376-160. Statutory authorization.
§ 376-161. Application procedure.
A. Pursuant to the provisions of the Municipal Home Rule Law, the Town
Board reserves the approval authority for special permits for uses
identified as such in Column D of § 376-31, Use Table. Such uses
represent such diverse benefits and impacts on local land uses as to
preclude specific descriptions and standards for their approval. The
Town Board, in considering any application for a special permit
hereunder, shall exercise such discretion re served for legislative
matters so as to ensure that the public health, welfare and safety are
protected and the environmental and land resources of the Town are
most efficiently utilized.
B. Applications for special permits pursuant to this section shall be upon
forms prescribed by the Town Board and shall contain the information
required in the rules and regulations adopted pursuant to this chapter.
C. Fees for special permit applications and for appeals before the Town
Board shall be in accordance with the Standard Schedule of Fees of the
Town of Ramapo.
A. An applicant for a special permit shall, simultaneously with the filing of
any application with the Town Board, file an application for site
development plan approval with the Director of Building, Planning and
Zoning, together with appropriate plans, drawings and fee for site
development plan review. Thereafter, and before the Town Board shall
give any consideration to or review the application for such special
permit, the Director of Building, Planning and Zoning shall refer said
site development plan application to the Community Design Review
Committee which shall review the application for the purpose of
preliminary site development plan review and in light of the general
considerations herein and specific standards herein for special permits.
Thereafter, the Community Design Review Committee shall transmit its
recommendations to the Town Board within 30 days.
B. The Town Board, upon receipt of the report by the Committee, shall,
within 45 days, conduct a public hearing and within 45 days thereafter
render its decision, unless the applicant waives the time requirements
of this section.
C. The Town Board, in approving any special permit hereunder, shall
require conformance with any supplementary requirements applying to
such uses generally and may establish such other conditions or
limitations upon the use, or characteristics of the use, which are
reasonably related to the public health, safely and general welfare and
as may be necessary to carry out the intent of this chapter. The decision
§ 376-160 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 376-161
1:487
§ 376-162. Public parkland preservation development standards.
A public parkland preservation development shall be subject to the
following standards:
of the Town Board shall be filed in the office of the Town Clerk and
a copy thereof mailed to the applicant. Thereafter, the applicant will
proceed with site development plan approval before the Planning
Board.
D. Unless specifically authorized in the decision of the Town Board, no
requirement or conditions of such special permit shall be subject to
appeal before the Board of Appeals.
E. Requirements or conditions imposed by this chapter for any special
permit use shall not be waived or reduced by the Town Board and shall
be considered to be the minimum requirements for any authorization
hereunder, except that the Town Board may authorize further
application and action by the Board of Appeals. Special permits shall be
deemed to be indefinite authorization unless otherwise specified in the
approval thereof but, in any case, shall expire within 18 months of the
date of approval unless a building permit has been issued for the special
permit use. Such period may be extended on separate application to the
Town Board.
F. The grant of special permits for the uses indicated may be conditioned
on periodic renewal, which renewal may be granted following
application, public notice and hearing and may be withheld upon
determination that conditions, as may have been identified in the
original grant requiring that the use be of temporary duration, now
necessitate cessation of such use or imposition of additional or
supplemental safeguards or conditions, or that the original conditions
as may have been prescribed for such special permit have not been or
are not being complied with, wholly or in part. Notices of violation
pursuant to Article XIV shall be a prima facie evidence of lack of
conformity with such standards or conditions.
A. The minimum size for the site shall be 500 acres.
B. The development may consist of single-family detached residences,
townhouses or a combination thereof.
C. The project must be built as cluster development(s) pursuant to
§ 376-43 but subject to Subsection F below.
D. At least 80% of the land area must be dedicated as public parkland.
E. The Town Board, as a condition of approval, may require that up to 10%
of the dwelling units be occupied by moderate income households as
determined by the Department of Housing and Urban Development.
§ 376-161 RAMAPO CODE § 376-162
1:488
§ 376-163. Active adult housing developments.
The standards for active adult housing developments shall be as follows:
F. The number of permitted residences shall not exceed the total acreage
of the site less wetlands, 50% of the site's steep slopes (over 25%), and
all watercourses and floodplains (100%) multiplied by 43,560 (square
feet/acre) and divided by 40,000 with no double counting of overlapping
areas.
G. Off-street, barrier-separated school bus stops will be required to
promote safe and efficient circulation.
H. The Planning Board, at the time of subdivision or site plan, shall
establish the minimum lot size, but at no time will the lot area be less
than as follows: [Added 6-14-2006 by L.L. No. 4-2006]
(1) Townhouse: 2,500 square feet.
(2) Semiattached: 5,000 square feet.
(3) Detached: 10,000 square feet.
A. No dwelling unit shall contain more than two bedrooms, except that one
dwelling unit for each superintendent may be provided which shall
consist of no more than three bedrooms.
B. Except for the superintendent and his family, the occupancy of an active
adult housing development shall be limited to owners or lessees, at
least one of whom is 45 years of age or older. Any other occupant must
be at least 18 years of age.
C. The density shall not exceed 12 units per acre.
D. The development coverage shall not exceed 65% including buildings,
walks, parking areas and driveways. Parking areas above the ground
floor, if any, within a building shall not be counted in computing said
coverage.
E. The maximum building height shall be 40 feet or three stories,
whichever is less.
F. The minimum distance between detached buildings shall be 30 feet.
G. Suitably equipped and adequately maintained recreation and open
space shall be provided. Group sitting areas shall be well-defined by
walls, fences, hedges or other plantings designed to impart a sense of
containment or security and to provide group privacy.
H. There shall be provided a safe and convenient system of drives, service
access roads and walks with due consideration given in planning such
facilities to such items as handrails and ramps. Such facilities shall be
adequately lighted, and said lighting shall not be directed on adjacent
streets or properties.
§ 376-162 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 376-163
1:489
§ 376-164. Congregate care housing developments.
The standards for congregate care housing developments shall be as
follows:
I. Central refuse collection areas shall be located for the convenience of
all units. They shall be supplied with an adequate number and type of
covered receptacles in an enclosed gated structure and shall be provide
with property screening and maintenance.
J. All parking areas, driveways, recreation areas and refuse collection
areas shall be no closer than 10 feet to any building or lot line, and any
swimming pool shall be no closer than 30 feet to any building and 50
feet to any lot line. The requirement which prohibits parking in
required yards (§ 376-71A) may be waived by the Planning Board.
K. The required side and/or rear yard may be decreased to 10 feet where
abutting another residential specialized housing development.
L. A buffer of not less than 20 feet shall be provided.
M. For purposes of this section, the minimum lot area as set forth in
§ 376-41 shall refer to the size of the entire site.
N. The Planning Board, at the time of subdivision or site plan, shall
establish the minimum lot size, but at no time will the lot area be less
than as follows: [Added 6-14-2006 by L.L. No. 4-2006]
(1) Townhouse: 2,500 square feet.
(2) Semiattached: 5,000 square feet.
(3) Detached: 10,000 square feet.
A. At least 40% of the dwelling units shall be one-bedroom units. No
dwelling unit shall contain more than two bedrooms.
B. Except for the necessary staff and their families, the occupancy of a
congregate care housing development shall be limited to individual men
and women 60 years of age or above or married couples 60 or above in
which one of the partners is at least 60.
C. Within the congregate care housing development, certain related
ancillary facilities maybe permitted, either in a separate building or in
combination with dwelling units, such as cafeterias, formal dining
rooms, family dining areas, self-service laundries, lounges, exercise
rooms, game rooms, arts and crafts workshops, libraries, music rooms,
auditoriums/social halls, meeting rooms for residents and offices for
visiting governmental agencies, housekeeping services and
transportation service, only to the extent that they meet the needs of
the occupants of the development. Such facilities shall be subordinate
to the residential character of the development and shall be located out
of public view, with no outside advertising. Such facilities shall be
§ 376-163 RAMAPO CODE § 376-164
1:490
expressly approved by the Town Board. Approval of a special permit
and site development plan for dwelling units in a congregate care
housing development in no way constitutes approval for installation of
any related facility.
D. The gross density shall not exceed 12 units per acre. [Amended
6-14-2006 by L.L. No. 4-2006]
E. The maximum development coverage shall not exceed 65% including
buildings, walks, parking areas and driveways. Parking areas above the
ground floor, if any, within a building shall not be counted in computing
said coverage
F. The building height shall be determined by the Town Board at the time
of special permit approval, but in no event shall exceed 45 feet.
G. The minimum distance between detached buildings shall be no less
than the height of the tallest building.
H. Suitably equipped and adequately maintained recreation and open
space shall be provided. Group sitting areas shall be well-defined by
walls, fences, hedges or other plantings designed to impart a sense of
containment or security and to provide group privacy.
I. There shall be provided a safe and convenient system of drives, service
access roads and walks with due consideration given in planning such
facilities to such items as handrails, grab bars, walking trails and
ramps. Such facilities shall be adequately lighted, and said lighting
shall not be directed on adjacent streets or properties.
J. The outside storage of refuse, if permitted, shall be in rodent-proof
containers and shall be provided with proper screening and
maintenance.
K. All parking areas, driveways, recreation areas and refuse collection
areas shall be no closer than 25 feet to any building or lot line, and any
swimming pool shall be no closer than 30 feet to any building and 50
feet to any lot line. Such areas between said facilities and lot lines shall
be landscaped with suitable screening. The requirement which
prohibits parking in required yards (§ 376-71A) may be waived by the
Planning Board.
L. The required side and/or rear yard may be decreased to 10 feet where
abutting another residential specialized housing development.
M. All developments shall provide proper access for fire-fighting
equipment and personnel and shall provide hydrants in such number
and location and with such water pressure as may be determined
adequate and approved by the Planning Board, based upon the
recommendation of the Building Inspector and Fire Department having
jurisdiction.
§ 376-164 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 376-164
1:491
§ 376-165. Assisted living developments.
The standards for assisted living housing developments shall be as follows:
N. All developments shall be connected to public sewer systems in
accordance with standards approved by the Town Engineer.
O. Buildings shall be constructed in compliance with the New York State
Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code and shall include the
following minimum safety standards for its guests and residents:
(1) All doors shall be of sufficient width to accommodate wheelchairs.
(2) All dwelling units and communal facilities shall be adaptable for
use by nonambulatory persons.
(3) Wherever steps are located, ramps or elevators shall be provided
for the physically handicapped as required.
(4) Emergency signal facilities shall be provided in each dwelling unit,
located three to four feet above floor level, and shall register a
signal at a central location(s) to permit twenty-four-hour-a-day
monitoring.
(5) Toilet facilities located within individual dwelling units shall be
adaptable for the installation and utilization of grab bars.
(6) Grab bars shall be located around all tubs and showers. Such grab
bars shall be of the same size and height as required by the New
York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code for toilet
facilities.
(7) All floor surfaces shall be nonskid.
(8) Central heating and air conditioning shall be individually
adjustable for each dwelling unit.
A. At least 40% of the dwelling units shall be one-bedroom units. No
dwelling unit shall contain more than two bedrooms.
B. Except for the necessary staff and their families, the occupancy of a
assisted living housing development shall be limited to individual men
and women 60 years of age or above or married couples 60 or above in
which one of the partners is at least 60.
C. Within the assisted living housing developments, certain related
ancillary facilities maybe permitted, either in a separate building or in
combination with dwelling units, such as cafeterias, formal dining
rooms, family dining areas, self-service laundries, lounges, exercise
rooms, game rooms, arts and crafts workshops, libraries, music rooms,
auditoriums/social halls, meeting rooms for residents and offices for
visiting governmental agencies, housekeeping services and
transportation service, only to the extent that they meet the needs of
§ 376-164 RAMAPO CODE § 376-165
1:492
the occupants of the development. A medical infirmary staffed by a
registered nurse on a twenty-four-hour basis must be provided. Such
facilities shall be subordinate to the residential character of the
development and shall be located out of public view, with no outside
advertising. Such facilities shall be expressly approved by the Town
Board. Approval of a special permit and site development plan for
dwelling units in an assisted living housing development in no way
constitutes approval for installation of any related facility.
D. The gross density shall not exceed 12 units per acre.
E. The maximum development coverage shall not exceed 60%.
F. The building height shall be determined by the Town Board at the time
of special permit approval, but in no event shall exceed 45 feet.
G. The minimum distance between detached buildings shall be no less
than the height of the tallest building.
H. Suitably equipped and adequately maintained recreation and open
space shall be provided. Group sitting areas shall be well-defined by
walls, fences, hedges or other plantings designed to impart a sense of
containment or security and to provide group privacy.
I. There shall be provided a safe and convenient system of drives, service
access roads and walks with due consideration given In planning such
facilities to such items as handrails, grab bars, walking trails and
ramps. Such facilities shall be adequately lighted, and said lighting
shall not be directed on adjacent streets or properties.
J. The outside storage of refuse, if permitted, shall be in rodent-proof
containers and shall be provided with proper screening and
maintenance.
K. All parking areas, driveways, recreation areas and refuse collection
areas shall be no closer than 25 feet to any building or lot line, and any
swimming pool shall be no closer than 30 feet to any building and 50
feet to any lot line. Such areas between said facilities and lot lines shall
be landscaped with suitable screening. The requirement which
prohibits parking in required yards (§ 376-71A) may be waived by the
Planning Board.
L. The required side and/or rear yard may be decreased to 10 feet where
abutting another residential specialized housing development.
M. All developments shall provide proper access for fire-fighting
equipment and personnel and shall provide hydrants in such number
and location and with such water pressure as may be determined
adequate and approved by the Planning Board, based upon the
recommendation of the Building Inspector and Fire Department having
jurisdiction.
§ 376-165 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 376-165
1:493
§ 376-166. Housing developments for the handicapped.
N. All developments shall be connected to public sewer systems in
accordance with standards approved by the Town Engineer.
O. Buildings shall be constructed in compliance with the New York State
Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code and shall include the
following minimum safety standards for its guests and residents:
(1) All doors shall be of sufficient width to accommodate wheelchairs.
(2) All dwelling units and communal facilities shall be adaptable for
use by nonambulatory persons.
(3) Wherever steps are located, ramps or elevators shall be provided
for the physically handicapped as required.
(4) Emergency signal facilities shall be provided in each dwelling unit,
located three to four feet above floor level, and shall register a
signal at a central location(s) to permit twenty-four-hour-a-day
monitoring.
(5) Toilet facilities located within individual dwelling units shall be
adaptable for the installation and utilization of grab bars.
(6) Grab bars shall be located around all tubs and showers. Such grab
bars shall be of the same size and height as required by the New
York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code for toilet
facilities.
(7) All floor surfaces shall be nonskid.
(8) Central heating and air conditioning shall be individually
adjustable for each dwelling unit.
A. No dwelling unit shall contain more than two bedrooms, except that one
dwelling unit for a superintendent may be provided which shall consist
of no more than three bedrooms.
B. Except for the superintendent and his family, the occupancy of a
housing development for the physically handicapped shall be limited to
single persons who qualify as physically handicapped under present,
future or amended definitions of the governmental agency providing
subsidy or support to the project (Federal Department of Housing and
Urban Development, New York State Division of Housing and
Community Renewal or similar or successor agencies of the federal or
state government) or to families, the head of which so qualifies, except
that occupancy of a dwelling unit by a family, the head of which is not
physically handicapped, shall be permitted if it is established that the
presence of such person is essential for the physical care of an eligible
occupant.
§ 376-165 RAMAPO CODE § 376-166
1:494
C. Within the housing development, certain related accessory facilities
may be permitted, either in a separate building or in combination with
dwelling units, such as cafeterias, self-service laundries, lounges, game
rooms, workshops or medical infirmaries, only to the extent that they
meet the needs of the occupants of the development. Such facilities
shall be subordinate to the residential character of the development
and shall be located out of public view with no exterior advertising.
Such facilities shall be expressly approved by the Town Board. Approval
of a special permit and site development plan for dwelling units in a
housing development for the physically handicapped in no way
constitutes approval for installation of any type of related facility.
D. The gross site density shall not exceed 10 units per acre.
E. The maximum building height shall be 15 feet or one story.
F. The minimum distance between detached buildings shall be 1 1/2 times
the taller building.
G. Suitably equipped and adequately maintained recreation and open
space shall be provided. Group sitting areas shall be well-defined by
walls, fences, hedges or other plantings designed to impart a sense of
containment or security and to provide group privacy.
H. There shall be provided a safe and convenient system of drives, service
access roads and walks with due consideration given in planning such
facilities to the needs of the physically handicapped; such facilities shall
be adequately lighted, and said lighting shall not be directed on
adjacent streets or properties.
I. Facilities for refuse disposal shall be provided for all dwelling units.
Central collection areas shall be maintained and conveniently located
for all groups of units. The collection areas shall be properly screened
and supplied with all covered receptacles required for tenant use.
J. All parking areas, driveways, recreation areas and refuse collection
areas shall be no closer than 10 feet to any building or lot line, and any
swimming pool shall be no closer than 30 feet to any building and 50
feet to any lot line; these dimensions may be reduced by the Planning
Board upon site plan approval where local conditions warrant. Such
areas between said facilities and lot lines shall be landscaped with
suitable screening.
K. The front yard depth may be reduced by the Planning Board upon site
development plan approval where local conditions warrant and
substitute measures are provided for the protection of neighboring
properties.
§ 376-166 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 376-167
1:495
§ 376-167. Active adult senior citizen housing developments within
the LO District. [Added 5-25-2005 by L.L. No. 3-2005]
The standards for active adult senior citizen housing developments within
the LO Zoning District shall be as follows:
A. The development shall be subject to the review and approval
procedures set forth in Article XVI, Town Board Special Permits.
B. No dwelling unit shall contain more than two bedrooms, except that one
dwelling unit for each superintendent may be provided which shall
consist of no more than three bedrooms.
C. Except for the superintendent and his family, the occupancy of the
housing development shall be limited to owners or lessees, at least one
of whom is 55 years of age or older. Any other occupant must be at least
18 years of age.
D. The density shall not exceed 12 units per acre.
E. The development coverage shall not exceed 65%, including building,
walks, parking areas and driveways. Parking areas above the ground
floor, if any, within a building shall not be counted in computing said
coverage.
F. The maximum building height shall be 40 feet or three stories,
whichever is less.
G. The minimum distance between detached buildings shall be 30 feet.
H. Suitably equipped and adequately maintained recreation and open
space shall be provided. Group sitting areas shall be well defined by
walls, fences, hedges or other plantings designed to impact a sense of
containment or security and to provide group privacy.
I. There shall be provided a safe and convenient system of drives, service
access roads and walks with due consideration given in planning such
facilities to such items as handrails and ramps. Such facilities shall be
adequately lighted, and said lighting shall not be directed on adjacent
streets or properties.
J. Central refuse collection areas shall be located for the convenience of
all units. They shall be supplied with an adequate number and type of
covered receptacles and shall be provided with proper screening and
maintenance.
K. All parking areas, driveways, recreation areas and refuse collection
areas shall be no closer than 10 feet to any building or lot line, and any
swimming pool shall be no closer than 30 feet to any building and 50
feet to any lot line. The requirement which prohibits parking in
required yards (§ 376-71A) may be waived by the Planning Board.
§ 376-167 RAMAPO CODE § 376-167
1:496
L. The required side and/or rear yard may be decreased to 10 feet where
abutting another residential specialized housing development.
M. A buffer of not less than 20 feet shall be provided, except that the
Planning Board may reduce and/or waive the buffer at the time of site
development plan review where, owing to topographic or other
conditions or characteristics of proposed use, there will be no
foreseeable interference with the use and enjoyment of residentially
zoned properties.
N. Within the active adult senior citizen housing development, certain
related ancillary facilities may be permitted, either in a separate
building or in combination with dwelling units, such as cafeterias, selfservice
laundries, lounges, game rooms, workshops, or medical
infirmaries, only to the extent that they meet the needs of the occupants
of the development. Such facilities shall be subordinate to the
residential character of the development and shall be located out of
public view with no outside advertising. Such facilities shall be
expressly approved by the Planning Board.
O. The provisions for bulk requirements as set forth under Use Group aa of
the Table of Bulk Requirements41 may be waived by the Town Board in
its granting of approval for a special permit as follows:
(1) The lot width may be reduced to 300 feet where the Town Board
determines local conditions warrant.
(2) The side setback and side yard may be reduced to 15 feet where
such setbacks abut another property in the LO District. In the case
of such reduction, substantial landscaping may be required by the
Planning Board at the time of site development plan review.
(3) The total side setbacks may be reduced to 20 feet where such
setbacks about properties in the LO District.
(4) The on-site parking requirement may be reduced to no less than
1.25 spaces per unit where the applicant demonstrates actual
parking needs are less than two spaces per unit.
41.Editor's Note: The Table of Bulk Requirements is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 376-167 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 376-167
1:497

ARTICLE XVII
Amendments
§ 376-170. Amendment of chapter; report from Planning Board.
This chapter, or any part thereof, may be amended, supplemented or
repealed from time to time by the Town Board on its own motion or upon
recommendation by the Planning Board or by petition. Prior to a public
hearing, every such proposed amendment shall be referred by the Town
Board to the Town Planning Board for a report, unless the proposed
amendment was initiated by the Town Planning Board. The Town Board
shall not take action on any such amendment without such report from
the Town Planning Board unless the Planning Board fails for any reason to
render such report within 60 days following the date of such referral.
§ 376-171. Petitions.
Petitions to amend this chapter shall be in writing and shall contain a
description of the property affected, together with such other information
as the Town Board shall require. Such petitions shall include the names
and addresses of all owners of real property within 500 feet of the property
affected or any other contiguous property of a petitioner in the same
ownership. All petitions for amendment of this chapter, excepting those
submitted by the Planning Board or on motion of the Town Board, shall be
accompanied by a fee in accordance with the Standard Schedule of Fees of
the Town of Ramapo.
§ 376-172. Hearings.
A. The Town Board shall fix the time and place of a public hearing on the
proposed amendment and cause notice thereof to be given as provided
by law.
B. Affidavits. [Amended 4-23-2008 by L.L. No. 4-2008]
(1) At least seven days prior to the date set for a public hearing, the
petitioner of the proposed amendment which changes the district
classification of land shall submit an affidavit to the Town Clerk
stating that he has notified owners of all real property within 500
feet of the property affected or any other contiguous property of a
petitioner in the same ownership. Said notification shall be made
via first-class mail. Prior to mailing the requisite notification, the
applicant shall be responsible for generating a list setting forth the
name and address of each owner of property to be noticed pursuant
to this section. The applicant shall bring said list to a branch of the
United States Post Office together with the envelopes for mailing.
The list shall be reviewed by a representative of the United States
Post Office, who shall confirm that the names and addresses on said
list correspond to the names and addresses on the envelopes for
mailing. The representative of the United States Post Office shall
also stamp on the list the amount of postage expended for mailing
§ 376-170 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 376-172
1:499
§ 376-173. Referral to Rockland County Department of Planning.
If any proposed amendment consists of or includes any of the following
conditions, the Town Clerk shall, prior to final action, refer the proposed
amendment to the Rockland County Department of Planning:
§ 376-174. Protest against amendments.
In the case of a protest against any amendment, such amendment shall not
become effective except in accordance with the provisions of § 265 of the
Town Law.
costs. The applicant shall submit an affidavit stating conformance
with the notice requirement. The original list setting forth the
postage shall be submitted together with the affidavit.
(2) The applicant shall also state in an additional affidavit that he has
completed and placed at least one poster for every 300 feet of road
frontage of the property in a visible location; said poster shall be
provided to him by the Building, Planning and Zoning Department.
Said affidavit shall be filed in the office of the Town Clerk at least
seven days prior to the date of the hearing.
A. Any change in the district classification of, or the requirements
applying to, real property lying within a distance of 500 feet from:
(1) The boundary of any village or town.
(2) The boundary of any state or county park or other recreation area.
(3) The right-of-way of any state parkway, thruway, road or other
controlled access highway or county road or parkway.
(4) The right-of-way of any stream or drainage channel owned by the
county or for which the county has established channel lines.
(5) The boundary of any county- or state-owned land on which a public
building or institution is located.
§ 376-172 RAMAPO CODE § 376-174
1:500
ARTICLE XVIII
General Provisions
§ 376-180. Construction and interpretation.
This chapter, its conditions and requirements, shall be applied and
interpreted such that the scope of application and the latitude of
interpretations that may be given to its provisions shall be held to the
minimum necessary to promote public health, safety, comfort, convenience
and general welfare. Except where explicitly provided to the contrary,
nothing in this chapter shall repeal, abrogate, annul or in any way to impair
or interfere with any rules, regulations or permits previously adopted or
issued, or which shall be adopted or issued pursuant to law relating to
the use of buildings, structures, shelter or premises; nor is this chapter
intended to interfere with or abrogate or annul any easements, covenants
or other agreements between parties; provided, however, that where this
chapter imposes a greater restriction upon the use of a building or premise
or requires larger open spaces than are required by any other statute,
local law, rule, regulation or permit or by any easement or agreement, the
provision of this chapter shall control.
§ 376-181. Severability.
Should any section or provision of this chapter be decided by the courts to
be unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of
this chapter as a whole or any part thereof other than the part so decided
to be unconstitutional or invalid, except that the provisions of § 376-31,
Use Table, pertaining to special permit uses before the Town Board, the
standards and criteria therefor and the provisions of Article XVI shall not
be separable. Should any provision pertaining to such special permit uses
be declared unconstitutional or invalid, the Town Board declares that such
provisions would not be enacted in whole or in part, and that such uses are
declared prohibited, absent such special permit use regulation.
§ 376-182. Repealer.
The prior Town of Ramapo Zoning Law Local Law No. 5-1985, as amended,
is hereby repealed. Such repeal shall not be construed as abating any action
now pending under or by virtue of such laws; or as discontinuing, abating,
modifying or altering any penalty accruing or to accrue; or as affecting the
liability of any person, firm or corporation; or as waiving any right of the
Town of Ramapo, under any section or provision existing at the time of the
passage of this chapter; or as vacating or annulling any rights obtained by
any person, firm or corporation by lawful action of the Town of Ramapo; nor
shall the enactment of this chapter affect those types of legislation, rights
or obligations which are expressly saved from repeal by virtue of § 1-4 of
the Code of the Town of Ramapo.
§ 376-180 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 376-183
1:501
§ 376-183. When effective.
Upon the enactment by the Town Board, this chapter shall become effective
as provided by law.
§ 376-183 RAMAPO CODE § 376-183
1:502
ARTICLE XIX
Rules and Regulations
§ 376-190. Power to adopt roles and regulations.
A. Establishment. The Planning Board, the Board of Appeals and any other
agency or affected by this chapter shall have the power to adopt rules
and regulations subject to the provisions hereinafter contained.
B. Any board may promulgate or propose rules and regulations either in
the conduct of its affairs or as supplementary to this chapter.
C. Adoption. The rules or regulations intended to be adopted shall first be
promulgated by the board. Upon approval of a majority of its members,
the same shall be transmitted by the Town Clerk who shall include the
same on a Town Board agenda within 60 days after receipt.
D. The Town Board shall, in its regular public session, approve,
disapprove, modify or alter such or any portion of the proposed
regulation, and when adopted by the Town Board the same shall
constitute a regulation of the promulgating board.
E. Amendments to any rule or regulation promulgated by a board and
adopted by resolution of the Town Board may be amended or rescinded
by resolution of the Town Board, with or without the concurrence of the
promulgating board.
F. Violations. Violation of the requirement of any rule or regulation shall
be a violation of this section, and such violation shall constitute a
violation of this chapter.
§ 376-190 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 376-190
1:503
Derivation Tables
Chapter DT1
DERIVATION TABLE OF 1965 CODE TO 2012 CODE
Chapter DT2
DERIVATION TABLE OF 1979 CODE TO 2012 CODE
Disposition List
Chapter DL
DISPOSITION LIST
§ DL-1. Disposition of legislation.
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
L.L. No. 3-2012 5-9-2012 Officers and employees:
Town Constabulary
Ch. 37, Art. V
L.L. No. 4-2012 5-9-2012 Tax levy limit override
2013
NCM
L.L. No. 1-2013 3-21-2013 Noise amendment Ch. 188
L.L. No. 2-2013 5-13-2013 Scenic Road District
amendment
Ch. 215
L.L. No. 3-2013 7-10-2013 Zoning Map
amendment
NCM
L.L. No. 4-2013 7-10-2013 Zoning Map
amendment
NCM
L.L. No. 5-2013 8-15-2013 Zoning amendment Ch. 376
L.L. No. 6-2013 11-20-2013 Tax levy limit override
2014
NCM
L.L. No. 7-2013 11-25-2013 Zoning amendment Ch. 376
L.L. No. 1-2014 2-20-2014 Flood damage
prevention
Ch. 149
L.L. No. 2-2014 2-20-2014 Tax exemption for Gold
Star Parents
Ch. 253, Art. XIII
L.L. No. 3-2014 4-9-2014 Stormwater
management and
sediment and erosion
control amendment
Ch. 237
§ 376-190 RAMAPO CODE § DL-1
DT1:504
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
L.L. No. 4-2014 5-28-2014 Temporary signs
amendment
Ch. 223, Art. I
L.L. No. 5-2014 5-28-2014 Peddling and soliciting
amendment
Ch. 199
L.L. No. 6-2014 8-21-2014 Flood damage
prevention amendment
Ch. 149
L.L. No. 7-2014 8-21-2014 Zoning amendment Ch. 376
L.L. No. 8-2014 9-8-2014 Zoning amendment Ch. 376
L.L. No. 9-2014 10-6-2014 Zoning Map
amendment
NCM
L.L. No. 1-2015 2-11-2015 Scenic Road District
amendment
Ch. 215
L.L. No. 2-2015 6-24-2015 Procurement: best
value contracts
Ch. 51, Art. I
L.L. No. 3-2015 6-24-2015 Ethics amendment Ch. 14
L.L. No. 4-2015 11-19-2015 Tax levy limit override
2016
NCM
L.L. No. 1-2016 9-14-2016 Solid waste: solid waste
management
amendment
Ch. 235, Art. III
L.L. No. 2-2016 9-14-2016 Tax levy limit override
2017
NCM
L.L. No. 3-2016 9-29-2016 Fire prevention
amendment
Ch. 144
L.L. No. 4-2016 11-10-2016 Zoning amendment Ch. 376
L.L. No. 5-2016 12-14-2016 Late filing of renewal
application for partial
tax exemption of senior
citizens
Ch. 253, Art. XIV
L.L. No. 1-2017 6-28-2017 Moratorium on
temporary modular
units
NCM
L.L. No. 2-2017 6-28-2017 Department of Finance
Amendment
Ch. 18
L.L. No. 3-2017 12-6-2017 Flood Damage
Prevention Amendment
Ch. 149
L.L. No. 4-2017 12-6-2017 Zoning Amendment Ch. 376
§ DL-1 DERIVATION TABLE OF 1979 CODE TO 2012 § DL-1
DT2:505
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
L.L. No. 1-2018 2-14-2018 Taxation: Tax
Exemptions for Cold
War Veterans
Amendment
Ch. 253, Art. XI
L.L. No. 2-2018 2-14-2018 Taxation: Alternative
Veterans Tax
Exemption Amendment
Ch. 253, Art. V
L.L. No. 3-2018 4-25-2018 Flood Damage
Prevention Amendment
Ch. 149
L.L. No. 4-2018 7-19-2018 Officers and
Employees: Police
Officers
Ch. 37, Art. VI
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Supp
No.
L.L. No.
5-2018
10-10-2018 Stormwater
Management and
Sediment and
Erosion Control
Amendment
Ch. 237 6
L.L. No.
6-2018
10-10-2018 Ethics
Amendment
Pending
Codification
L.L. No.
7-2018
12-12-2018 Zoning
Amendment
Ch. 376 6
L.L. No.
1-2019
1-3-2019 Taxation: Tax
Exemption for
Persons with
Disabilities
Amendment
Ch. 253, Art.
VIII
6
L.L. No.
2-2019
12-12-2018 Moratorium NCM 6
L.L. No.
3-2019
1-30-2019 Zoning
Amendment
Ch. 376 6
L.L. No.
4-2019
2-13-2019 Zoning
Amendment
Ch. 376 6
L.L. No.
5-2019
2-27-2019 Taxation: Tax
Exemption for
Properties
Purchased by
Nonprofit
Organizations
Ch. 253, Art.
XV
6
§ DL-1 RAMAPO CODE § DL-1
DT2:506
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Supp
No.
L.L. No.
6-2019
6-26-2019 Taxation: Tax
Exemptions for
Cold War Veterans
Amendment
Ch. 253, Art.
XI
6
§ DL-1 DERIVATION TABLE OF 1979 CODE TO 2012 § DL-1
DT2:507

PLEASE TAKE NOTICE that the Town Board of the Town of Ramapo adopted the
following local law at a regular meeting held on the 26th day of February 2020 at the Ramapo Town
Hall, 237 Route 59, Suffern, New York:
LOCAL LAW NO. 2 OF 2020
AMENDING CHAPTER 376, ZONING,
TO CHANGE THE ZONING MAP OF THE TOWN OF RAMAPO
TO REZONE CERTAIN PARCELS OF LAND
FROM THE R-15 ZONING DISTRICT CLASSIFICATION TO
THE MR -12 ZONING DISTRICT CLASSIFICATION
BE IT ENACTED by the Town Board of the Town of Ramapo as follows:
Section 1: Title
This Local Law shall be known and cited as " Local Law No..2 of 2020, Amending the Zoning Map of
the Town of Ramapo to Rezone Certain Parcels of Land from the R- 15 Zoning District Classification
to the MR -12 Zoning District Classification."
Section 2: Legislative Intent
1. The Town Board, upon being petitioned by the owners of certain property, and upon its own
initiative, considered the rezoning of certain lands commonly known as Pascack Ridge, and to that end
directed that proposed amendments to the Town' s 2004 Comprehensive Plan and this proposed local
law be prepared to reclassify certain parcels ofland, presently included in the R-15 Residential Zoning
District ( 15, 000 square feet per lot), into the MR -12 Multifamily Zoning District (maximum 12 units
per acre).
2. The Town Board held initially held a public hearing on the petitions in 2014, at which time it
considered potential amendments to the 2004 Comprehensive Plan and the Town Zoning Map,
thereafter required preparation of an Environmental Impact Statement on the proposed action, accepted
a Draft Environmental Impact Statement and held public hearings on a proposed local law,
Comprehensive Plan amendments and the DEIS on August 15, 2018, accepted a Final Environmental
Impact Statement, referred the proposed zoning amendments to the Rockland County Planning
Department and the Town Planning Board for their recommendations, and held public hearings on a
revised local law, revised Comprehensive Plan amendments, and a Technical Addendum to the FEIS
on August 15, 2019, at which hearing and during the following written comment period, it received
public comment on the revised local law, revised Comprehensive Plan amendments, the FEIS and the
Technical Addendum thereto. On considering the comments ofthe public and involved and interested
agencies, the reports of the County Planning Department and Town Planning Board, as well as the
advice of its planning consultants, the Town Board thereafter directed revisions to the proposed
Comprehensive Plan and zoning amendments.
3. The Town Board has adopted, in its capacity as SEQRA Lead Agency, its SEQRA Findings
Statement setting forth its findings with respect to the environmental review of the proposed SEQRA
action, and alternatives thereto, and has considered therein the recommendation of its consulting
planner that certain properties being considered for rezoning should retain their existing zoning. 
4. Having studied the proposed rezoning action, including the petitions, proposed amendments to the
Town' s 2004 Comprehensive Plan to reflect current conditions in the area of the Town that would be
rezoned, a conceptual development plan known as Pascack Ridge and the environmental review
documents prepared in connection with that action, the Town Board finds that the proposed rezoning,
revised to exclude those parcels identified by its consulting planner, is reasonable and appropriate to
respond to the growth of the Town' s population, meet the current housing needs of the Town and its
residents, and further finds that the proposed rezoning fulfills the purposes of Chapter 376 as stated in
376- 3. A through J, and is consistent with the goals and objectives ofthe Town Comprehensive Plan,
as amended.
5. The adoption of this Local Law is determined to be an exercise of the Town' s powers pursuant to
the Municipal Home Rule Law, and is further considered an proper exercise of the police powers of
the Town to protect the public health, safety and welfare of its residents by acting to increase the supply
of safe housing resources needed to meet the Town' s housing needs.
6. The Town Board finds that the revised local law, which excludes certain parcels that were considered
for rezoning from being rezoned due to size, location and constraints that indicate they are not suitable
for development of multifamily housing and would therefore be rendered nonconforming parcels if
they were subject to the MR -12 zoning regulations, to be entirely within the embrace of the duly
noticed zoning amendment considered at the August 15, 2019 public hearing, and is consistent with
public comment urging the Board to retain the R- 15 zoning district on the east side ofPascack Brook.
Section 3: Amendment to Article II, Section 376- 21, Zoning Map of the Town of Ramapo
Chapter 376, titled "Zoning," of the Code ofthe Town of Ramapo is amended by revising the Zoning
Map of the Town ofRamapo, which was duly established pursuant to § 137-21, titled " Zoning Map,"
to change the zoning district designation of the list of parcels annexed as Exhibit B from the existing
R-15 Residential Zoning District ( 15, 000 square feet per lot) zoning to the proposed MR -12
Multifamily Zoning District (maximum 12 units per acre) zoning, as shown on that portion of the
Zoning Map annexed hereto as Exhibit A entitled, "Proposed Zoning Map Amendments Associated
with Pascack Ridge Rezoning Petition," dated February 7, 2020.
In the event of a conflict between the Zoning Map amendment attached as Exhibit A and the list of tax
map parcels annexed as Exhibit B, the inclusion of a tax map parcel, or any portion thereof, in the area
shown on the Zoning Map shall be dispositive.
Section 4: Severability
If any clause, sentence, paragraph, section or part of this Local Law shall be adjudged by any court of
competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such judgment shall be confined to the clause, sentence,
paragraph, section or part thereof directly involved in the controversy in which such judgment shall
have been rendered, and shall not affect, impair or invalidate the remaining portions hereof, which
shall remain in full effect.
Section 5: Effective Date
This Local Law shall take effect immediately upon filing with the Secretary of State. 
o. r.. -
EWfNG qy................................ `
MIRROR.
1
1
1
11
1
11
1
SPRING BROOK ROAD
LEGEND:
Proposed Zoning District Boundary
PROPOSED ZONING MAP
AMENDMENTS ASSOCIATED
WITH PASCACK RIDGE
REZONING PETITION
Ramapo, New York
FREDERICK P. CLARK ASSOCIATES Exhibit
A HARDESTY S HANOVER COMPANY
Scale in Feet
200 150 100 50 0 zao 2/ 7/ 20
Exhibit B: List of Tax Map Parcels
Exhibit B
Tax Parcel
Number Address Owner's Name
Existing
Zoning
District
New
Zoning
District
50. 19- 1- 44 100 Ewing Avenue Union Collins Realty Inc. R- 15 MR -12
50. 19- 1- 45 110 Ewing Avenue Brown, Paul & Simpson, Paulette R- 15 MR -12
50. 19- 1- 52 21 Christa Lynn Drive Christa Lynn Properties LLC R- 15 MR -12
50. 19- 1- 51 19 Christa Lynn Drive Christa Lynn Properties LLC R- 15 MR -12
50. 19- 1- 50 17 Christa Lynn Drive Christa Lynn Properties LLC R-15 MR -12
50. 19- 1- 49 15 Christa Lynn Drive Christa Lynn Properties LLC R- 15 MR -12
50. 19- 1- 48 13 Christa Lynn Drive Christa Lynn Properties LLC R- 15 MR -12
50. 19- 1- 47 11 Christa Lynn Drive Union Collins Realty Corp R- 15 MR -12
50. 19- 1- 46 7 Christa Lynn Drive Union Collins Realty Corp R- 15 MR -12
50. 19- 1- 71 2 Christa Lynn Drive Union Collins Realty Corp R-15 MR -12
part of 57.07-
1- 21
167 N. Pascack Road Union Collins Realty Corp R-15 MR -12
57.07- 1- 19 3 Spring Brook Road Union Collins Realty Inc R- 15 MR -12
50. 19- 1- 61 39 Christa Lynn Drive Union Collins Realty Corp R- 15 MR -12
50. 19- 1- 60 37 Christa Lynn Drive Union Collins Realty Corp R- 15 MR -12
50.19- 1- 59 35 Christa Lynn Drive Union Collins Realty Corp R- 15 MR -12
50. 19- 1- 58 33 Christa Lynn Drive Union Collins Realty Corp R- 15 MR -12
50. 19- 1- 57 31 Christa Lynn Drive Union Collins Realty Corp R- 15 MR -12
50. 19- 1- 56 29 Christa Lynn Drive Union Collins Realty Corp R- 15 MR -12
50. 19- 1- 55 27 Christa Lynn Drive Union Collins Realty Corp R- 15 MR -12
50. 19- 1- 53 23A -23B Christa Lynn Drive Christa Lynn Properties LLC R- 15 MR -12
50. 19- 1- 68 10A -10B Christa Lynn Drive Christa Lynn Properties LLC R- 15 MR -12
50. 19- 1- 69 8 Christa Lynn Drive Christa Lynn Properties LLC R- 15 MR -12
50. 19- 1- 70 6 Christa Lynn Drive Union Collins Realty Corp R- 15 MR -12
1 Excludes the small, narrow strip of land to the east of the Pascack Brook. 
50.19- 1- 67 12 Christa Lynn Drive Union Collins Realty Corp R- 15 MR -12
50. 19- 1- 66 14 Christa Lynn Drive Union Collins Realty Corp R- 15 MR -12
50. 19- 1- 65 16 Christa Lynn Drive Union Collins Realty Corp R- 15 MR -12
50. 19- 1- 64 18 Christa Lynn Drive Union Collins Realty Corp R-15 MR -12
50. 19- 1- 63 20 Christa Lynn Drive Union Collins Realty Corp R- 15 MR -12
50. 19- 1- 62 22 Christa Lynn Drive Monsey Lumber & Supply Inc R- 15 MR -12
NA Right-of-way of Christa Lynn Drive and its Extension R- 15 MR -12
Dated: February 28, 2020
MAL ' r EN PE
Deputy own Clerk
Town of Ramapo
Ramapo Town Hall
237 Route 59
Suffern, New York 10901